SPEAKER_03:
Hello and welcome.

It's January 24th, 2023.

We're in ACT-IMP bookstream number 001.07 on Governing Continuous Transformation.

Off to you, Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

So we are the Active Inference Institute, a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can reach us at all of these social media links.

This is a recorded and archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve upon our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we will be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Again, if you'd like to participate, ActiveInference.org is our main website, and there's a link to get involved and join many of the ongoing collaborative projects or live streams or both.

This is, as Daniel said, Bookstream 1.07.

So it's our seventh contextualization video on this book, Governing Continuous Transformation by Bijan Kesri.

So we will just jump right into it.

I'm Blue.

I'm an independent researcher in New Mexico, and I will pass it off to Daniel.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and just happy to see this series continue.

Tyler?


SPEAKER_02:
And I'm Tyler.

I'm a protocol designer and DAO researcher in California.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

So we are in part two, free energy governance of this textbook.

And the name of this chapter is cognition from superposition to reality.

And so I think that that kind of hints to some quantum stuff that might be elaborated more towards the end of this chapter and in the next chapter.

And just a few keywords for this chapter, but still quite a bit of content here.

So Tyler, do you want to read the start of the abstract?

Do you mind?


SPEAKER_02:
Sounds good.

Can you guys hear me okay?

Great.

All right.

Attention-based view and an activist approach address FEG's cognition dimension.

To this day, strategy management research is not entirely de-chained from its very path dependency of putting perception ahead of action, i.e., putting environment ahead of strategy.

While ABV's structured cognition nexus is FEG's critical building block, ABV erroneously treats action as a consequence of perception.

Once we embrace attention as action-generated, we start understanding that clever analysis and form of belief updating follows action-generated stimuli, not the other way around.

ABV is trapped in the old-school limitations imposed by bounded rationality.

In the discontinuous and distributed quantum world, agents' bounded rationality is meaningless as enacted inference empowers the world to deliver a supervisory signal.

Effectively, agents offload the burden of cognition to the environment.

Boundary rationality is replaced by extended cognition.

The badness of human cognition is effectively neutralized.

Blue, do you want to take the next one?

Sure.


SPEAKER_00:
There are at least as many reality models as there are economic actors.

Every organization chooses, akin to holding, acting upon a light torch in the darkness.

which environmental significance to attend to.

Whatever the torch highlights is equivalent to breaking a quantum wave of probabilities, moving from superposition to reality, intermediated by the Markov blanket.

Environmental enactment is essentially a purpose-directed, interactive, inferential, and social learning sense-making process.

Alright, so there are two sections to this chapter.

The first is attention based view and the second is an activist approach.

So Tyler, do you want to take this slide?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

All right.

So attention-based view.

So we actually touched on this a couple of streams ago in the context of when we introduced this was that Bijan was going through different models of thinking about firm cognition, and they're all limited in their own sense, including attention-based view.

And we'll go deeper into why attention-based view is limited, but also has important ways of thinking about how firm cognition works.

And so the general idea of it is that attention is a limited resource.

And that permeates through all levels of the hierarchy of an organization.

So at the individual level, you have limited attention that bounds your condition of what you're able to understand and perceive and decisions you're able to make.

And the boundedness of your individual cognition bubbles up into a social context, which bubbles the kind of decisions a group of people can make.

And then that finally bubbles up into your organizational cognition, which manifests through different rules, positions, players, and resources.

So this is just to say like, hey, we only have so many things that we can spend our time and energy on.

And that manifests at larger levels in the kinds of rules that we make within an organization.

Blue, Daniel, anything you'd add here?


SPEAKER_00:
So I can read this claim.

While attention-based views structure cognition nexus is a critical building block of free energy governance, fundamentally attention-based view suffers from severe shortcomings that weaken its relevance to practice.

By highlighting some of attention-based views' most fundamental weaknesses, we should further cement the case for free energy governance as a meta-theory connecting in circular causality structure, cognition, and capabilities.

Once we understand how the Bayesian brain is building a model of its world, we start seeing how anachronistic and full of friction our deep-rooted conceptions of organizational attention are.

Do you guys have anything to add here?

Okay, cool.

All right.

So bounded rationality.

So this was a concept that Bijan brought up here in this chapter, and it was introduced by Herbert Simon, the term, in like 1957.

And I pulled this from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

So his introduction of this term was a shorthand for his position against neoclassical economics.

and his call to replace the perfect rationality assumptions of homo economicus with the conception of rationality tailored to cognitively limited agents.

And so this little figure here shows the cognitive limitations and imperfect information and time constraints that we're faced with when we have to make a decision.

So we always are limited by what we can hold in our brain and the view of the information that we have.

Like, we were talking about, like, complexity, like, computing pi.

Like, we could get a more accurate, you know, numerical digit of pi, but we're limited, like, by time.

Like, if we go on and on and on, we could get more and more accurate.

But, like, why?

Like, is 3.14 good enough?

Because I could pull it up in, like, a split second from memory.

And so all of this, like, configures our bounded rationality and complexity.

we use a process that Herbert Simon introduced as satisficing to make a suboptimal decision or our best possible decision with the bounded rationality that we're faced with.

A quote from Herbert Simon says, broadly stated,

The task is to replace the global rationality of economic man with the kind of rational behavior that is compatible with the access to information and the computational capacities that are actually possessed by organisms, including man, in the kind of environments in which such organisms exist.

Tyler, do you want to read where this founded rationality concept is introduced in the chapter?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

Yeah.

So I think the context here is that he's trying to connect ABV to bound rationality by saying, all right, well, you have limited attention.

How does a firm decide where its attention is spent, right?

Like, how do you make that decision collectively?

So he says, in ABV, top leadership's attention to the right issues and solutions consider the source, the firm's competitive advantage.

Essentially, it's content rather than process-centric, and the firm's performance bottleneck remains upper echelon's attention.

i.e.

bounded rationality.

The critical question then is how, in the first place, context is selected to determine attention, or how bottom-up market signals connect with top-down upper echelon expectations and predictions to determine attention.

And so what he's saying is like, ABV doesn't really explain how that attention gets directed in the first place.

ABV is trapped in the old-school limitations imposed by bounded rationality.

and discontinuous and distributed quantum world agents bounded rationality is meaningless as perceptual content is given in our predictions and this is precisely what allows the world to deliver the supervisory signal effectively the firm is off loading the brilliant condition to its environment so bound rationality is extended is replaced by extended cognition the badness of human cognition is effectively neutralized uh blue Daniel anything to add there

We'll go to the next slide where we could explain more about extended cognition.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So extended cognition, I took this from this article by Mark Spivak.

Extended cognition takes the idea that your mind is on your smartphone, literally.

So it says that human cognitive states and processes sometimes spill outside of our heads into objects in our environment.

And this is something that we've looked at and talked about before.

In many ways, like, even with, I'm not sure if you guys talked about it yesterday on the stream, but in the thinking, like a state live stream that we did, we talked quite a bit about extended cognition and.

cumulative cultural evolution and how like a lot of our cognition is like out there embedded in our environment so that we don't have to think about it.

Like when I grew up, there was no internet.

So we would have to like, you know, I mean, Colton, like my son in the car the other day asked me some question and I was like, you're gonna have to ask Alexa or Google.

And he was like, will you ask your phone for me?

And it was like some fact question, like how many bones are in the body or something that I couldn't remember off the top of my head.

And I said, well, wait till we get to school and then I'll ask my phone because my phone was like, whatever, playing music or doing and I'm driving.

Right.

And he was like, that was so long.

Like, you can't wait 15 minutes to get to school to answer the question.

And I was like, man, when I was a kid, if I wanted to know the answer to this question, I would have to go to the library, look in the card catalog, find a book or encyclopedia or something.

Oh, it's a Guinness Book of World Records.

That's what it was.

It was like the world's smallest pancake or something like that.

And so we would have to find the book and then look it up in the book.

And it would take days if we could even remember the question for that long.

And he was like, oh, my God, where would you live?

So like this kind of extended cognition, like we could just know everything with a click of a few buttons is amazing.

Do you guys have anything to add here at extended cognition?

Sorry, I rambled.

All right.

Then maybe Tyler wants to talk about channeling attention.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool, so yeah, I mean, your extended cognition is not just you as this single known organization, and it actually encompasses both your environment, the firm around it, and also maybe the environment around the firm.

How does the attention of that cognition get channeled?

How do you decide what matters, what doesn't matter?

And so what Bajon says is, well, ABV views organizations as systems of structurally distributed attention, where structure-channeled attention, ABV, treats the process of channeling as a black box.

So it's like a framework for thinking about how cognition is limited in organizational context, but it doesn't really tell you what's going on.

For that reason, it doesn't end up being super practical, at least in Bajon's telling.

So he goes on to say, neither UEV nor ABV

both fundamentally top-down oriented frameworks have given due consideration to the dynamic interplay between top management team tmt and the board of directors more specifically there's no transparent structural link between the upper echelon level and field intelligence for example the very process that governs the two layers interaction determining affirms attention and actions

remains opaque.

And so I think broadly, what Bijan is saying is that, especially like the inactivist approach of thinking that how your actions in the environment determine your perception, that's missing in ABV, and that's a critical aspect of understanding how cognition happens in an organization, but specifically the interplay between the board and the management team, which in previous streams, he spent a lot of time describing why that's a really critical and important relationship for firm cognition.

Blue Dale, anything you got here?


SPEAKER_00:
So I would just add that like or maybe emphasize the point that we talk about a lot about top management here and the board and that interaction and then like the interactions between different levels of the hierarchy, like from the top all the way to the bottom.

And I think that that we emphasize the importance of like the the feeding forward and feeding back and like the interaction between the layers and how information is transmitted between them.

But there's no real concrete

um examples of how to to best do that um and I think that this is like like for me like not just in a firm but also like in the body like how is that information like transmitted like how does like my big toe prioritize like what goes to my brain like obviously if I kick something really hard and hurt my toe or like if I get like a hangnail or like a like ingrown toenail or something it really hurts

But, like, otherwise, my toe, like, I don't even know it's ever talking to my brain.

So it has to, like, provide salience somehow.

And how this is done and, I don't know, that's so critical for me.

I think that that's, like, really at the heart of all of the active inference hierarchical structuring stuff.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Attentional coherence.


SPEAKER_00:
So here, Bichon quotes Ocasio, and this is like a 2011 paper, I guess, or maybe book.

But he puts a lot of emphasis on Ocasio as like one of like the people that like his work really rests strongly upon.

So I encourage you to read the chapter if you want to learn more or go straight to Ocasio itself.

So he says, the interaction of top-down and bottom-up attentional processes is also implicit in the Wick and Sutcliffe concept of the quality of organizational attention and in the rerope analysis of attentional triangulation, combining attentional stability, top-down, attentional vividness, bottom-up, and attentional coherence, combining both.

And he goes on to say that attention-based view cannot explain attentional coherence.

And so getting at what I just was saying about the interaction between the top-down and bottom-up and how that works can be explained in attention-based view.

Maybe it can be explained in free energy governance, or we can maybe get some guidance on how to best do that.

Hopefully, in the coming chapters, we'll learn more.

Do you guys have any comments here?

Okay.

Do you want to read these claims for me, Tyler?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So, APV erroneously treats action as a consequence of attention and perception.

According to PPF, Prediction Processing Framework, action is determined in circular causality to stimuli that dictate attention and sense-making.

While ABV is laying a critical foundation in looking cognition structure, the question arises whether ABV's attention will need to be redefined as something more granular and practical.

So attention not only is too diffused as a cognitive concept, but also is hard to meaningfully operationalize in the context of continuous strategic renewal.

So exactly what Blue was saying on the previous slide, ABV explains like, okay, I understand why

attention being limited shapes a firm's cognition.

But like, what do I even do with that information?

Like, how is that going to be impactful?

How can I model that?

And Bajon is kind of like, well, it's not that useful right now, but he's teasing that maybe it could be with active inference or free energy governance.


SPEAKER_00:
What is that something more granular and practical?

How do we focus attention?

How do we break attention up into sub-components that are more granular and practical?

What is in our field of view or what should be in our field of view?

What we're looking at, what we're prioritizing, and do those things line up?

I don't know.

I could speculate all day, but it's hard to know really what that more granular and practical thing might be.


SPEAKER_03:
One other quick note on that is there's the question of coherence and adaptivity.

For example, that student answering their cell phone in the classroom on the previous cartoon that may have certain dimensions of adaptivity or fulfill certain preferences.

of one agent but not another and then there's this question of action orientation and so if we're always in the business of asking about the environment doing the market research not thinking about the strategy taking this sort of perception first mindset there still is the question of attentional coherence are we paying attention and sense making putting all the pieces together from what we're perceiving

And also there is this inactive shift, which is incomplete, but it's part of the puzzle, which is we want to be having attention, regimes of attention on our action.

And that brings together the embodiment and the inactive view with the attentional view, which as brought up, doesn't really describe what attention is and still can be mobilized in a passive setting.

But together we have this active attention and that flowers in active inference where attention is internal action.


SPEAKER_00:
So isn't it like pay attention to what you're paying attention to?

Is that like a nested little hint there?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, in Livestream 28, we saw a three-layer model of attention, and there is no single one way to model any cognitive phenomena.

It's going to be up to people in different settings to understand what treatments of attention are insightful or useful or applicable.


SPEAKER_00:
I don't know.

I think that that, like, paying attention to what you're paying attention to kind of gets...

like a lot of attention in like the business context or like even in like prioritizing like your to-do lists, right?

Like, are you just like fighting fires all the time or are you like making progress to do like things going forward, making progress on your own goals?

So I think like, I don't know, that might be a critical like governing variable, right?

All right.

So let me read this claim.

In that regard, predictive processing framework in the form of inactive inference is potentially a critical complement to and possibly substitute for the attention-based view.

Predictive processing framework provides the concepts and logics that give new meaning to the linkage of structure and cognition.

According to predictive processing framework, prediction models and predictions self-optimize as a matter of pursuing surprise minimization by way of free energy minimization.

It is strictly a priori not an attention challenge, but a purpose-directed prediction challenge.

The evolution of self-driving vehicles provides an exemplary illustration of this point.

Once the challenge was conceived as a prediction rather than attention challenge, the road to perfection is simply a matter of continuous and purpose-directed prediction error minimization.

And I don't know, like, what is really meant by this?

Like, like, the challenge of self driving was conceived as a prediction, like once people predicted that it would happen.

I'm not really sure, like what Bajan means here.


SPEAKER_02:
I could maybe take a stab at that one.

Because I think what he's saying is that for a self-driving car, that's the kind of thing that if you were using purely linear thinking, only using the things you know already about the world, a self-driving car wouldn't be an obvious next step.

You have to take this leap of faith, an action-oriented leap of faith, into saying, no, we're going to build a self-driving car.

And then once you've decided that that's your path you're going to go down, now it's just optimization on that path.

And so I think he was illustrating the inactivist approach of like, hey, a self-driving vehicle, there's nothing obvious or self-evident about that needing to happen.

But once you decide it's going to happen, then it's a prediction problem.


SPEAKER_03:
Agreed, there's different readings one way, also not knowing the self-driving car game.

If we were in this passive game,

perception-first world, then there would be the main issue to resolve would be understand from noisy sensor readings where is the location of a person and produce our uncertainty about where the person is or what that object is.

However, once we see it in terms of this continuous purpose-directed prediction error minimization, we're going to center the role of action, gas break, and turning, and a few other affordances that cars have.

So instead of going for all the decimal points on whether that's a person or a mailbox or a cone,

what does it look like to take this unfolding action-oriented view where you're aligning with your preferences, for example, not to cause harm to people and then lesser priority not to cause harm to objects.

Maybe steering away from that object, you can have a good policy posterior on.

It's a good and likely action without having all the decimals of precision about the environment.

once we understand how essential action is to the self-driving car it reframes what we have to do with the sensor data and it centralizes the relevance of the strategy yeah i do remember something about like um some change in self-driving like in the sensor system so maybe that like


SPEAKER_00:
references the um like attention versus prediction problem or maybe that's like being referred to internally in there i'm not sure okay so that sums up um the attention based view section and we're moving in now to um the inactivist approach um so this is like at the start of the chapter um bijan quotes thompson 2007

and says the organism's environment is the sense it makes of the world.

The environment is a place of significance and valence as a result of the global action of the organism.

So again, taking this like action-centric perspective.

And he quotes Bramsted et al.

2020 by saying active inference is an active inference.

And he says, indeed, the essential question is how the firm brings forth significance and valence that does not pre-exist, but is the result of action-centric and socially constructed engagement with the outer world, equivalent to internally assigning probabilities to the external hidden unknown states in the form of a Markov blanket.

This revealing of significance and valence then lays the foundation for generating shared meaning and shared expectations in the form of unique interpretation models, belief systems, underlying firm performance and survival.

Yeah, so we can go on to see what else he says.

So he makes the claim.

dafton week 1984 differentiate between environment driven and interpretation driven approaches to strategy making and in this big quote they say in environment driven frames top managers experience environments as concrete hard measurable and determinant on the other hand top managers of firms confronting more unstable or unanalyzable environments

are thought to construct, coerce, or enact a reasonable interpretation that makes previous action sensible.

Thus, they attempt to construct their environments through their strategies rather than developing strategies in response to environments, resulting in strategy, environment beliefs, or proactive logics.

And he also says, despite work's strong influence on strategic management research to this day, the environment driven approach remains dominant.

So I think that this is like one of the central themes that's emerging in the book is that that like the environment is somewhere out there.

It's some very real thing.

It's taken to be like it is this way.

It's always going to be this way.

And it's like, and kind of something that Daniel and I have talked about at length, like the niche as responding to the organism.

The niche responds to the organism just as much as the organism responds to the niche.

And whether or not the niche includes other organisms in the environment or not is kind of irrelevant when we have things like books and smartphones.

So this environment is changing and it's changing maybe so fast and so much that this environment driven

framework is perhaps not effective so unstable or unanalyzable environments is maybe like this discontinuous environment that Bijan speaks of because the environment's changing fast like maybe faster than it's ever changed before because of like our global connectivity and many other reasons so now maybe all environments are unstable or unanalyzable or more unpredictable than they've been before so that this

constant update or attempting to construct the niche rather than viewing it as something stable is maybe more important for firm persistence.

Do you guys have any comments here?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I just think on the second half of that, of very unstable and unanalyzable environments, that really resonates in a startup context where a lot of times startup founders will have no pretense of knowing anything that's going on in the environment.

like they're very clear about their ignorance of the world.

Instead, they run small experiments to kind of gauge what's going on in the external world and then kind of construct a worldview from there rather than saying, hey, we have this great business idea.

Let's scale this thing.

It's more like, hey, let's discover who our users are, which I think really corresponds well with that second half of the word.


SPEAKER_03:
also with our classical temperature example let's just say that we were in a house and there was a heating element if we think that over the time scale of days things aren't going to change that much we might look towards a strategy of turning on and off the heater so dealing with the environmental variability in the niche we're in whereas if

we're in an open space so there's no point in having any strategy of trying to heat the local air because it's just going to get blown away in the next second then you might center decision making around like finding a warmer location and so when there's a more stable environment then it puts us into a mode of like understanding the variability patterns the circadian patterns in temperature and responding with what we have or maybe inventing something new to respond to those regularities

But when there's the discontinuous and complex environmental settings that this work is focused on, it centers this kind of creating one's own niche through action, not just modifying it more locally to do the best one can.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Tyler, do you want to read this claim?

Do you mind?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So every organization chooses, akin to holding a light torch in the darkness, which environmental significance to act upon and to attend to.

Whatever the torch highlights is equivalent to breaking a quantum wave of probabilities, moving from superposition to reality, intermediated by the markup blanket.

In this regard, strategy research is challenged to be less mechanistically determined environmental strategy, but more quantum strategy to environment.

quantum world is more tenuous than the one I imagine and this is actually a quote from Revelli and this is not Sean uh the quantum world is more tenuous than the one imagined by old physics it is made up of happenings get discontinuous events without permanence there's a world of fine texture intricate and fragile as Venetian lace every interaction is an event and it is these light and ephemeral events that weave reality not the heavy objects charged with absolute properties that are philosophy positive in support of these events


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, thanks.

So Bishan goes on to say, and I think we'll come back to this quantum, because I have some questions here.

So we'll come back to this at the closer to the end of this section.

But right now, let's read this claim.

Bijan says the critical consideration is how an organism, organism, sorry, too much biology, how an organization transmorphs the sensing and sensemaking activity at the individual level into a firm's institutionalized environmental enactment as a basis for continuous strategic renewal.

Enactment is essentially an interactive and generative social learning sense-making process, hence inactive inference.

Dong et al.

elegantly address this micro-macro dichotomy.

They say, while hypothesis setting is an individual activity, hypothesis testing is an organizational activity.

According to Smircich and Stubber, organization members actively form, enact their environments through social interaction.

A pattern of enactment establishes the foundation of organizational reality and in turn has effects in shaping future enactments.

The task of strategic management in this view is organization making, to create and maintain systems of shared meaning that facilitate organized action.

Do you guys have any comments here?


SPEAKER_03:
one thought i'm imagining a fleet of boats the upper echelon view and the board of directors specifically they may not need to be concerned with the minutiae of move the wheel left move the wheel right on this boat at that time

But they are, as it says here, the task of strategic management in this view is organization making.

So that justifies some of this upper echelon focus.

It's not coming, I don't think, from a place of elitism or chauvinism about those upper management groups, but it's especially targeting to those who are in a position to be involved in organization making, which isn't steering the boat.

But allowing the agency and enactment to happen in the front line requires those not in the front line to take the view that is being promoted here.

Rather than just imagine if we had enough sensors on enough boats, we could have all of them viewed up in front of us and then we could call out who should turn left and who should turn right.

with the three to eight board meetings per year, it's not going to happen.

So what is the organization making that responds to that look like?


SPEAKER_02:
Something that I'm kind of curious about what you just said, because something I've been wondering about through this whole book is whether a board is really necessary for that meaning making or whether that can be done in a more distributed way.

And I think Bijan touched on this a little bit in our last call with him saying that like, well, this is their job is to be, the board's job specifically is to be able to distinct from the operation.

So like they're in this unique position to really build meaning and create sense making and facilitate that process.

But I'm wondering if it's,

like actually necessary for that to happen because it does strike me as like very top down like imposing a sense making framework on an organization is a ton of power and it does very much constrain the cognitive abilities of the larger organization and it strikes me just on this simple reading of it that like maybe something is missing from that or maybe a potential other way forward that is less top down as possible but I'm probably misunderstanding Bijan as well so I'm curious what y'all think


SPEAKER_03:
It'll be so fun to explore, but let's just say that the task of strategic management is organization making.

Maybe this is a saddle point view that everybody can get on board with, but then we go, great, upper management's role and function was organization making, and now everyone has access to the tools and at least view or comment access to the process of organization making.

So, transmorphing

the understanding of what the upper echelon does in terms of organization making.

So just double checking, you're not involved in steering the ship, you're involved in organization making and action orientation.

And then perhaps that function could be taken on by another organizational structure

with that as its focus, or that could be an emergent functionality of other organizational units.

But it's really hard to go from vision coming from the top to simply a vision that's coherent arising from the bottom and from the outside.

And so there's an intermediate view that qualifies the conversation differently.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think that makes sense though.

I think we have observed

that sense making happening both in the bottom and the top and especially in tech companies um where like you will have a board and they are making bit like you know top-down decisions but you will also have like consultants almost embedded at each level of the hierarchy who do that sense making at every level of the hierarchy uh and bubble that up also to the top so i think it does exist where you kind of have it's not purely sense making happening at the board or tmt level


SPEAKER_00:
So I just want to point out the first sentence here, and it really resonates with what you just said, Tyler, like the way that I've been reading this.

He says, the critical consideration is how an organization transmorphs the sensing and sense-making activity at the individual level into a firm's institutionalized

environmental enactment as a basis for continuous strategic renewal like what i took that like individual level as a very like bottom-up thing um because it's like you know each like little worker ant right in the colony like i i took that as like a very bottom-up and distributed thing like how do you take that and turn it into like some kind of collective sense making but really that could also be like there's an individual um

like level at the top, like each board of directors is selected for their different expertise, right?

So like you have a variety, I mean, ideally you have a variety of different views and perspectives at the board level.

And then how do those individuals like translate their sense-making into like something that the institution can then act upon?

So I think that that is a very, like, it rings very true that like this individual sensing and sense-making is happening at like the top and at the bottom.

I think that that rings true.


SPEAKER_02:
I just want to draw one distinction based on some experience of doing the top-down sensemaking.

I was a strategy consultant for a while.

A lot of times you would do the top-down sensemaking where you would talk to all levels of the hierarchy and you would act as the board in that situation and kind of

bubble up all of this information into like a top level um idea about like what's happening in the organization what the narrative is and what actions they should take it's just like very top-down structured but there's like other models of doing this where each node in the organization is more or less operating independently and sense making independently whereas like the top-down structure isn't as important and maybe you're saying the same thing but it strikes me as like a little bit different

Whereas sensemaking isn't happening through a bubble up process through a pyramid, but rather happening in like a web, like in a mesh.

And that strikes me as like an important difference, but maybe Bijan is saying the same thing.

I'm not sure.


SPEAKER_00:
It's hard to know.

And it's hard to also know like how, you know, when you have like, even at like a single layer of the hierarchy, like you have, you know, 25 people and like, you know, 12 of them think one thing and 13 of them think another thing.

Like, how do you, like, make sense of that?

Like, where there's this, like, opposing viewpoint, how do you collectively, like, get buy-in to proceed with, like, either strategy A or strategy B, like, even at a single level, and then pass that information up or down without, like, well, I wanted it to be this way, or I wanted, like, the people going...

um that like the opposing view like whatever wins right like in a vote the the 13 would win if that's the way that it's run or maybe there's weighted voting or who knows right like however a firm would structure itself but it's like really important i think to get strategy buy-in like from everyone at least like hear all of the points in order to proceed and and um

have like the viewpoint adopted widely and like get people to get behind it so it's i don't know it's a hard like weird thing to think about how that information is passed up or down in the hierarchy all right tyler do you have something to add well i was just going to add that this is a really important point like i don't think i'm not just trying to be like pedantic about it like it actually a lot of


SPEAKER_02:
organizational strategy debates hinge on this of whether really you can do sense making in a like hierarchical way, like truly like a pyramid or like a more mesh network.

So like the mesh networks are more like teal organizations or holocracies.

And like, this is a very contentious point.

And I was hoping that we could like figure it out head on or understand the John's like perspective on it.

And I think he thinks both are possible because I think he's hinted at that in the previous live streams, but he hasn't said it like,


SPEAKER_00:
uh super clearly so far um but something i've been like very eagerly waiting for him to like spell out clearly so maybe he'll get to it in the next chapters so tyler like i have a request like in the next live stream you have to put in like a slide on holacracy and like explain that to us like in a very like break it all down break down all these different like strategies for us because like you have that expertise and i'm lost so that there's there's my special request


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Awesome.

I mean, I've just been in like lots of debates with, even within, especially in DAOs where they try to do the mesh network version of things, not the, the pyramid.

And a lot of times just like a total disaster and it doesn't work, but there's always this dream, especially in DAOs like, Oh, could this be possible?

Like, do you actually need the hierarchy at all?

Can this work more like a spider web or rather than the pyramid?

Um, and I've been, this whole book, I've been like waiting for the answer to that.

So I'm excited to ask for Sean.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, and also just getting these dimensions sketched.

Because what if it's like, well, yeah, we can have a slime mold, but then we may split a lot and not all the things that split off may survive.

If that is tolerable or preferable to you, slime mold it is.

But if we all want to...

ride or die together, then this kind of a structure is what we want.

So making sure that there's like consent and transparency around what people are wanting to be in, because also in sort of emergent online 2020s eras teams in DAOs, it's like, are we hanging out in the group chat?

Are we building a product that's going to change the information environment?

Are we learning about other projects?

Are we learning about other early projects to invest in?

It can move very rapidly amongst those spaces and at the risk of trying to capture four birds and getting none.

there's all these other failure modes but maybe again that's what those people wanted to do in that blanket at that time but when you have shareholders in a board and there are some responsibilities that come into play and these sort of okay to fail or okay to Sunset experiments in online organization hopefully can reveal empirical patterns that we use to carry forward organizational technique


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, my read so far on what Bhajan's doing is that he's saying like, yeah, sure, a slide mold organization is a thing you could conceive of.

And that's a valid way for thinking about an organization.

But he's specifically thinking about the legal context that a lot of organizations live in today and making active inference or free energy governance work for those organizations in the world that we live in.

So I'm not sure if that resonates with you guys.


SPEAKER_00:
okay nice nice uh debate it's tangential I don't know information dive all right uh so um Bijan makes this point and he says organizations are challenged to better distinguish how their actions differ from those of others as they construct eco niches and he um really kind of gives this like

A lot of background information, but I just pulled these two quotes about distinguishing self from other.

How do you distinguish what is me and what is you?

And also about how do you sense make, help others see what's in your head?

And in talking about these things, he gives two examples, which I thought were really cool from biology, so I wanted to read them.

He quotes Godfrey Smith, 2016, and says, whenever a fish emits a pulse, it also sends a copy of the command around to the sensing system, enabling that system to counteract the effect of the pulse it has produced.

The fish is tracking and registering the distinction between self and other, between the effects on its senses of its own actions and the effects of events going on around it.

And then he also goes on to say, to use the example of sharks, he says sharks, he quotes Lanza et al, this 2020 paper.

He says sharks have organs called Lorenzini blisters, which sense electrical fields.

Dolphins and toothed whales, for example, benefit from echolocation abilities.

whose sound pulses can penetrate soft tissue to provide them with an x-ray-like mental image of the object of interest.

In order to tell the other dolphins what they have discovered, they actually create a visual picture of what they just saw in the minds of other dolphins.

So I didn't put a full explanation of echolocation because it gets complicated, but here's this dolphin, and it sends out these echolocation rays, and if something is in its

echolocation sight because it's not really sight right but if something it sees it then the rays that are reflected back like give like a or like molded around so you can imagine like ripple ripples through like water right like so they mold around like a rock or a stream and so what comes back is actually like a physical like ripple picture of the rock or whatever it's seeing

And so it can actually then modify its own echolocation sounds to give a picture of the rock to someone else, which I think is so cool, right?

Like to a dolphin friend, not like someone else, because I couldn't see a rickle picture of a rock, but maybe its dolphin friends could.

Anyway, I think that that is a neat idea of how to like really, you know, we always ask people like, do you understand me?

Do you know what I mean?

Do you really know?

But like, it's really hard to know perceptually what someone else's is what's behind their Markov blanket, right?

Do you guys have anything to add here?

Sorry, I'm just the one fascinated by biological sensing and sense making.

Okay.

Tyler, do you want to read this claim for us?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So more specifically, optimization is essential across the constituent elements determining the circular causality of the underlying inactive inference.

One, actions generating reliable sensory input precision.

Two, the ability to express beliefs about beliefs, consequences, sophistication, to enact only a bounded set of external states.

Three, leveraging salience without missing the very air signaling value that non-salient stimuli may nonetheless behold.

And four, force that to anticipatorily develop and strengthen the internal states, i.e.

from resources in form of capabilities critical to resource recombination.

So sensing, sense-making, and duality management.


SPEAKER_03:
I find it interesting here that one, two, and three are within the life cycle of an organization or an organism.

They refer to the reliability of action, the

Ability to have an appropriately expanded vocabulary in terms of sophistication to describe relevant action.

And then three, essentially attention, which is to make sure that you're not just falling victim to hyper skewed or hyper normal stimuli, but rather you're using your attention to enrich

incoming stimuli and also not ignoring what you're not totally paying attention to that might be on the margins of relevance but then four is framed here as an anticipatory question in the long run whether the capabilities are successful to manage resource recombination that's the question of life and death

So one, two, and three are like the behavioral imperatives.

And then four is kind of like the organism looking to the horizon.

Maybe it makes it, or maybe its offspring does, or maybe none of the above.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

And then just this final quote from the paper or from the book.

He says duality is an essential quantum concept that underpins the mastery of managing the distributed and discontinuous nature of today's market realities.

And like I'm curious as to like what Bajan is referring to as duality, like in the quantum context, I always think about like wave particle duality.

But I think he has talked here a lot about superposition.

and maybe he's referring to superposition um maybe he means superposition like you can exist in two different states you know until until for a long time like you can be both black and white one and zero um so i'm not i'm not really sure what he's referring to as duality but i think maybe we'll get into it in the next um


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I was curious whether the connection he's making here is like one of analogies saying like, hey, in the same way, you don't know what was out there in the quantum world.

Do you only you observe something and you kind of collapse all of these waves into an electron?

Is it an analogy in the active inference free energy governance world with through the inactivist approach?

Or is he saying that this is actually like the same thing, that is the same principle underlying?

And I wasn't totally sure which way, what he meant there.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, we should explore.

There's the wave-particle duality, famous.

There's the observer-observed duality or the experimenter-environment duality.

There's multiple dualities.

And then if we think back to Bayesian physics, what does this help us with?

Let's go into it more in the next chapter and then see how it actually connects back.

Otherwise, I believe it puts us squarely into the quantum business advice genre.

But I know there's more to it.


SPEAKER_00:
That would be like a very sellable, like quantum business advice, quantum business strategy manager.

That's my new job.

I'd be like a heck of a consultant title.


SPEAKER_03:
Am I working?

Am I not working?

You could check.

You still might not find out.


SPEAKER_00:
Am I here?

Am I there?

Where am I actually?

You can't measure my position and my momentum at the same time.

That's too funny.

Okay.

All right.

I think we've reached the end of our set of slides.

I'm looking forward to exploring the quantum in more detail as I find the quantum concepts fascinating.

I guess Bijan also does.

Do you guys have anything else to add before we say goodbye?

That's it?

No.

Okay.

Thanks, Tyler.

Thanks, Blue.

We'll see you next week.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, y'all.

Farewell.