## 0Cx5MTNxs-0

SPEAKER_01:
All right, hello and welcome.

This is Active Inference Guest Stream 87.1 on September 5th, 2024.

We're here with John Boyk and Lee Ayer.

So Lee, how about please say hello and give some contextualizing thoughts.

Introduce John however you like, and then we'll have presentation discussion with John.

So go for it, Lee.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

Thanks, Daniel.

So I came across John through the Active Influence Institute because he was the only other person sitting on the strange intersection that I'm sitting on in this space between looking at societal transformation and active influence as well.

So I was very excited.

And I joined the first live stream that he did on his

science driven transformation papers.

And subsequently I contacted him and we both explored a kind of a shared interest, I guess, in functional forms of cognition at scale and how those can be facilitated.

And John was talking about the potential of

uh some kind of software solution to facilitate that and uh the kind of the discussion that ensued over the following months um has led to john creating this this paper so i'm i've kind of been in discussion with him sort of over the months and i'm really really interested to get more into this presentation okay thank you go for it john


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Lee.

Appreciate that.

But I think it was more like many months of discussions that we were engaged in that led up to this paper.

So thanks for all your input during that time.

My name is John Boyk.

I'm a research fellow at the Active Inference Institute.

I'm very pleased to be appointed to that position.

I have two new preprints available to the public, two papers that we'll be discussing today, both on the topic of

of group cognition at scale.

As Lee mentioned, I'm proposing a essentially software ecosystem, online ecosystem for group cognition at scale.

And today we'll talk about kind of the

there's some of the general ideas there the overview of that project and then on the second guest stream but maybe is this slides view can everyone see the slides right now and can you go to the next slide then please

So the two papers have two gas streams that we're doing today.

And then the next one is on September 10.

And on the second one, today we'll cover some general concepts.

And on the second one, we'll get a little bit more into some technical details about the underlying meaning representation.

I'll discuss in a moment what that term meaning representation means.

But this first paper is available on archive.

You can download the paper from there.

And let's get started.

Next slide, please.

So I'm proposing something called the Cognar Ecosystem.

And Cognar stands for cognitive narrative.

And in concept, and I should say this is just a concept, this project is still in its incubation phase.

The two papers are the substance of what has been done so far on this project.

And I'm hoping that I can interest others in the research community and in other communities, civil society communities and other communities, to get engaged with this project and help it to move forward.

So in concept, this is an open source, online, extensible ecosystem of basically software, but resources, tools, applications, libraries, services that facilitates group cognition, and especially for large groups.

And especially with regard to deliberation, strategizing, problem solving, decision making, that kind of things.

But you'll see that as we go through these slides, you'll see that there's really a variety of use cases for this.

But these are the use cases that I really had in mind as I was developing the concept for the project.

So essentially, Cognar helps users to, the way I phrase it, is tell their story.

And by that, I mean to convey their beliefs to their group about how the world works relative to some situation.

so um a group can be anything uh could be a you know could be a uh uh could be a a city could be a corporation could be a school could be any kind of group that is trying to you know process the the understandings and beliefs of its members towards some goal perhaps problem solving or some other goal

So towards that aim, Cognar helps users to tell their story, that is, convey their beliefs to the group about how the world works.

I use the word story and I use the word narrative in the series of two papers.

But I don't mean to confuse the reader because I'm not talking about a narrative in the normal sense, like a written narrative where you write down several paragraphs or several pages of text.

This is a little different, but I still call the representation a story because it's a story in the sense that it conveys

a user's beliefs about like why something happened and what might happen next and um what should we do and what does it mean and all that kind of stuff so you know this this belief really a belief model that the user is is creating for this situation maybe explains you know what is the explains what the problem is what are we trying to solve or here's my solution or

what just i think this is what just happened or what did happen or here's here's what i think will happen next um here's what i here's what i think will the people that will be affected by this issue uh i believe that so and so and so and so was involved

uh i i think that this this situation means such and such and we should take you know to address it we could take these series of actions or i think i think this should be done or or we could learn this from the situation so it's a story in in the sense that it it spans the who what where how why questions regarding some situation um next slide please

So there's actually several services and apps available for group collaboration, for example, voting apps and things like that.

The Cognar ecosystem is, I would say, a much more sophisticated approach to that.

It allows a user to tell what I refer to as a potentially rich story.

That means the story could be long, complex, nuanced.

It could be conditional.

Like, for example, I might believe that in some situation, if we do A and B, then perhaps C will happen.

But if D happened first, then something else is going on.

So it could be a conditional story.

It could be the equivalent of maybe a few paragraphs of text, very short a story, or a story could be the equivalent of a book chapter.

It all depends on what the user wants to do.

So how could such rich information be processed by a large group?

That's really the question behind Cognar.

How could that happen?

So the proposal includes a backend

computational system that does numerous things.

It assists users in creating and constructing stories.

It helps the group to digest what all of these stories are saying and how they are the same and how there's different and what interesting points other stories make and where there's agreement and what are the many ways that this issue is seen by this group of people.

So it does analytics on stories, for example, to help answer some of those questions.

The system also assesses stories for quality, like is this story on topic for whatever the group is trying to do, whatever the situation is the group is addressing?

Is it complete?

Does the story just make sense in and of itself?

And the system can use those kinds of assessments to give feedback to the user.

Like, for example, a story might have some character in it named Bob and some other character named Sue, and it might not be clear from what the user is creating how those two people are related.

So the system might...

If the system is confused about what the relationship is, it might actually ask the user, like, I'm a little confused.

What's the relationship between these two people?

So in that sense, the system acts very much like an engaged, active listener.

Like if you were at home telling your story to a friend, the system is kind of like that friend that is listening and trying to make sense of what you're saying.

maybe asking you know pertinent questions to help direct your your telling of the story so that it understands what's what what the story is about and the system also performs inference for uh uh for queries like perhaps other users other people in the group have a question for the for the storyteller or the story or perhaps the system has questions like what's the relationship between bob and sue as i just mentioned

So the system has to perform various kinds of inference to help generate and answer those types of queries.

Without such a computational system, imagine a large group of thousands of people and thousands of people submit a long, complicated story.

How would a group make sense of that if there weren't some kind of computational system doing assessments and inference and guidance and assistance behind the scenes?

Next slide.

So I've been talking about a group, a group that's interested in some topic, some situation or topic or problem.

But maybe we should take a moment and just let me explain what I mean by group.

So we're talking about a group of people in this case.

And I call a group a collection of people that demonstrate some kind of coordinated behavior in response to dynamic conditions as time elapses and conditions evolve.

So examples include just about anything you can think of that would be a group.

So social clubs, volunteer groups, civic organizations, nonprofits, corporations, and even political entities like cities and states and nations.

um a group can range from the very informal to formal flexible to structured temporary to permanent small to large autocratic to democratic in the way it manages information and manages decision making and

So a group does many things.

Generally, a group has a purpose.

It forms for some purpose.

And to carry out its purpose, it generally senses its world, processes information, anticipates outcomes.

Like a group might say, we should take steps A and B in order to be financially viable or some such thing.

A group evaluates its options, it makes decisions, and then it takes actions, either just within the group or within the world, or in some way, some kind of actions.

In other words, I'm saying that a group can be thought of as an organism.

An organism that performs cognition.

And just like any organism, an animal, a rabbit, a human, the animal has to do all of these things.

It has to sense its world, sense danger in particular, look for food.

It has to process the information that it receives from the world.

And some of that information, of course, can be noisy.

Like it thinks it sees a wolf, but maybe that's not a wolf.

What does it do?

What should the animal do in this situation?

It has to anticipate the outcomes of its actions, evaluate options, make decisions, and then take some kind of action in order to maintain itself in the world, and really in order to thrive in the world, if that's possible.

So I'm thinking of a group as an organism, and that organism is just like any organism is performing cognition.

Next slide.

So that's a quick overview of Cognar.

But now maybe it's a good point just to ask the question, who cares?

Or more in particular, why should you care, the listener?

So obviously, Cognar is about group cognition.

And maybe you see the need for improved cognition.

Maybe in particular you wish that some group, perhaps a political group, a nation or a state or a corporation or some other group, maybe you have a story to tell that you think would be important to help this group out, to help the people, to protect, to warn of danger, to

highlight a problem or a solution that you think no one else has thought of or is being underrepresented.

Maybe you have beliefs, maybe you have a story to share with a group.

Not only that, it's not just sharing a story because

because if i i could write a a 50-page letter and send it to my congressman or you know some other some other group a group or group member and there's really no guarantee that that group will really understand what i'm saying in this in this thing you know that's um so you so whatever you share with a group you want them to you want the group to actually hear it to

register it to hear it and then understand what it is that you're saying because why bother if uh why bother submitting information if if it if it's not really heard or understood or maybe you maybe you look at the world as as i do and you see that the world has some serious uh you know the human world has some serious issues to solve

climate change would be one example, but there's many, pollution, climate change, poverty, all kinds of social problems.

And maybe you feel that, isn't there some way that we could do better?

Isn't there some way that as a group, as small groups, as large groups, as formal groups, as informal groups, is there some way that we could cognate better, that we could be,

uh more functional organisms group organisms and better act better make better decisions in our world and take better actions you know maybe maybe you think we could do better or maybe you just are a scientist and you're interested just simply in the science behind cogner and and i would say that this project is large uh it's and complex and it touches or or could touch

really just about every field of science.

I mean, if you give me a scientific field, I could take a guess as to how this Cognar project might affect it or how it incorporates ideas from that field.

Let's just take one example, say medicine.

You might think, what would Cognar have to do with medicine?

Because it's not a medical program in and of itself.

doctors have to make decisions groups groups of doctors insurance companies other groups have to make decisions so that they have to come together as a group to make a decisions and and assess some situation so that's one potential way another another potential impact on medicine is as a patient

I have a story to tell.

I have a story about what happened.

You know, there was an accident.

I cut my arm.

I stepped on a nail.

It was rusty.

This and this, you know, this and this happened.

And I'm afraid of this and this.

And I have a condition, past condition of this and this.

And I'm allergic to this and this.

And all of that can just be written on a piece of paper, you know, like a regular intake form.

But in Cognar,

that the story is standardized in a sense so that it's easily readable and understandable by humans and computers.

And a story that a patient is telling

using the Cognar system would be more accessible to inference and computation.

And also there's a natural record of stories in Cognar.

So there would be potentially many areas of medicine as just one example of how either Cognar incorporates the science or could affect the science.

Um, or maybe you're just curious about, uh, you know, what's possible for human groups.

You know, we, we live in a society that, uh, is faces, uh, all kinds of challenges.

Uh, there's future challenges on the horizon.

Uh, you know, what, what is the potential of society?

How, how is considering that a society is a group of people.

So again, we're talking about groups.

How, how could, how could a society best.

share information, make decisions, cognate, really.

How could the organism called a society perform functional cognition or improved cognition over what is common or available today?

So I hope there's many reasons why you might care about cognitive.

Next slide, please.

So I've mentioned the term large group already.

So what does large group mean?

What does it mean to me?

Dozens, question mark, hundreds, thousands, millions of participants?

And I would say the answer is yes, all of those.

Maybe dozens of people perhaps can fit in a room and talk freely about some situation, some topic.

and share rich information verbally or in other ways, face-to-face.

That might work with dozens, but it doesn't work so well with hundreds.

And it certainly doesn't work so well with thousands or millions.

So as I said a moment ago, Cogner has many potential use cases, but one that I'm really targeting is the large group setting where really, you know, hundreds to thousands or millions of people are involved in the group.

And having said that, there's also use cases for just a single person using Cogner.

would be reasons why somebody might want to record their story in card now just for personal reasons to as a history for example to look back on later and reflect when and there's other reasons too that we'll talk about shortly

So the question at hand is, what kind of online ecosystem would allow, say, 100,000 people to share some kind of rich, complex story, and particularly a dynamic story?

I'm a member of a group.

We're sharing our stories.

I write down what my story is, I look at what you're writing, I look at your story and I go, I like that idea, I like that part of it or that seems really useful to me or I forgot, I should have mentioned that myself.

By sharing stories, by sharing belief models,

we can come to um you know uh uh reach a you know better agreement our belief by sharing our belief models can start to um influence one another and and develop and the group then develops a shared belief model just to an extent

um and then and then it's not just about cognar is not just about sharing uh uh stories it's about using them in some kind of uh to facilitate functional uh group cognition

Right.

So you can imagine a group, a corporation, any kind of group, civic group, a city state.

And the cognition for that group, you might say, is functional sometimes or really quite dysfunctional sometimes.

So Cognar is aiming at facilitating functional group cognition.

That's its purpose.

Next.

Next slide.

Okay, so we've talked about what a group is, and I've used the word cognition now many times, so maybe we should talk about what is cognition.

In cognitive science, one might come up with various definitions of what is cognition?

How does it work?

What is its purpose?

So I'm relying quite heavily on the active inference framework for my definition of cognition and the way the Cognar system would work.

But active inference is essentially a Bayesian description of cognition.

It's a normative principle underwriting cognition in biological and artificial agents.

In active inference, there's an intelligent agent and a world that the intelligent agent is acting in.

Maybe there's even multiple intelligent agents acting in the world.

An agent has an internal generative model about how the world works.

That is, given some conditions,

It sees that there's potential actions that could be taken and it sees that there's likely outcomes of various actions.

So an agent has a model of how the world works.

What will happen if I do A?

What will happen if I do B?

What will happen if I don't run from that lion?

And the agent and its world are separated, in a sense, statistically separated by what's called a Markov blanket.

And that blanket consists of agent actions and agent observations.

So as an agent, I take some action.

That action affects the world.

The world reacts in some way according to the world's generative process.

And then things change, conditions change.

And as an agent, I perceive my world, but maybe it's dark and I don't perceive it very closely, or maybe it's loud and I don't hear it very accurately, or I get sensations from the world, but I'm not necessarily observing the actual state of the world.

I'm observing some kind of noisy representation of that.

So the Markov blanket, it's conditionally separates the world from the agent.

And Active Inference is the framework that I'm using to talk about cognition and not just cognition, how it works, but also what is the purpose of cognition?

What is functional cognition versus dysfunctional cognition?

Next slide, please.

So what is the purpose of cognition?

Well, from an active inference perspective, we can think of it simply as an idealized four-part cyclic process of I predict what will happen if I act.

I choose an action from my generative model.

i i the world changes i sense whatever however the world has changed and i learn from processing those sense sense inputs for example uh suppose i'm a young boy and i'm learning how to catch a baseball right if i don't lift my arm high enough i maybe missed the ball so that happens a few times i i learn

that i really need to lift my arm higher and if i want to catch that ball so uh

So again, informally and simply, it's the cycle of predict, act, sense, and learn.

And an agent does this.

It engages in cognition to reduce its uncertainty about whether it's going to achieve and maintain those conditions that it thinks will be good for it, that will help its thriving.

As a young boy learning how to catch a ball,

I want to catch the ball.

That will be good for me if I can learn how to catch a baseball.

And I want to reduce my uncertainty that I'm going to catch that ball.

I'm going to practice hard and I'm going to learn from my mistakes and I'm going to reduce the uncertainty that when I put my glove up, that ball is going to land on it.

or I'm going to outsmart the lion and get away from danger when the lion appears.

So an agent favors those choices, those actions that are going to ensure the greatest resolution of uncertainty under the constraint that preferred outcomes are realized.

That's the way Friston phrases it.

And so it's not just that I want to learn how to catch a ball or run from a line.

It's that I want to be sure or pretty sure that I can catch that ball or get out of the way of that line.

And from all this, I would say that active inference offers a potential description of functional versus dysfunctional cognition.

If I have a pattern of making poor predictions and therefore acting in ways that are harmful to me, we could call that dysfunctional cognition.

If I fail to remember what happened last,

or fail to remember how many times or the many ways that I missed the ball, that could be also called dysfunctional cognition.

And cognition itself rests on many core functionalities like remembering and attention and communication and other processes.

And any one of those or all of them together and any one individually could be functional or dysfunctional in some cognitive event.

Next slide, please.

So given all of that background, what is the Cognar ecosystem really?

I'm going to claim or offer that Cognar could be viewed as a cognitive architecture.

So every organism has some kind of, every organism cognates, whether it's an amoeba or a human, and cognition requires some sort of cognitive architecture.

For humans, we have a central nervous system, and we also have computers and external tools and things that can be thought of as part of that cognitive architecture.

And the cognitive architecture essentially integrates information and helps us coordinate our actions in the world.

And it's the set of components by which and through which cognition occurs.

And for a group that includes, a group has members, so it includes the cognitive architecture of the individual members.

but it also includes the this the set of norms that a group uses its rules its mechanisms and institutions its tools its sensors perhaps we're talking about a group that is a nation and it has sensors on air pollution you know something like that it's analytic processes its systems procedures all of which uh facilitate or guide cognition really make cognition possible

And every part of a cognitive architecture can be functional or dysfunctional, right?

So for a group, say, maybe its rules, maybe it has certain rules that are either enhanced

functional cognition or detract from functional cognition.

So I view Cognar as a component of the cognitive architecture of the groups that are using it.

And again, its purpose is to facilitate functional cognition versus dysfunctional cognition.

Next slide.

Oh, Lee, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, hi, John.

Sorry, this is really interesting because, you know, based on the discussions we've been having, I'm kind of using the concept of cognitive architecture in some of the research that I'm doing in organizations at the minute.

and tried to feed it back in.

So if you take an organization like a public sector body or a commercial organization, would you consider that the structure of the processes are all part of the cognitive architecture of that particular entity?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I mean, I suppose, depending on how broadly you want to define an architecture, I suppose it could include just about every aspect of a group, you know, potentially.

But I think in a practical sense, you could probably focus on those components of group, you know, those mechanisms and structures of the group and its dynamics that would be particularly aimed at sensing really the four steps that I discussed just a minute ago.

taking action, learning, sensing the world.


SPEAKER_00:
I guess one of the reasons I ask is that one of the things that tends to... The context in organisation has an enormous influence in shaping people's behaviour.

but uh because there's a there's a general kind of widespread view that cognition is localized within people rather than a kind of uh you know an organismic view of it i guess where it's kind of distributed between people um in a hierarchical organization a lot of those factors if i mean i'm almost viewing it now as a generative model but there's no way that certain processes that determine behavior can actually be subject to change because they're not considered just part of the cognitive structure

if you if you see what i mean so i think the idea that um you know that that um groups could view themselves as organisms is really interesting but currently there's kind of more of a mechanistic kind of view of of organizations and i think that potentially gets in the way anyway maybe this is a discussion for a for a different no no no no no it's actually good because i i i i


SPEAKER_02:
i wanted to emphasize the importance of this view you know thinking of a group as an organism as a cognitive organism and thinking of decision making and those operations as aspects of group cognition so you know

uh the world is kind of crazy in some ways politics are engaging for many people and this is just one example in the for a political entity but you know we we

We rarely ask what a economic system is supposed to do, or what a governance system is supposed to do, or really what an organization is supposed to do, right?

So we're framing all of that now in terms of cognition.

And we're framing it in such a way that it is amenable to scientific examination of whether this is functional or dysfunctional.

And from an active inference perspective, cognition has a purpose.

So then we can start talking about, is this organization, its structures, the way it's put together, its rules, its mechanisms, its institutions, is that functional?

yeah and and right and could it be improved like now that we know what we're after now that we have the problem you know the the issue and focus

How could we improve the cognition of... I can just give you a tiny little vignette.


SPEAKER_00:
So in this particular organization, they have a performance management system.

So if you were to take the view of functional cognition, you'd go, what's the purpose of the performance management system?

Well, it's there to motivate employees, reward them, make them feel excited about their work.

But it doesn't do any of that.

What it actually does is it demoralizes them, annoys them, gets in their way and just generally pisses them off.

I mean, it's actually doing the opposite of what's intended.

If you take the whole system out, the organization would be better off.

But it's not subject to any prediction error.

signal because it can't be defined in terms of, you know, purpose and outcome.

So it's a completely dysfunctional system that's just stuck there that you can't take out and nobody, you know, nobody has a view on it.

It's really weird, but I think would really get to it.

But anyway, sorry to interrupt.


SPEAKER_02:
No, no, no, no, no, it's good.

It's good.

I just want to emphasize again, that this is a, in a sense, it's a change in worldview.

It's a it's this is a

comprehensive and potentially very useful way to con to understand what a group is whether that group is a small informal group or a large formal group and and and then to assess you know how well it's doing and how could how could we how could it do better

Right, so that's the question for Cognar that I raised just a minute ago is like, okay, given the setup, given our goals, given the purpose of Cognar, so how should Cognar be designed?

You know, like, how should it be designed to do what we're saying it should do?

You know, that's the question here.

But anyway, getting back to where we were at in the slides, Cognar is, I would say Cognar is a part of the cognitive architecture of the group that's using it.

Next slide.

So actually, this slide speaks, Lee, to some of the things that you were raising there and speaks to some of the things that I just mentioned.

But so consider a society as a group, say a nation as a group.

Again, a group that is an organism performing cognition for some purpose, and that purpose obviously for any organism is to thrive, to maintain viability, to do well, to live, to pass on information.

in the i i wrote a series of uh of three papers a couple of years ago in 2020 and 21 2021 and i think maybe there's i don't know daniel four guest streams for that series i think three or four or something like that that are in the archives so i encourage viewers to check those out too um and that series of three papers

again looked at cognitive architecture only in this case it looked at uh societal systems as the cognitive architecture of a society so by core societal systems i mean for example economic systems financial systems governance systems legal systems educational systems you know these constitute a considerable

aspect of the cognitive architecture for society we use these systems to sense the world to think to make decisions to allocate resources to take a variety of actions uh that that hopefully actions that better the you know the nation at hand

so um societies around the world the nations around the world have i should really say nations around the world have some kind of the core societal systems say economic systems that have some kind of particular design to them for financial system has a particular design but the question i raise in this paper is in the series of papers is out of all conceivable designs

know the existing designs or completely new designs which which of them might be most fit for this purpose of group cognition which of these might best serve the common good and and obviously making good decisions that you know favor the vitality and well-being of a nation is serving the common good

so out of any conceivable design or economic systems you know what is money for example is there some other way to think about money or some other alternative to money or how do votes happen or you know like any aspect of a core societal system

one could imagine many conceivable variations on a theme or just completely new designs, new ways of looking at what an economic system is.

And from this umbrella of considering all of these systems as part of a cognitive architecture, then one can ask,

you know, really what designs are fit for purpose and how do we, of course, how do we measure fitness and, you know, what kind of information goes into assessing the fitness of some system, but it opens the door for a science-based design of the systems by which societies live under.

and that is not the way that is not the you know our current system economic system financial systems governance systems they were not you know developed through some kind of science-based process they were they kind of evolved through social social pressures and social conditions and you know ideas from individuals but we could revisit all of that um and and ask the question you know

What designs actually would serve us best?

And in this series, I propose an R&D program to really address that very question, not just as an academic exercise of let's write some interesting papers about how governance systems could be redesigned,

The idea in this series is, what kind of designs would potentially be most useful?

And then how do you test them, actually practically test them, implement them, use them, gain information from the experience of using them and learn from them?

how how how could that happen how could that actually be done how could some kind of transformation you know i call it transformation in the series but how could some kind of transformational step like that occur and be viable and practical so in the in the series i offer you know what i think is one path towards that

But this current series of two papers that we're discussing today, it's an extension of the same idea.

It's, again, looking at the cognitive architecture of a group and asking the question, in this case for Cognar, what kind of design of Cognar could best help group cognition?

And how could Cognar be used by groups to help them perform better cognition?

Next slide.

Now that I've said next slide, but there's just one more thing I want to say about the last slide.

As I was about to say a few minutes ago, lots of people are interested in politics and what a government should do, and they have ideas for maybe somebody thinks that term limits for judges or for politicians should be limited, that that would be

that might be a solution to some of our problems or you know there's all kinds of of proposals floating around for how to improve economic systems or governance systems or you know any any of the course societal systems and and even say corporations do the same thing you know they wonder how could we improve our communications and all that kind of stuff

But this concept, this really powerful approach of viewing systems as a cognitive architecture allows those questions to become, you know,

meatier in a way, more relevant, with a greater high-level understanding of what that system is actually supposed to do.

So I believe that by viewing the societal systems of a society as a cognitive architecture and looking at groups as small or large groups as organisms that perform cognition,

I think that opens up all kinds of doors and avenues for investigation into what kinds of designs, what kinds of rules and approaches and methods and tools might actually help groups perform better cognition and better solve their problems.

Okay, next slide.

So everything we've talked about so far has just been sort of high level.

What is Cognar?

What does it do?

What is its purpose?

But this slide really gets more to the question of how does Cognar work under the hood.

So I've already said that I use the word story, but I don't mean story in the regular sort of written narrative sense.

A user creates a story, and it creates a story perhaps by speaking.

In one version of Cognar, maybe a user speaks the story and the system hears it and understands it.

But maybe the first version of Cognar would be somebody, the user inputs a story kind of passage by passage, you know, sentence by sentence.

And the system takes that input, those little passages and other metadata associated with passages, and constructs a fragment of a story.

And that story is represented as a graph.

So its internal meaning representation is actually called a story graph.

And that story graph, the reason that it's not stored in just regular English text or some other language is that this representation is more amenable to computation.

and could be better understood in the large group setting in that sense.

There's other reasons too we'll get to.

But the important thing for this slide is that actually what the user is creating is something that resembles a graph, a graph of how little elements of the story are related.

And story graphs are really the core innovation on which Cognar is based.

And that representation allows Cognar to curate, understand, reason with, perform inference for stories.

And these stories then represent really high quality information.

Much of the vagueness of natural language is eliminated in this way.

Not all the vagueness, but some of the vagueness is eliminated in this way.

So at the top of this little graph, you can see that a user types in, for example, text passages.

Those are translated by the system into what I call a story graph fragment, just a small little graph for that passage.

And that story graph fragment is then merged with the growing larger story graph.

And once it's complete, the complete story graph can then be translated and used in various ways.

It could be translated back into natural language so that potentially a user could listen to their story back.

Like, you know, I typed in my story about, you know, what should happen for this particular situation.

And I could ask the system to replay that back to me and hear it perhaps.

The story graph can also be translated or used as input into a variety of inference models, so probabilistic, logical, or other kinds of models.

And maybe it could be translated into alternative meaning representations that would be useful in certain kinds of inference models.

So that's what happens under the hood you're constructing a story graph and you can view the user can view aspects of that graph as it's constructed to verify that the system actually understood correctly what i'm trying to say.

Next slide please.

Oh, well, fine.

This is good.

So this is an example of a meaning representation, a very common meaning representation called the abstract meaning representation for a particular sentence.

Sentences, a similar technique is almost impossible to apply to other crops, such as cotton, soybeans, and rice.

So you can see that this sentence, the representation is structured.

There's rules for how the representation is constructed and there's a structure to it and certain links, arrows, lines between nodes have a given meaning.

And I have this slide in the paper and here, just really, just as an example of what I would call a relatively simple

meaning representation might look like.

So the Cognar meaning representation is going to be like this, only far more sophisticated in many ways.

So just as one example, anticipation

and predictions are an important very important part of cognition as we've already discussed and the meaning representation has to be you know sophisticated enough to handle the predictions of a story of a belief system like if the uh if if the topic at hand is uh immigration um i have a beliefs about you know what kind of

rules the immigration authorities should have and how it should be done and you know build a wall or don't build a wall it's just one of the topics of the conversation in the in the papers these days um um but for my story uh there would be

naturally would be anticipations and predictions related.

Like, if we build a wall, then it will have such and such an effect.

If we don't build a wall, it'll have such and such an effect.

If we allow freer immigration, it'll have such and such an effect.

These are all anticipations, predictions, and the meaning representation has to be sophisticated enough to handle all of those.

and they're not just and they're not just um predictions they're probabilistic predictions no one knows what's going to happen in the future so all of those kinds of statements are are probabilistic so even even you know it has to be even more the meaning representation has to be sophisticated enough to handle probabilistic uh predictions about you know what a story means and what might happen next

So this is a very simple graphical version just to give you the user a very, very high level rough idea of what's going on under the hood.

But in actuality, the Cognar meaning representation would be much more sophisticated.

Next slide.

So what is the purpose of the story graph?

Some of this I've mentioned already, but it represents a story in a format that is less ambiguous than natural language.

Natural language can be very ambiguous.

The story graph is meant to be readable and understandable both by humans and computers.

So a human can look at a story graph or pieces of a story graph, views of a story graph,

and verify that the system understood the story correctly, for example.

But computers then can also read and process the stories and then perform analytics and inference and do the many things that the back end, the computational system has to do.

The stories obviously then provide a structure for inference and analysis, and they also serve as a natural language independent representation that's suitable for translations into other languages or uses inputs to analytical models or other things.

So that's what a story graph should do.

And then one of the questions is, well, what does the Cognar story graph, you know, what is its design?

You know, what are the specifics of its design?

And that is a topic that I raise in the second paper that we'll talk about a little bit in the next guest room.

Next slide, please.

so um we've talked about stories and i've said a little bit about what they are but let's maybe recap that just a bit so you know a user has some story in their head about a situation some you know issuer problem in the world and and the user has an internal belief model about how the world works relative to that situation or problem and a story is a

is an externalization of that belief model.

And it potentially is a dynamic externalization.

It can change as the user sees other stories or reads what other people think.

So it externalizes a user's belief system and makes it shareable.

You know, that's the purpose of Cognar is to share these belief models with other members of the group.

So again, the story conveys a user's beliefs.

And the emphasis here is on beliefs, right?

Because the computational system is not going to predict what's going to happen in real life if the group takes actions A versus action B, for example.

uh and it's not gonna the system is not gonna verify that somebody's story is ac is accurate is realistic or or is practical for the situation at hand those are those are assessments that the group of users has to do you know together and the system helps that process but it doesn't perform those kinds of uh assessments

so so the system the system doesn't have to know the rules of gravity or you know newtonian mechanics or it doesn't have to predict what's going to happen in the world it re all the system needs to do is to capture a user's belief model and to communicate that model with others and to help

and others help the group understand that model and how it compares to other models and um what elements are in it and you know what is its time span and you know what it what is what what is this you know what are the characteristics of this user's belief system and and what is the user predicting will happen so it's it's the story just captures the user's beliefs right and then the group

shares and acts in some way on those beliefs so so that's it the the system helps a group to understand what its members believe that's that's really the core of this and then those by sharing those beliefs users can influence one another perhaps you know like in a decision-making setting next slide please

All right.

So, uh, so we've talked about what a story is, how it's representative and under the hood, what is PR what the purpose of Cogner is, what the purpose of a story is.

And now we can talk about how this cognitive system might be actually used.

And I've said that the emphasis is on, you know, the cognition in the large group setting and particularly for things like decision-making and collaboration and things like that.

But in actuality, there's a very wide span of use cases that are possible with this kind of ecosystem.

And I'll cover just a few possibilities, but this is a non-exhaustive list.

There's many, many possibilities.

And the communications in its different uses, maybe there's an app developed for each particular kind of use.

So maybe there's many apps that are part of the ecosystem.

But the sort of events, I call it a group, a group defines an event and then invites people to participate in the event.

So for example, a city might, if a city is using the system, it might define a group event to solve some particular issue, maybe a trash issue or a recycling issue or a road issue or some other issue.

And the group would define the topic for the event and the purpose of the event and the rules for the event and the methods for the event and how decisions were made and, you know, the setup for how this event is going to unfold.

And then it asks for group input through storygraphs.

So depending on the event and the group and the purpose of the event, the communications can be many to many as in, you know, collaborative decision-making, for example, that could be many to one or even one to many.

So, uh, and, and, and, and I've been emphasizing group use, but again, uh, an individual might use this just for their own personal use, just to record their, their understandings of the world at a certain time, for example.

So some possible use cases are in decision making, such as by a corporation or a city, maybe customer service, emergency reports, public polling, instructions for how to put together bookshelves or instructions for how to run a machine, for example.

uh system descriptions of you know what what is what is this system and how does it work or maybe there's a whole variety of educational uh use cases also and uh later versions of cognitive could be could include things like role playing or game playing like uh intentional games uh purposeful games

and strategizing what what what here's here's my belief system of the world relative to the situation and uh you know the people involved in this story or the characters involved in this story are you know so and so and so and so and so and so and what would happen if i if i take action a you know what's likely to be the outcome what is what does player b gonna likely to do if i take action a so later more sophisticated versions of cogner might include that kind of stuff where

a user might play against the system or two systems in a sense might play against each other to strategize for some situation.

Next, please.

So the next couple of slides are just a few examples that I have in the paper for use cases.

So I'll cover them briefly.

So I have written at the top of these slides some text.

And this isn't actually the text that somebody would write in the real Cognar.

This is just a snippet, an example snippet of the kind of information that a user might want to convey.

So this user, there's an issue, some issue X, and this person believes that in order to address that, we should first address it.

issue y that caused x and y started when you know it's when such and such happened and it had the effect of such and such and this person believes that if we don't solve issue y then some event a someone wanted event a is likely to occur maybe within a few months and then x the original issue is going to be impossible to solve

so if that if a happens then you know there's going to be all these effects maybe you know and there's some this this in this story there's some kind of uh you know 20 value put on the risk of this or the or the outcome of this

and uh this user says a possible solution to this this problem why is to do you know such and such and it's conditional so do such and such if event b occurs and such and such if event c occurs

So there's some kind of complicated story, conditional story involved here that has predictions in it.

There's some shoulds in it.

We should do this.

And how does all that work for the decision-making case?

Well, I believe what would be a common setup for the decision-making case is a group forms or comes together for an event.

and individuals create their story.

That's kind of at the top of this diagram.

They create their story and then submit their story.

And the system, the middle block there, the system does its assessments and computations and the various things that the system is going to do.

And then it reports back to the group about the range of stories that have been submitted and what they include and who they involve and what

kinds of solutions have been proposed and various kinds of summaries and details about the set of stories that have been involved.

And then the group digests that information and looks at individuals, can look at the stories of other individuals.

so users can kind of take in what the group is saying.

And maybe a user thinks, oh, that's, you know, Bob had something really interesting to say there.

You know, I should really include that as part of my story.

That was a good idea.

I didn't include it, so I should include it.

So the next step is this process cycles in a series of rounds.

and at the end of each round there's a kind of a dialogue and digestion phase where everyone looks at what's been done and gets a better idea of what the group is thinking and maybe they adjust their their story uh you know accordingly and hopefully over time over a series of rounds the a proposed solution that the group favors starts to become clear

And then this process can end when it's sufficiently clear and there's enough agreement that we understand each other, we think we understand the situation, and we think as a group that this solution or this set of solutions might be the best actions to take.

So that's group decision-making might occur over a series of rounds.

Next slide.

Here's an example use case for emergency reports.

This is a person who wants to report that they just witnessed an accident.

There's an accident with some kind of truck of some kind.

Maybe it was going too fast.

Maybe it was because of the wet conditions.

It shouldn't have been going so fast.

Lots of accidents like side information.

There's been many accidents at that corner.

So maybe that,

Maybe the local conditions have something to do with this.

But anyway, the truck had a telephone pole, and now there's sparks in the grass, and there's a school, and children are playing outdoors.

All of this is a little unclear to me.

I'm about a block away, but that's what I see, and I report it.

so you know there's a there's an interesting story and you could imagine even a more complex story of someone that wants to report something maybe they want to report a crime for example or in this case an emergency report and there's also there's various kinds of inference that has to happen like under the hood for this right like if you read the the sentences that i that i wrote there i never say that a wire

uh fell from the lines and is now on the grass that's sort of inferred right so there's various things that the that the the system has to infer about the story in order to make sense of it and i say that there's you know this user is saying that there's children present but the implication is is that there's a danger to those children

Right.

So there's actually a forecast, like a prediction, like if we don't do something, someone might get hurt.

These children might be harmed because of the aftermath of this accident.

This little story is a lot different than, for example, calling a hotline and the hotline instructs you to

press one if there's a fire, press two if there's something else.

And then if you press one for a fire, it says, press one if the fire is in your house, press two if whatever.

There are other computational systems out in the world that seek to address, seek to gather this kind of information for the purpose of making an emergency report.

But I'm claiming that out of all the kinds of systems that I know of, the Cognar system

much more functional and has the capacity to convey a much richer story, understanding of someone's understanding about a situation and perform inference on it and record as a history the story and how it evolved and many other things that the computational system does, offers.

Next slide, please.

This is an example for a customer service.

This is an example of a many to one sort of communication, right?

In the sense of many customers are communicating with one agent, one central agent, which is the corporation in this case.

So people are writing in and they're sending in their broken parts and they're giving a description of why this part worked or is this part defective or why was this...

why was this aspect of the part designs seemingly so poorly or could you fix this design or you know like here's what here's what's here's where it's broken this this part here this this part f has a leak in it and it causes this other part to h to slip you know some kind of sliding mechanism to slip and uh and you know seems to me that part was

it wasn't really broken it's just that it didn't really fit so it was that by design or is this part defective or you know is what's what's what's going on here with this so you know this is rich information that a that a corporation might receive about uh its products from users and uh you know much more useful than say just a you know a couple of sentences written in natural language or maybe a paragraph written in natural language because

you know, the corporation could use this to really assess, you know, really analyze closely what's going on and how many times this has happened and how many times have people complained that that part was too thin and, you know, all that kind of stuff.

So there's an example of a many to one sort of communication scheme.

Next slide.

This is also an example of a many to one.

So, you know, lots of political things happening in the world right now, elections and so on, and lots of polling going on too for the different elections.

And, you know, typically in polls, you might be asked a yes or no question.

You know, do you agree with the statement, yes or no?

Or maybe you have a short multiple choice.

Yes, I agree strongly, or no, I disagree strongly, or I can rate my agreement on a scale of one to five, or something like that.

But that is not near as rich as intaking what the user actually has to say, what they think are the important aspects to the question that's being pulled about.

In this case, the user is, there's a poll for some candidate and this user is saying, you know, I thought her past decisions on certain issues are terrible and I've been fuming about them and I don't trust her on this issue because of such and such statement and I don't even think she's sincere on that issue.

But anyways, that issue could be solved by some other much simpler process, which I mentioned here.

And I don't think I'm gonna vote for her.

So this is rich information.

And again, there's inference that has to go on behind the scenes with the system.

uh for example the word fuming you know that has various meanings uh does it mean that the person the writer is on fire no not in this case you know it means that they're angry so a lot of the various definitions of the word fuming the system has to figure out what definition is the user aiming for here um next slide

And then I think we're done with the next slide.

We've come to the end of our talk.

So what is next for this project?

I've already mentioned that Cogner is in the incubation phase.

And I put out the vision in these two papers, the vision for it.

really it's a big project it touches on many aspects of science computational science complex system science all kinds of different sciences that touches on and this is all beyond my capacity as one person to create so if this project is going to move forward it will need your help whether you're a scientist or you're

uh belong to a civic organization or you're just an interested citizen or whatever there's there's there's some way that uh just about anyone could be involved in this especially as it picks up steam and and moves starts to move forward

There's many, many interesting questions to address.

I raised a few future research questions in the papers, but there's many, many more that could be imagined.

And I encourage people to reach out to me if they have interest in this project.

Upcoming, there's the guest stream on September 10th.

That's next Tuesday.

And I believe I'll be starting a Cognar project at the Active Inference Institute.

People can get involved that way and get involved with the Institute that way.

And there should be some additional talks coming up.

There's an active inference symposium coming up that I think I'll present at, and there's a few other talks I'll be giving to private groups and such.

So again, please reach out to me if you have interest in this and show up next time for the guest stream on September 10th, and we'll continue the discussion.


SPEAKER_01:
awesome thank you john i will read some of the questions from log chat upcycle club wrote is group cohesion one of the goals of cognar um so good question and and you know the the


SPEAKER_02:
in any kind of group there may be very different opinions of what should happen and um there may be lots of friction in that group right so um it's not that kagnar is is necessarily going to solve all kinds of friction problems and get everybody on the same page for every setting you know that would that's not the way the world works right but but what it what kagnar does do

is a sets up a process and a means and a mechanism by which people can share their stories and perhaps come to some agreement uh shared understanding you know share that share their way they see the world and maybe the group will come to some kind of shared understanding if the purpose is decision making you know that's kind of the context here so um hopefully a group will come to some kind of uh agreement but but but even if they don't cognar can

Cogner has a record of the stories and of the differences in stories and maybe there's really kind of two subsets in this group or three or four subsets in this group and and each subset views the situation in a very different way well at the very least Cogner is going to help the group to understand that there's you know different ways to look at this problem and different proposed solutions and it's going to record

the the the evolving stories that are related to the to this you know like how they how a particular story started and what it what it grew to become over the course of cognition and um so you know maybe that maybe the group will actually come to a well uh you know widely accepted uh decision on some topic or maybe it won't but at least it's going to have a functional process to you know to to go through to to understand itself right


SPEAKER_01:
so that's the that's the that's the hopefully yes and but you know that what happens the dynamics depends on what the group is and what the topic is thank you all right next question from abbas tollgate who wrote two questions one how does kognar maintain consistency in story graph updates when passages are the single source of record

Second question, how are changes propagated across the story graph and associated models without conflicts?


SPEAKER_02:
Can you flip back in the slides to the process of creating the story?

It's kind of far back.

Is that one more?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, there we go.

This one?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

There you go.

Thank you.

Okay.

So,

One could imagine, you know, we're thinking about how should Cognar be designed?

You know, how should it work?

You know, what should it do?

And, you know, one could imagine a user could input text, type in something, and then that text becomes a story graph fragment here, and then the story graph fragment becomes a story graph.

And then maybe the user realizes, oh, I didn't mean that, or I didn't make that clear.

I want to add something.

So how should the user edit this thing, right?

You could edit the story graph or you could edit the graph fragment or you could edit the original text and then rebuild the story from there, right?

So how should it happen?

Well, the simplest approach and the approach I suggest in the paper is that all the editing really happened on the text passages.

Because if you allow edits on the story graph, then they have to propagate in this diagram, have to propagate upward to change the original text passages so that everything is in agreement, all the different sources of information.

are in agreement so it would be easier and simplest if there's only one source of information and that the entire graph can be um regenerated from that source as the as the information changes

What was the second question?

I think maybe I answered it.


SPEAKER_01:
How is the internal consistency and the statistical consistency, and then also the changes through actual propagation, how does conflict, how are changes propagated across the story graph and associated models without conflicts?


SPEAKER_02:
yeah yeah that's that's that's i think i answered the question or at least i tried to um so there's only one source of record and that's the text passages itself but suppose now that the that the system uh suppose the user created a story and the system uh uh responds and says hey i don't i don't understand is is you know is bob

Bill's brother or his boss?

I don't understand what this relationship is.

Or when you say he, which he are you referring to, Bob or Bill?

Who is it that this passage refers to?

So now you have a situation where maybe the question is, are they brothers or are they coworkers?

Maybe that's the question the system poses.

And maybe the user responds, they're brothers, as a response.

well how does that how does that response you know get into the story graph right because you don't want the system to edit the story graph because then the system would have to change you know propagate that changed information back up into the text passages and that might not work so well you know what if the system doesn't propagate it correctly

The user could simply change their original text passages and make clear that what the relationship is, you know, whatever the question is.

So, you know, that's a clear way.

The user just changes the text passage itself.

But another way is there's metadata associated with a text passage and that metadata might actually be, you know, include the kind of the conversation between the user and the system.

The system says, the system asks,

Are they brothers or coworkers?

And the user's response is they're coworkers.

Okay, well, that's meta information that is now saved as meta information and can become part of the graph downstream.


SPEAKER_01:
What about the human element of conflict, like using code as law, legal code, plain text repositories, versioning and forking and instancing?

How does the social reality of the conflict not go into the fractal Linux kernel

separation and what would actually you said one version of record and whether or not that resolves logical ambiguity that's an internal question but what about the actual existence and production and power and influence over that one version of record if there really is one


SPEAKER_02:
Are you asking how reliable is a versioning system?

Like if there's some kind of versioning system where the user changes information, is there a reliable versioning system that can keep track of all these changes?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and even given a reliable, complete, perfect, Git-type versioning of the text,

How does that not, or does it, or etc., have conflict outside of the text?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I'm not exactly sure what you're asking, but let me pose this situation to you.

Suppose that, I don't know, suppose that the system is unclear about what the story is saying, and asks the user, you know, is...

Bill's are these two people related?

Are they coworkers?

And the user responds, the user makes a response.

So therefore changes the record, changes the metadata and says something really vague.

Like, uh, they're, they, they, they know each other.

That's the response.

didn't really address the question right like it didn't resolve the issue that was raised right but then so what that means is that the story is simply vague right so the story is not a maybe not a great story it just has inconsistencies within it it's it's uh not logical maybe or it's just too vague to understand what is what is being said so that's not the

That's not a problem of Cognar itself.

That's a problem with the telling of the story and its completeness and its logical consistency and things like that.

And just like any, just like if you and I were in a room together and we're hashing out what we think about some situation.

I might make some vague statement to you about people involved, and you might think in your head, what?

What is he saying?

And that's the way it is, right?

That's the way it goes.

And you might ask me, can you clarify that?

But maybe I give you some unclear answer, and then you still don't know what I'm saying.

And you walk away thinking, well, John doesn't really know what he's saying.

But that also can happen here, right?

So if I'm a user and there's some group that I'm participating in, and there's some event that I'm offering a story to, and I submit a story that is, especially if I have a history of submitting stories that are unclear, logically inconsistent, incomplete,

My reputation in that group is probably not going to rise very high.

People will eventually figure out that he's not clear on what he's saying, or else he doesn't know what he's saying.

So, you know, that's part of the dynamics, interpersonal dynamics, and the, you know, assessing who in the group can be relied on to give a thoughtful, you know, reasonably useful contribution, and who should we pay attention to?

Like, the group has an attention mechanism, right?

Naturally, and maybe even facilitated by Cognar to some degree.

And that attention mechanism sort of naturally focuses on contributions from people who are known to

provide clear, useful information in the past, or maybe people who have good predictive capacity.

Like maybe I get a record and a reputation because I've participated in this group many times or on many different events.

And a lot of what I said was going to happen in the world actually happened.

I'm good at making forecasts of what's in.

Maybe I'm good.


SPEAKER_01:
and making forecasts so maybe the group is going to weigh my contribution a little bit more than some other person's contribution that was unclear or made poor forecasts maybe i maybe i kind of didn't answer your question daniel but yeah i i think it touches on and you cite and discuss some related projects related to like meta governance like you talk about modular policy and about attention economics and then also the trust networks it's uh

lot of interesting work like john ash's work in cognizant and just thinking about how the attention distribution which is changing moment to moment based upon what kinds of message passing and and quantum reference frames the interpretant deploys in that moment in the information environment setting

And then how that relates to formal and informal and all of these heterogeneous systems, which I think will bring us through the series towards active inference.

And what does active inference do beyond you saying there's positive alternative narratives?

However, such is some of the most common statements that people implicitly or explicitly say.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Well, you raised many good points.

I'd like to speak to a couple of them.

One is that by thinking of group decision-making as a cognitive process and thinking of a cognitive process as being a purposeful process,

and using active inference and other frameworks to potentially evaluate how, maybe there's ways to evaluate how functional a given process was.

Maybe in retrospect, a group can look back at its history

and assess how functional is our cognition how how how are we doing how how is information flowing how what are the many you know from it from a scientific standpoint what are the many ways that we could evaluate the process of cognition for its you know capacity or functionality or other things so you know those are some of the nitty-gritty scientific uh questions that that this project is sort of

uh offering in a way uh another thing that you mentioned that i'm really glad you mentioned was meta governance and um it's an interesting group uh and i i you know cite them in the first paper at the end um but uh i did i did it reminded me that i wanted to say that

that Cognar itself is sort of a group agnostic.

Different kinds of groups could use Cognar, a Cognar app.

And the different groups might have different levels of formality or different ways they want to make decisions.

Maybe if it's a decision-making process they're interested in, maybe they want to use majority vote, maybe they want to use ranked choice voting, maybe they have some other unusual system they want to use, maybe the group is organized in a particular way, maybe it's an autocratic group or a very democratic group or something.

So Cognard could be used by any group.

The group is going to define what it is and how it works and what its rules are and how things go.

And then Cognard seeks to be the structure on which then cognitive group events can occur.

And that is really good because Cognar is not responsible for forcing all users to use some particular method or approach or rule set or whatever.

There's room for innovation within the Cognar system.

There's room for experiment within the Cognar.

system there's a history of of events that can be assessed in hindsight for how well they worked uh how did they how well did they guide a group towards uh shared uh you know widely widely shared and uh valued solutions to problems and things like that so uh yeah


SPEAKER_01:
awesome okay another question from live chat and anyone else can continue to write questions and we can continue to explore a few things synthetic data generator wrote can it be used as a protocol for group mental model harmonization


SPEAKER_02:
Well, that's what it is.

If I understand the question correctly, that's sort of what it is.

If you and I are together in a room and we're talking about some situation in the world, I have a model in my mind about how the world works and what will happen if we do something or not do something and what it means and what the future might be.

And you have your own model in your head.

And we're communicating aspects of that.

But what Cognar does is it kind of makes that process available to the large group setting where there's potentially millions of people who are participating in this.

And what it does is it makes the model explicit.

right?

It puts it down in an explicit way so that it can be assessed and analyzed and considered as whether it's different, how different it is from other ways of approaching the situation or what its components are.

So that is what Cognar does is it represents a user's mental model of a situation.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah and i think an important aspect of the harmonization is whether or not any given sense of harmonization is achieved or whether that's like a positive attribute used like coherence informally by taking like a dynamical systems

parametric modeling, Bayesian probabilistic.

There actually are ways, like using fMRI analysis on the brain, that rhythms of different time scales, different mutual information, different KL divergences, like there's a whole toolkit of harmonics and analysis.

So this is one mapping strategy and representation.

However, it doesn't

need to be the only mapping or representation one that has some great causal properties though and helps be like kind of a repository format for the perception cognition and action that make things about a given system specific rather than like the generic active inference formalism


SPEAKER_02:
Recently there's been several papers published on how groups harmonize their belief systems as they come together to understand the world or make decisions.

So there's already prior work on what harmonization in a group setting might look like and how that works and how it might be even mathematically approached for modeling purposes.

And another thing that you just raised there a moment ago, Daniel, is the idea of a repository.

So suppose that Cognar existed and there were, say, millions of stories in Cognar and hundreds of thousands of group events that could be analyzed in retrospect.

Think of the value that would be to science for understanding cognition and understanding how information is conveyed and used and flows and...

what kind of designs for rule systems or uh inputs or whatever facilitate uh cognition in the best way I mean just the existence of a repository of externalized belief models of you know complex externalized belief models of a variety of individuals on a variety of topics itself would be extremely valuable for cognitive science and computer science and various other you know


SPEAKER_01:
psychology of the various other aspects of science yeah this relates to a question that synthetic data generator followed up on it's an interesting question larkin and simon were the seminal researchers in this diagrammatic reasoning is the explicit model visual or linguistic


SPEAKER_02:
is the um is if i can interpret that is the question is the story graph visual or linguistic is that about it um uh so it's it's a comp the the story graph one of the purposes of the story graph the meaning representation is to allow computation

So in that sense, I guess you would say it's linguistic.

It's trying to record the, trying to capture the meaning of what a phrase is, what the user is trying to say, right?

And how that phrase relates to other phrases of what the user is trying to say.

But it's also visual in the sense that suppose, and I'm glad you brought this slide up, but suppose I'm creating a story and now I want to check whether the system is understanding that story correctly, right?

So what I might want to do is I might want to view

a portion of the story graph under the hood and see if the system put those things together correctly so that aspect could be sort of visual as a user i could look at something you know like this like what you have on the screen and go like okay i see that i see that these two concepts were properly connected with each other it actually you know

sue actually is related to robert and uh you know this particular way or it was it was sue that dropped the gun not bob or you know whatever the story is

So there might be visual tools that the user would have available in order for them to query the underlying story graphs or even query someone else's story graph.

There might be visual tools for that.

And a result from a query might be a visual result so that it sort of makes sense to how the different elements are connected with each other.

But the kind of the core thing happening under the hood is computation based on the linguistic meaning of phrases and the intent of the user.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, a lot there, especially programs considered and graphs considered as diagrams, like from an applied category, theoretic perspective, the data structures themselves already being diagrammatic symbolic.

Now they, they might not be the right semantic representations for given system with this available observable with this unobservable modeled for this person with this accessibility, that language, like, et cetera.

But that is a cognitive situation with the human computer interface.

So whether it's a phone and uses this interface or uses another interface, part of the interesting question with a generative model interoperability is can those different blankets, different screens be also connected to a system that has an underlying representation that those perspectives come filtered through?


SPEAKER_02:
Right, right, right.

You raised the field of applied category theory there a minute ago, which is really interesting.

Lots of applications of applied category to this sort of setting, because maybe you want to translate this graph into some other representation, and you want that translation to preserve meaning.

Well, that's a functor in applied category theory.

So there might be ways to use applied category theory in even designing the structure of this.

Structurally, how does a story graph work?

What is it?

How is it stored?

How is it retrieved from

a database and you know how is it manipulated and how is it you know what kind of functors translate a particular story into a different version or visualization or you know

But really just a different version of that story, or a sub-story, or translated from a story graph into English, or a story graph into animation, or whatever the case might be.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

This was a great first go for .1.

Maybe just restate what are we going to head towards in .2, what would be fun, and what for those who are watching now could do between now and then.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, well, so today we've kind of talked about the general high level, what is Cognar and what is it supposed to do?

Next time when we get together, we'll talk more about meaning representations and what should the Cognar meeting representation look like?

What should it do?

What characteristics should it have?

How was it put together?

Maybe we'll have a chance to talk about how does applied category fit into all of this?

um in the meantime uh you know i i encourage watchers to take a look at the papers and uh and also if there's questions and you know feel free to send questions i think i can be reached through the institute somehow perhaps and um or post questions and maybe we can try to pick up any of those questions or comments or

suggestions you know that are offered in the intermedium intermediate part pick it up next time okay awesome thank you again john and lee too so see you next time sounds good bye

## 52eHP5ReG34

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome this is active guest stream number 87.2 on september 10 2024 we're continuing on with the cognar ecosystem series with john boyk so john thank you again go for it and we'll look forward to people's comments and questions great thank you daniel


SPEAKER_01:
uh my name is john boyk i'm a active inference institute research fellow um i have two new papers published or excuse me posted as a pre-prints and that's what this live stream these two live streams are about next slide please daniel

So on September 5th, we had our first one.

I encourage listeners to check that out.

The links are in the PDF.

And today we're talking about the second paper, which is the Cognar Ecosystem Preliminary Thoughts on a Story Graph Meaning Representation.

Next slide, please.

So the next several slides are brief recaps of what we discussed before.

The Cognar project is new, and it's large, and it's fairly complex.

And it might help a little bit to set the stage for this talk just by quickly reviewing some of the main components of the Cognar system.

So Cognar means cognitive narrative and it's, uh, it's a, it's a, it's a, um, the, the cognitive system is still a concept.

It's, it's new.

It's very much being created as we speak.

It's conceived to be an open source online ecosystem of tools and services, et cetera, that facilitates group cognition, especially for large groups and especially with regard to deliberation, strategizing, and collective problem solving.

Cognar helps users

and the phrase I like to use is tell their story.

So I use the word story and I use the word narrative in the paper and I will in this talk, but I don't mean story as in fable or I mean story as in

actually what i mean by story is is the a belief model of a user so the idea is that relative to some problem or situation of interest a group as having a online discussion you could say and the users are contributing their an externalization of their belief model to this discussion so they are they are in this in this story they're they're

describing what's the situation or problem, what happened, why did it happen, what might happen next.

What might happen next clearly is predictive, right?

So there's predictions are part of, generally are part of a story.

Who does this situation affect?

Who was involved?

What does it mean?

What should be done?

What can be learned?

All those kinds of questions can be addressed in a story.

And a story really is a model, an externalization of beliefs about how a user sees the world and sees the situation and thinks that the world works.

Next slide, please.

Um, so, uh, stories can be rich and by rich, I mean, potentially long, complex, nuanced, informative, conditional dynamic, et cetera.

So maybe a typical story might be the equivalent of a few pages of text perhaps, but, uh, but, uh, could be even be longer.

It could be like a equivalent to a book chapter, for example, or a story could be very short equivalent to a paragraph that really depends on what the user wants to communicate, but they can be rich.

And this is much different from other online services that are aimed at collaborative decision-making and similar tasks.

This is not a choose multiple choice sort of system where the user can contribute to the conversation by choosing A, B, C, or D, or filling in a blank with a couple of words.

Stories can be much, much richer than that.

There is a backend computational system, and that system assists and guides users in constructing their stories.

assess the stories for quality, but for example, is the story on topic?

Is it comprehensible?

Did the user follow whatever rules the group set out for submitting stories?

And primarily the backend computational systems helps the group to digest and make sense of the many stories that might've been submitted.

And when I say many stories and large group,

I mean, potentially a group of thousands to tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands, even to millions of peoples.

So, you know, potentially very, very large groups.

And the backend system also performs inference for queries that users generates.

For example, I'm part of a group, we're all sharing our stories, and I might have some question about some particular story, like in that story, does the economy, does unemployment go down?

Some question like that, and I can pose a query

or even a more specific query either to the storyteller of that story or to the story itself.

And the system can also generate queries all by itself.

When you're creating a story, the system might ask you, I'm confused, do you mean that the unemployment is going to go down because of this or some such question like that?

But the system, this is quite important, the system does not predict the future.

So it's not going to assess a story for how useful that will be in real life or how accurate it will be.

That's the purpose of a story.

A user does this in their story.

The user says, I believe that if we take actions A, B, C, and D, then unemployment will go down, for example.

And the system does also not assess the realism or accuracy of the story or a group of stories.

And that's really the responsibility of the group that's collecting the stories.

Next slide, please.

Importantly, those last two bullets means that the back-end system does not have to have its own model of how the world works in reality.

It does not need to know mechanics, for example, or biology.

It really just needs to communicate stories and help users digest stories and help users create stories in such a way that users can communicate their belief systems and share their belief systems together.

So if the purpose of the Cognar system is to facilitate group cognition, the obvious question is, well, what is cognition?

In this project, I'm looking at cognition through the active inference lens.

And active inference is a normative Bayesian description of cognition.

In the previous PDFs for the first series, there's links that listeners could follow to find some literature on this.

And obviously, there's references in my papers also.

So an agent has, in active inference, an agent has an internal probabilistic model about how the world works.

And that is the model that is conveyed, really, that is externalized into the story.

So cognition is idealized here, simplified as a four-part cyclic process of predict, act, sense, and learn.

So I underline the word act here because

Often that's really not considered a part of cognition, but in the active inference world, it is.

So for example, I'm learning how to play football.

I predict that if I jump up high and raise my arms, I might catch a high pass.

I act on those predictions.

I sense whether I actually caught the ball or not.

And if I didn't catch the ball, I learn from my mistakes.

I learn that I need to jump higher or reach higher or take some other action.

And then we repeat the process.

And over time, I get better and better at catching that ball.

And in action, an agent favors choices that ensure the greatest resolution of uncertainty under the constraints that are preferred outcomes are realized.

So my preferences are that I catch that ball and I really want to reduce the uncertainty that I'm going to miss it.

So I repeat this learning process over and over and my certainty about catching that ball goes up and up as I get better.

And active inference is normative, so it offers a description of functional cognition.

And that's what we're after in the Cognar system is to facilitate functional cognition as opposed to dysfunctional cognition.

So for example, dysfunctional cognition would not ensure the greatest resolution of uncertainty under the constraints that preferred outcomes are realized.

If uncertainty does not decrease about preferred outcomes, then that's a sign that cognition may have problems.

Next slide, please.

so what is cognar really then um i in in this project i i look at a group as an organism as a cognitive organism so just like any organism it needs to needs to react in the world it needs to do those that four-step process of you know sense act learn uh a cognitive architecture

integrates information and coordinates action.

And every organism has a cognitive architecture, and so do groups.

So do groups viewed as organisms.

And the cognitive architecture for an individual human, say, is the human biology, the central nervous system, the body, and also tools that a human might use.

Computers, for example, could be considered a part of that cognitive architecture.

Notes to remember is an extension of the brain's capacity to remember, for example.

And cognitive architecture for a group might include rules, methods, institutions, sensors, sensors for air pollution, for example, for a group that might be a nation.

And essentially, all the components by which and through which cognition occurs.

As an aside, in a previous series of three papers that we discussed in the previous guest streams a few years ago,

I look at a society's core systems, that is governance systems, economic systems, financial systems, legal systems, as part of that society's cognitive architecture.

And this Cognar project is kind of closely related, or maybe you could say an offshoot of that initial series.

So Cognar is a component of the cognitive architecture of the groups that use it.

And its purpose again is to facilitate functional cognition.

And as I've mentioned, a story is a potentially dynamic externalized representation of a user's internal belief model about how the world works.

Next slide.

Just a couple more of these recaps, and then we're on to the meat of today's talk.

Um, so, um, under the hood, this is how the Cognar system works.

Um, I've used the word story.

I've used the word narrative, but, um, I do not mean textual, uh, information.

So it's not, users don't convey and discuss and, and share their stories in, in text form, but rather in a very special kind of meaning representation that I call a story graph.

And story graphs really are the core innovation of the Cognar system.

It's really what allows the Cognar system to function well.

Um, this diagram shows how story graphs are constructed.

A user might either speak or write a short text passages, a sentence, a few sentences, maybe with some metadata associated with that, perhaps a table, perhaps the graphs, you know, something like that, perhaps a, a few words about how the sentence is supposed to be interpreted.

Um, uh, the system accepts that, uh, those passages, uh, translates that into a story graph fragment, and then merges that story graph fragment into the growing story graph and the story graph fragment and the story graph.

That's, that's, that's the meaning representation, uh, for the Cognar system.

Once the story graph is constructed, then several things can happen.

It could be translated into a natural language, potentially.

So one day you should be able to instruct the system to take the story graph and then read it back to me, play it back to me so I can hear how it sounds, or translate that story graph into some other alternative meaning representation that's maybe better suited for a particular

logical or inference some kind of inference model or some kind of analysis or translate it directly into you know either in part or in whole into some kind of probabilistic model or logical model or other kind of model to conduct either analysis or inference next slide please

Here's an example of a meaning representation that's used.

This is a very popular meaning representation called abstract meaning representation.

This is for the sentence, similar technique is almost impossible to apply to other crops.

such as cotton, soybeans, and rice.

You can see at a glance from this meaning representation that it's graph-based, that's one thing, and that the edges in this graph represent some kind of relationship between words and the sentence.

The rest of it is not important.

And I don't use, we don't use AMR in the Cognar system.

We're actually, the purpose of this second paper is to explore what is the best meaning representation for Cognar?

What does, what should it do?

What should it, how should it be constructed?

What should it be able to accomplish?

Those kinds of questions.

But this graph picture gives you a very rough idea of what we might be after.

Next slide, please.

so um the purpose of the of the story graph meaning representation is to represent a story in a format that's less ambiguous than natural language natural language can be very ambiguous and it should be a representation that is readable and understandable both by humans and computers

As a creator of a story, I should be able to look at that graph and confirm or validate that, yes, that the system understood what I was trying to tell it, things like that.

It provides a structure for inference and analysis.

It serves, as I noted in the previous slide, it serves as input to various kinds of inference and analytical models.

and it serves as an interlingua which is a natural language independent representation that's suitable for translation into other languages and and models next slide so now we now we can really begin with today's talk so what is the cognar meaning representation

That's the question, but whatever it is, it's fit for purpose.

And what does fit for purpose mean?

Daniel, if you back up one slide, this is the purpose.

So the task at hand is to design a meaning representation that is capable of performing these tasks.

Okay, let's go forward two slides.

All right, so I've already showed you an example of AMR, abstract meaning representation.

And I've mentioned that that's a common meaning representation used in research.

So, there's others.

So, before we jump into questions about what should the cognitive meaning representation look like, it's useful to look at the meaning representations that are used in the research world, particularly in the natural language inference.

on natural language inferences inferences falls under the general category of natural language processing there's many tasks that that fall into the categories of nlp and nlu natural language understanding and natural language inference is one of them and perhaps it's analyzed the in a sense the most difficult because in in in nli

for inference, the system or the model really needs to understand the meaning of some text.

So this is the way that NLI is conducted in the research setting.

uh some text is selected usually that text is just a single sentence or maybe you know a short a small number of sentences at the most um and that text might be selected from some some database of of sentences you know where the meaning is is well understood

And that text then is sent to a natural language processing system, so for parsing, word sense disambiguation.

The result of that is then sent to some meaning representation, such as AMR.

And then the meaning representation is used within the inference method.

So this is typically how it's done, but the Cognar is much different.

The setting is much different.

In Cognar, numbers 1, 2, and 3 here happen almost at the same time.

And it's interactive.

So Cognito doesn't select text out of a database to make a story.

Users are contributing text to make a story.

And they're doing that for some reason.

A user wants to convey some information, some aspect of their beliefs about how the world works.

So in an NLI study, that text is fixed.

You're given a sentence, and then the whole system is going to be scored on how well it understands that particular sentence.

But in Cognar, if the system doesn't understand what you tried to say, it can ask you for feedback.

It can say, I don't understand.

Who is the word he referring to, for example?

Or do you mean flame?

Do you mean flame as in a hot burning candle?

Or do you mean flame as in a romantic interest?

So the system can ask you for

ask you questions, give you feedback, maybe suggest phrasing or just simply say, I don't understand what you just entered.

And then the user is able to adjust that text to something that the system can understand.

which of course can reduce ambiguity and error and improve the quality of the story, the text that is being converted into a story.

And as I showed in one of the graphs a few slides ago, the system then takes that text and converts that into a story graph fragment.

And depending on the use case for the Cognar system, say in a use case that involves group decision making, the editing of that story might occur over a series of rounds where people edit their stories, share their stories.

The system helps digest the set of stories in a given round and how they've changed and what they entail and how they're different and how they're similar.

And then at the end of each round, users would have the opportunity maybe to read other people's stories, digest the information from other stories, and maybe change their story if they see an idea that they like or they think, oh, I should have included that.

I meant to, but I didn't, and I'm going to include that in my story now.

So in that process of iteration and rounds, the quality of the story increases even further.

So that's really quite different from the research setting that is typically used in NLI.

And it gives the Cognar system a lot more flexibility as to how it operates.

Because it can interact with the user and ask questions and give feedback to the user and tell the user that it doesn't understand something when it doesn't understand something, it really has the capacity, at least the potential capacity, to create much higher quality stories.

and perform even more complex forms of inference than would be possible in normal NLI studies.

Okay, next slide.

So in the literature over the years, many meaning representations have been proposed.

This is a table from the second article, but there's even more than this.

This is just some selected meaning representations.

And actually, meaning representations are being developed and created regularly.

So it's not that there's three fixed meaning representations and you have to pick one of them.

That's not really the way it works.

People are creating new ones as

as new situations arises, new tasks arises that they're trying to address.

We will focus on a few of them today, and the second paper focuses on a few of them, particularly discourse representation theory, which is, I don't know, about the fifth one down or so.

And there's a few others, type theory with records, the last one.

And we'll also look at Disco Cirque towards the bottom there, which is not exactly a meaning representation, but it's related.

Next slide.

This is a T this is a, uh, graphic from Lou, uh, 2021.

And, uh, he was interested in, in meeting representations for document length text.

And so are we, you know, document length text means, you know, potentially the, the equivalent of a, a book or a book chapter, for example.

um so we have the same interest as lou he's also interested in graphical meaning representations not all meaning representations are graphical and the reason that you might prefer a graphical meaning representation is because graphs computers understand graphs very well that's a it's a way to encode text information such that computers are able to process it well

And I might back up just a minute here and say like, why is it even necessary that a backend computational system assesses stories and, you know,

does inference on stories why not just why not just write your story in text form and and you know share it with the group why why not that well the reason is because uh we're interested here in group in group cognition in the large group setting

So if you have a group of, say, 100,000 people and each of them is submitting some long story that's complicated and nuanced and dynamic, they're going to change it maybe next week as they learn something new.

There's no human that's able to digest, you know, a hundred thousand long stories.

It's just not going to happen.

So the purpose of that backend system is to help use, help the group to digest all of that information and make sense of all that information.

And that's why the computer needs to understand what is written.

And that is one way to do that is to use a graph based meaning representation.

So in Lou's table, you can see that discourse representation theory really scores quite well for all the many things that are necessary for understanding aspects of text.

And for the very same reasons, DRT looks interesting for the Cognar system also.

Next slide, please.

So this is an example of discourse representation theory.

This is the box form, and DRT is not graph-based, inherently graph-based, but people have proposed ways to convert this into a graph.

This is a DRT for the two sentences Max fell, John might have pushed him.

We have some reference, X1, X2.

X1 is a person named Max, and some event happens, he fell, and he fell before some event, and that event being pushed by John.

And the two boxes represent roughly the two sentences, and they're related in the sense that this word because.

because of k1 k2 yeah max fell because john might have pushed him um uh yeah that's that's that i think it's it's kind of straightforward how you would read a drt box next slide please

As I said, DRT itself is not inherently graph-based.

And Lou came up with a version of DRT that he calls Discourse Representation Tree Structure, DRTS.

that is graph-based and that really is aimed at document-length text.

And this looks particularly interesting in the Cognar setting because it's graph-based, it's really constructed for long text, and it has all the benefits that DRT has.

So you could imagine a story graph looking a little bit like this, but still far more sophisticated.

Next slide, please.

By the way, that was a DRTS for the very same two sentences.

Max fell, John might have pushed him.

Another type, this is not really a meaning representation per se, but closely related, something that would be of interest in the Cognar setting, is type theory with records.

So type theory actually is closely related to category theory.

Types are really like category objects.

And type theory with records is a hybrid type theory.

But in type theory with records, there's records, uh, that is, you know, in a sense, a, uh, abstract description of some potential situation.

The potential situation here is, uh,

boy hugs a dog that's so that's the event that is this uh hypothetical that could happen boy hugs a dog and for that to happen there has to be a boy there have to has to be a dog and there has to be some event where the boy hugs the dog so that's written as a record and um

Then there has to be, if that event is perceived in life or in a story or in the imagination, there becomes a witness for that event.

So type theory with records has both record types and witnesses.

And a witness really is like a proof and the proof of the proof of this boy hugs dog event is that, uh, you know, I witnessed a boy and I witnessed a dog and I witnessed this boy hugging the dog.

So there we go.

That's the proof.

And this is actually, type theory with records really kind of captures in a way the way human cognition works.

Because we have in our minds these kind of possible things that could happen.

And then we witness the world and process our sense information.

And we usually make then probabilistic judgments about whether something happened.

uh it's dark i think that was a horse in the front yard it looked like a horse it was big it sounded like a horse i don't know why a horse would be in my front yard but i think i'm pretty sure that was a horse so that would be a potential witness for a horse in the yard type event

TTR is very flexible.

Records can be nested.

It can be as complex as you would like.

It's kind of closely related to DRT, but it can do some things and has some capabilities that maybe DRT doesn't have.

And its inference using type theory through records is potentially fast in that it depends mostly on type checking.

So was there a boy, an individual of type boy?

Was there a dog?

And so on.

And because it depends mostly on type checking,

play well with proof assistance for which there's, you know, sophisticated software programs to do that service proof assistance, logical proof assistance.

So inference with TTR could be potentially fast.

And as I said, it mimics semen cognition more so than interpretation of logical formulas.

It's more flexible than that.

Next slide.

So what I'm doing here, maybe I should have introduced what I'm doing a little bit, but I'm just going through some of the meaning representations that look potentially useful for the Cognar setting.

So I'm going to take a quick diversion from that, though.

We'll get back to it.

I'm going to take a quick diversion and talk about large language models in this setting.

I think probably most users are familiar now with large language models.

In the paper, I call them pre-trained language models.

But they're large in the sense that they have billions of parameters, as the top graph is showing, and the size of the models is increasing over the years.

So they essentially ingest an enormous amount of text that's available.

via the web and other sources and then process that text and find associations between words and between words in a sentence and between words in different sentences and things like that so that through those, you know, it learns those associations and then

can perform various tasks based on based on the information in those associations and um the large language models typically use some kind of transformer attention mechanism which showed in the you know high level view is shown in the bottom the graph there

There's some text comes in at the bottom.

This is a few French words, and that's encoded through an encoder.

That information is sent to the decoder.

There's attention mechanisms mixed in there.

And then the output of the decoder is going to be some answer to a query.

And in this case, it's the translation of the French into English.

I won't go into any, you know, it's not necessary to go into any more detail about how transformers and large language model works, but that's the high level overview.

Next slide.

And the reason that I'm injecting this LLM discussion here is that I really wanted to talk about vector embedding, because that'll be important to the next meaning representation we talk about.

So in using large language models, words are converted, embedded really, into vectors to capture their meaning.

This is just a really simple sort of example, but suppose you have the word cat and suppose you have a list of a vector, really a list, a vector of 30 other words like mom and dog and tree and run and a variety of other words.

Well, cat is gonna be more similar to, the meaning of cat is gonna be more similar to some of those and less similar to others.

So cat might be very similar to tiger.

So if tiger is in this, is one of the possibilities in this list, then that's gonna get a high similarity score.

So from that process, you can imagine constructing a series of numbers that are reflecting how similar some query object is to some reference objects.

or at least reference vectors.

So that's basically how the meaning of words is embedded into vectors.

And then these vectors can be used in a variety of computational tasks.

It also opens up the possibility for what's called a vector database, where on the left there, at the bottom left, the user has some kind of query.

For example, how do you translate this sentence from French into English?

Maybe has some extra content that kind of gives more information about the setting.

So maybe the content in this example is the French phrase has to do with the petroleum industry.

for example.

It's like a little hint as to what this phrase might mean.

That information then is embedded in vectors, and those vectors could be saved in a vector database, a very large vector database.

And then at the bottom right, the LLM could communicate back and forth with the vector database looking for vectors that are good matches for

what the query is, and then eventually the LLM spits out some kind of answer.

So that's a brief overview of vector embedding, and that'll be important in the next meeting representation we discuss.

Next slide, please.

I'm calling the disco-circ here a meaning representation, but that's not actually true.

It's not a formal meaning representation.

It's really more a computational method.

So, a disco-circ, distributional compositional circuits, is kind of a mixture of category theory and distributional semantics.

Distributional semantics is really what I was just referring to with a vector embedding of word meaning.

And it presents a graphical calculus via string diagrams.

An example of a string diagram is shown there.

And this is not just a diagram that sort of shows relationships.

It's actually a computational diagram.

It's the way string diagrams are processed really implies that there's some computational aspect going on here.

So let's just look at the at the very top left there.

We have some entity Alice and Alice is sober and the meaning of Alice and the meaning of sober should be merged in some way to create the concept of a sober Alice.

Right.

And how is that merging done?

Well, it's depicted as a string.

This string diagram is shown here, but

The vector representations of Alice and Sober are then multiplied.

You can think another word for vectors or complicated vectors is tensors.

So these tensors might be very high dimensional.

And then you have some multiplication happening in a high dimensional space.

And that is merging the ideas of Alice and Sober.

And then it continues on through the rest of the graph, multiplication of high dimensional tensors.

And then the answer is whatever the output of the last tensor product

the the last event in that tensor product line of events so um

just a little bit i don't want to really get into category theory too much but it obviously category theory obviously is important in this sort of approach and um and as we'll discuss later it has category theory and applied category theory really it may be applicable in many of the many of the

computational tasks that Cognar has to perform.

So I'll just say a few quick words on it.

So string diagrams represent morphisms and monodal categories.

Category objects are the nouns, the strings.

So the string for Alice, that's a object.

And the boxes are morphisms.

Morphisms are like maps, like functions, sort of.

And they transform one type into another.

So we have the type Alice, and we have the type Solver, and then we're going to do something to merge those two types together.

And then functors map the monoidal category of string diagrams into another category of vector spaces.

And that's where this linear maps can happen, the multiplication.

So again, this string diagram is really a computational diagram more than anything else.

And the other thing maybe that's important here is that since we're talking about linear multiplication operations in high dimensional space,

um this system becomes a little it's really really best suited maybe for uh Quantum computers Quantum computers could handle the you know when they're event when as they become more and more available and as they improve

quantum computers could handle this kind of situation very very well it can still be done on on on you know current systems but would really be ideally suited for quantum computation next slide please

So there's variations on disco circ, uh, actually on disco cat, uh, which is the, the, the disco circ is really aimed at understanding, um, you know, how multiple sentences fit together.

Disco cat is aimed at, uh, understanding single sentences.

uh so a higher order version of disco cat uh as uh

uses a Lambda calculus as a word in this higher order version is a diagram valued higher order function via Lambda calculus.

And then the meaning of a sentence can be given by composing Lambda terms together.

And then that ends up with a diagram that can be interpreted in the category Vect as in Disco Cat.

So this is again a computational graph that we're looking at.

It's for the sentence no man is an island.

And the pink areas in there, that is the areas where the actual vector multiplication is happening.

But because it's offering this higher order function, it can do things that a discusser can't do.

It can easily handle adverbs, propositions, negation, quantifiers, and more.

So this is really interesting.

It has potential.

It may offer a way to use the system that is more applicable to conventional computing rather than quantum computing.

And it's obviously more flexible and can process other kinds of meanings that DiscoCirc has trouble with.

um but um it's new and it this higher order version there's not a higher order version of disco circ yet this is a higher order version for disco cat nevertheless quite interesting next slide please

Okay, so now we're going to jump back and talk a little bit about the potential roles of large language models in Cognar.

But just to kind of summarize what we've already discussed, we've talked about a couple of meaning representations or things like DiscoCirc and higher order DiscoCat that are closely related.

So we have a few ideas now about maybe what a Cognar meaning representation might look like.

It's probably going to be graph-based.

It might lose tree structures.

potential for, you know, especially with quantum computers, potential for kind of using a very different approach of the disco cat and higher order disco circ when it's available.

So that we have a few ideas that we might work from.

And now the question arises, well, why do we even want to use a meaning representation?

Why can't you just take text, you know,

Some sentences and feed that into a large language model and and get the kind of inference that you seek do the kinds of analysis that you seek.

So I want to address that question.

So.

Large language models, they're pretty amazing.

They can do a lot of things.

And they've really, in a sense, taken the research world by a storm in the last few years.

And they've been used in NLI.

So there's numerous studies that have used large language models to perform a variety of NLI tasks.

And there's many NLI tasks, and different databases, and complexities of sentences, and types of linguistic

phenomena that are used for various kinds of NLI tests in various kinds of NLI tests.

So from everything that's been written so far that I've digested, LLMs can be amazing, but they can also really struggle in certain situations.

And it happens that some of those situations are the situations of Cognar.

So LLM struggle with complex text, long text.

If it's not domain specific, they can struggle.

Stories can be about anything.

They can be about industrial processes or environmental issues or social issues or political issues or whatever.

Story can be about anything.

And LLM struggle with that kind of variable setting, variable domains, and also struggle regarding logical reasoning, especially over long texts.

And in some NLI tests, LLMs can really do quite poorly.

Some they do okay, and some they can really fail.

LLMs can also hallucinate.

They can kind of make up people in situations.

And they don't generally, I'm really talking about vanilla LLMs here, but they generally don't provide explainable answers.

And that's kind of important because, for example, I'm writing a story and maybe the

scores my story quality in some way maybe i get a low a low score for story quality because perhaps the story is off you know in theory perhaps the story is off topic or it's uh not just not comprehensible or it's incomplete or you know some kind of problem like that

And I maybe want to know why am I getting a low quality score in the story?

What's going on?

Why did you give me this score?

And in general, at least a vanilla LLM wouldn't be able to provide that answer.

Its answer would be, well, I multiplied all these numbers in some high dimensional space and came up with this value.

And that's why you got a low score.

And in contrast to that, this is just one of many contrasts, using a story graph as an intermediary in the computational process provides several utilities, one of which is that that story graph can then be inspected visually by a user to see if the system has understood

the story correctly.

I can, if I'm, as I'm creating a story, I can view aspects of the story graph to see that, um, uh, that, uh, you know, these two persons in the story are related.

One works for the other, for example, the system understood that correctly.

Um, so, uh, you know, the question here is it's not whether LLMs should be used at all in Cognar.

It's really more of the question of, um, there's two approaches, uh, uh, an approach to natural language inference that does not use any kind of intermediate meaning representation, just, just text as input and the approach where, uh, there is a intermediate meaning representation in this case, a story graph.

And from what I can tell in reading the literature, the LLMs are just not capable of doing all the things, all the sort of inference and analytical processes that would be necessary in the Cognar setting.

So using story graphs as an intermediary in that computational process could be, I think, more useful.

And also keep in mind that suppose that the group is very large, suppose that hundreds of thousands of people are gathering for some event to explore some situation.

And many of them are submitting long stories, long complex stories.

Well, you would have to somehow compare all these stories to each other.

You'd have to have LLMs ingesting very large masses of textual information and then comparing their various parts and then following the logical line of reasoning through a story.

Really, LLMs are just not up to that task as it sits today and as it looks even in the near future.

Next slide, please.

But that doesn't mean that LLMs couldn't still be useful.

So the combination of LLMs and story graphs or story graph fragments is potentially useful and makes sense from what's in the literature today and what looks to be coming down the pike.

So for example, as a user starts to create a story graph and inputs text or spoken language into the system to create a story graph fragment, an LLM might be very useful to help understand the words of those passages

and to put them into a proper story graph fragment that might be one example and another interesting really interesting approach is to use a graph a story graph as a contextual input to an llm so in in theory llms could digest graphical information and use that to provide a context for the query

And LLMs might be useful, for example, in transforming story graphs or story graph fragments into natural language to export a written story of what the story graph is saying.

And several new, more sophisticated approaches are being developed for LLM.

There's many of them.

Some of them are actually what I've just mentioned, using graphical information as input to the LLM.

That's one of the approaches.

And another is processing the outputs of the LLM through some kind of other program, maybe a logic program to enforce semantic constraints.

And you can think of that actually as tool use by LLMs.

So that's really an interesting possibility too.

And there's many others, and these newer, more sophisticated approaches could be useful in many areas of Cognar, potentially.

But nevertheless, it still appears to me that using a meaning representation as an intermediary, either as input to an LLM or as something that the LLM is creating from

Text or spoken language would seem to be the most useful and productive path to follow at this point.

Next slide.

Okay, so now we've talked about several possible meaning representations, graph-based and not graph-based.

Well, yeah, graph-based and not graph-based.

DTR is not, type theory with records is not really graph-based, but potentially it could be converted to graphs.

So now we get an idea of what's out there.

And now the task is, so what is the Cognar meaning representation?

And I said in one of the early slides, whatever that meaning representation is, it's fit for purpose.

And then we talked about what that purpose is.

For example, be readable by both humans and computers, and facilitate analytical and inference computations, et cetera.

so in the paper i offer a desiderata of about 20 or so items roughly 20 items um that this you know that's these are the things that we would want a cognitive meaning representation to to to do or to qualities that we would want it to have

And these seven that I list here is just kind of a smattering out of that larger set of about 20 or so.

Obviously, we would want the graph to be readable by humans and computers for inference and analysis.

And for computational reasons, I think we would want the meaning representation to be graph-based.

Uh, it should be capable of handling document like text stories of very, uh, stories that contain varied linguistic phenomena.

And there's a lot of linguistic phenomena.

If you're, if you're trying, if you really wanna understand natural language, there's a lot of linguistic phenomena to understand.

And some of it is quite challenging.

Um, I, I give examples of that kind of phenomena in the papers, in the two papers.

Uh, the story graph should be reproducible in the sense that similar stories should have similar graphs.

Otherwise, comparing graphs would not be so meaningful.

Comparing two stories by comparing the graphs wouldn't be very meaningful.

The system should be able to handle metadata.

For example, if I'm typing in a passage of text, but I want to refer to a table, I input a table of data or maybe a figure or something.

And, uh, the, the meeting representation ought to be able to handle that.

It ought to be, be able to handle fluid beliefs because we're not creating a story that is static.

We're creating a story that is, that is live and amenable.

And if, if this happens to be a group event, that's going in rounds, I might change my story, parts of it, um, you know, over the next hour or the next day or something.

Um, and it should also be able to handle beliefs about beliefs, right?

So, but, uh, in this story, I'm telling you, I believe that such and such person is acting the way they're acting because they think that such and such is the case.

Uh, so beliefs about beliefs, uh, you know, uh, and non-symmetric information, like in this story, I know that John is a murderer, but my neighbor doesn't know that.

And the meaning representation has to handle uncertainty in all its forms.

In particular, uncertainty about predictions.

So part of the inactive inference, part of the cognitive process is anticipation of what

will happen if some action is taken or not taken.

So these are predictions, anticipations of what will happen if certain actions are taken.

And a story, stories in general, will have predictions in them.

Typically will have predictions in them.

For example, if we tax rich, wealthy people more, the economy will

get better or we'll get worse or, you know, something will happen.

So stories often, usually, uh, typically have predictions in them and there's uncertainty associated with those predictions and uncertainty, even about what the story is saying.

Like, I think I saw a horse in my front yard, but I'm not sure.

And, uh, if it's a horse, I really better go close the gate to the garden or, you know, sue my neighbor for letting their horse eat my corn or, you know, whatever.

um so how so now suddenly you know i showed you the picture of the amr the little graph for a sentence and i showed you the store the graphs for two sentences put together max fell john pushed him now we're you can see that we're talking about something much more sophisticated here we're talking about you know predictions and models modeled you know the output of of probabilistic models and

um we're talking about beliefs about beliefs so that so one could imagine a meaning representation that maybe has multiple layers to it a graph based meaning representation that has multiple nodes and multiple layers and that that a user should be able to zoom in to to look at a particular part or zoom out so

You should be able to have various views of this meaning representation.

And maybe as you zoom out, it should be possible to just kind of summarize what you're looking at.

If you zoom out all the way out of a story, maybe you end up with something similar to a tagline to a movie, like this is a story about

How a man who was once a thief turns his life around and he says it's possible for anyone in his position to do so.

Maybe that's the overall meaning of the story, but then you can zoom in to the different details.

um you should also be able to confer nodes and edges in this meaning representation with with meaning so maybe a group of nodes and edges really represents say a bank you know a bank has some complicated transactions that occur within it and

there's ports to this bank the bank the you know people can put their savings money in this bank or take out loans and various things so you could imagine some kind of compositional or you know

a set of nodes and edges that have meaning in in and of themselves and are also reusable so to make it really useful if you if i want if if many of us are telling stories about banks well it might be very useful to have some bank objects that we have in a library that we can include in our story that makes it much easier to construct the story

And ideally, this whole meaning representation would be compositional in the category sense.

So in category theory, g of f, there's a function or map f and g mapping.

And you apply one to the results of the other.

That's called a composition.

And in category theory, that composition preserves algebraic structure.

And then there's functors between categories that preserve structure, including the composition of morphisms.

So if it's possible, that sort of approach could be used so that it makes sense when you link computational events together in this graph.

In a sense, the meaning is preserved or conveyed through some series of computations.

and transformations.

And that's different than just modularity.

Modularity really means just the ability to chain things together.

So compositional is kind of a more sophisticated setting.

And as I said, you should be able to reuse objects to make it really easy and fast to create graphs for some particular story.

So these are just a small selection of the many desiderata that are listed in the paper.

And whatever the meaning representation is, it would be really good if all or many of these could be fulfilled.

Next slide, please.

I've already mentioned category theory, applied category theory, so just a few more thoughts on that.

Category theory can be used to reduce the complexity of a system, to understand the complexity of a system and then to work with the complexity of a system, to manage complexity.

And compositionality is part of that.

And in particular, it is, I think, possible to use C-sets, which is an object from applied category theory, as property graphs as the basis of story graphs.

So, you know, I've already showed you graph pictures of, you know, like say AMR of what kind of a simple, simple meaning representation might look like, a simple Cognar meaning representation might look like, but that could actually be stored under the hood as property graphs where a node has various, you know, flexible properties that can be attributed to it.

And same with edges, edges can have properties.

And all of that could be really constructed as C-sets from applied category theory.

And then there's also functors for various kinds of transformations, graph-to-graph, graph-to-text transformations that

kind of preserve meaning through the transformations.

I've mentioned zooming in and zooming out and summarization.

There's an interesting paper where an applied category approach has been used to make a system, this in the chemical world, but a systems dynamic model of a situation.

and then convert that into causal loop diagrams.

And causal loop diagrams are kind of a simplified version of a systems dynamic model.

And causal loop diagrams are sort of more approachable for the lay public, but still convey some of the main information that would be contained in a systems dynamic model.

So that offers kind of one possibility of how you might zoom in and out and summarize meaning for story graphs.

And then there's also mathematical models of group interactions and belief sharing that could be constructed using concepts like sheaf and topos theory from category theory.

So that's the application of category theory to the Cognar meaning representation and Cognar computational processes, I think, is a really rich area for exploration.

Next slide.

So given all of that in the paper, I suggest maybe the best approach for a meaning representation is to base the meaning representation on the tree structure, the discourse representation tree structure.

And then with TTR, type theory with records, and higher order disco-circ as being also potentially interesting.

But if DRTS is used sort of as kind of the main idea, then it would still have to have numerous extensions as per the desiderata.

So layers, compositionality, and so forth.

And also, I think it might be useful to use a categorical grammar, like combinatorial categorical grammar, CCG.

And that kind of grammar is, for example, patterns in a language.

you know, verb noun, adjective noun, big dog, dog runs, you know, those sort of patterns would be contained in a categorical grammar.

And then the system would understand if you use those patterns, the system would better understand what it is you're trying to say.

So that's a form of restriction of input, user input to a categorical grammar.

But it probably makes sense to do so to improve the capacity of the system to understand what is being said.

And if you were to use some kind of pattern in text that wasn't part of the category of grammar, then the system could say, I don't understand what you're trying to tell me.

Can you rephrase that?

Do you mean this?

Or do you mean this?

You know, something like that.

And then, uh, one inference, one potential inference pipeline is to use a categorical grammar, create the story graph, and then send, uh, convert the story into a logical forms is like, for example, suitable for natural logic, and then send the results of that to a proof assistance, a proof assistant for a fast inference.

These are just some ideas, but at this point, it looks like this approach might be the most productive of the approaches that we've discussed.

Next slide.

Um, so some research questions, um, I should say that this is a, this is a, it looks like a long list, but this is a short list of all the possible, uh, you know, uh, to do's and questions that could be raised about, uh, about the cognitive system and about the cognitive meaning representation.

I mean, there's really all kinds of questions, like questions that don't have anything to do with the meaning representation per se, like how do you ensure that the information being shared is not manipulated?

How do you ensure the quality of information that's being submitted and discussed in this Cognar setting?

What are the social implications of this?

What are the legal implications of this?

How do you protect privacy of a person's information and their stories?

There's all kinds of big picture questions like that.

And then there's detailed questions.

uh that need to be answered too but uh you know how do you construct what is a what is the meaning graph uh representation what is the role of of of category theory and developing the system um

what kinds of stories are going to be applied here?

What are the categories of stories?

So just looking at the second bullet there, maybe one early step is just to create a, or excuse me, the first bullet,

is just to create a small set of very simple stories.

Maybe the stories are only a short paragraph in size, and those serve then as the kind of proof of concept or as the core of what the rest of the machinery is constructed on.

So perhaps that's a good start, generate a small set of simple stories.

It could even be like three or four or five simple stories just to start.

And then using those simple stories, perhaps develop some kind of simplistic meaning representation, perhaps building on discourse representation tree structures, convey these simple stories in that representation.

And then maybe that process is even done manually at first, not in some automated fashion.

automated fashion the automation would come later as you as you know we get more familiar from comfortable with the approach and the chosen meaning representation um as I mentioned category theory and in particular algebraic Julia which is a software in the Julia system

that is aimed at applied category theory could be useful.

There's various kinds of models in algebraic Julia that could be useful.

Explore C-sets as property graphs for meaning representations.

That would be, I think, useful.

Uh, given a simple next bullet, given a simple meeting representation, explore version control systems for that.

How do, how, how are we keeping track of edits to stories so that they can, so that we have a history of edits and so that, uh, we can construct a, uh, you know, we can regenerate a story from the various original inputs in the edits.

And then how are stories stored?

What kind of database is used for storage and recall?

How do we zoom in and out of stories and summarize meaning when you zoom out?

What kind of query language is used for story graphs?

You have a graph and you have various questions that you want to ask about the graph for inference.

What kind of, how do you query a story graph?

How are LLMs used?

What role do they have?

Could they be used for generating a story graph fragment from a small text passage?

What is the initial simple inference pipeline?

Does it involve, for example, natural logic and proof software?

proof assistance.

How about a simple analysis on story graphs?

How do you compare the similarity between two story graphs?

What is the first simple probabilistic model for handling story graph uncertainty?

and predictions how does that occur you know there's various software programs that handle a probabilistic model so you know choosing one of them and um and you know incorporating uncertainty and

Uncertainty really means, too, in predictions, maybe the future comes out this way.

Maybe this time I run the story, I execute the story computationally.

The result is that events A and B happen.

And then I execute the story again.

And because it's a probabilistic story,

events a and b don't happen in the second round they they happen in the some other event happens event c happens then i run the story again and again a and b happen and i run the story again and again c happens and then i run the story again and now d happens so uh you know the outcomes of a story are are variable because stories are probabilistic that's the way we understand the world

So all of those are research questions to consider, ideas for moving forward, ideas for getting involved.

Next slide, please.

And that's really kind of where we're at right now.

In the series of papers, I've laid out the ideas of Cognar, sort of the vision of Cognar, really.

And that's all that's been done on the Cognar project to date is these two papers.

There's no GitHub repository for Cognar code.

Nothing has happened yet.

This is fresh.

i i hope that the vision is interesting to not just to other researchers but the public at large and civic organizations and people who are interested in improving the ability of society to

cog functionally cognate and make better decisions and be functional in the group setting so i i hope this project is of interest and uh cognar really needs your help to move forward there's numerous interesting questions to explore so please reach out to me you know if you have interest

Upcoming, I believe that I'll be submitting a project to the Active Inference Institute, so that'll be kind of one hub to work through.

I'll be involved in some additional talks, the Active Inference Institute symposium coming up, and so on.

I think my email address is in the papers, so people can reach me that way, or I think they can reach me through the Institute, and I encourage anyone who is interested to reach out.

So that's all I got, Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

A lot of places to continue.

For people who are watching live, feel free to write a question.

How about just to start it off, what did you get more curious about during the course of this path?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, well...

you know i obviously was a process to create these papers and uh i i did you know at first when i started i didn't realize what i was up against i didn't realize how complicated this project was and i thought that i could i thought that i could create a working model of you know some code of a of a of a story graph and doing inference on a story graph and things like that and i suppose that could still be possible but

I realized as I went through the process that there was so much to think about, there was so much meat to this whole thing that it would be better for me to write two introductory papers that lay out the vision than actually constructing some initial version of the cognitive system.

So, you know, it was kind of humbling in a sense, the process of humbling in a sense, in that I realized I really didn't know enough to actually start constructing the Cognar system.

I really needed to like lay out some of the fundamentals before that step could even be taken.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

The papers and the presentation, it's like a whirlwind tour of linguistics and semantics.

you're dealing and invoking with, well, you said like natural language is ambiguous.

And then it's like, well, what does that mean when it's precisely what it is?

And then here's the vector representation, here's string diagrams and all these different like proofs.

And all these interacting pieces, like the backend could have,

multiple parallel or or related processing methods one just doing like how many words are there over under 300 words defined by a space between the two words and then some other part could could go through llms it's like it's more like a linguistics fusion approach and also you're really focusing

in on the representation, not so much on the social process around how people would convene and narrativize around what it is.


SPEAKER_01:
Right, right, right.

That's a good point.

The papers really are focused on sort of the nuts and bolts parts of this.

But clearly, if Cognar were to be successful, there would be a very large, potentially large social impact.

And then there would be all kinds of questions, some of which I already raised, about how do you protect user privacy and how do you ensure that

quality information is being shared and discussed you know all that kind of stuff so my thinking is is that uh really i think maybe it's better to focus on the nuts and bolts parts first to get a simple uh you know to get simple meaning representations constructed

conveys a few simple stories in them, figure out some of the inference methods that might work best for this, those kinds of nuts and bolts questions.

And then once you have something to kind of show and tell, once you have a little small working model, then start to explore how you use this in the social setting.

How do you engage people to participate in Cogner?

How does that work?

And even there, I imagine the process that'll happen if the project moves forward is that there'll be maybe the initial work on this will be kind of slow and detailed.

But as things, as artifacts start to be developed and there starts to be something to kind of put you, something you can hold in your hand,

then there'll be a little wider circle of researchers and you know others from the civic society and just ordinary people who become interested in the project and start to contribute and as that grows eventually there'll be a you know start to be a little bit more of a critical mass that oh this is really starting to be a thing we have you know there's

We're starting to get a repository for this.

We're starting to understand how it could be used, what it would look like, how we engage people, how we make this easy to construct stories, story graphs out of stories, how we ensure that the dialogue and the

discussions and the sharing are healthy and useful for cognition.

And also numerous questions, as that happens, there'll be more and more of the social questions will come into play.

there's also like all kinds of other questions like how do you like in the nli setting it's really uh straightforward how you measure success you know you you you have a fixed set of sentences you know you know this is their gold standard so you know what the actual meaning of these sentences is and then you score the model or system that you're constructing on how well they reach the

actual meaning of these sentences.

Well, they convey the actual meaning.

Well, how do you do that in the Cognar setting?

Like, how would you actually do a study to prove that the Cognar system is understanding properly what you're saying?

It becomes a little more complicated because now you're engaging the user in creating the story

in an interactive fashion so it's a you know even studying the cognitive system you know from a scientific standpoint becomes a little bit more complex right because users are actively engaged in in the dynamics and and for that matter you know how do you how do you how do you assess

the quality of cognition?

That's a really interesting question.

In one of the early slides, I suggested that active inference can be used as a means to assess what functional cognition looks like versus dysfunctional cognition.

Maybe you can think just off the top of your head of a few examples where that would clearly be a symptom of dysfunctional cognition.

For example, if I had a pattern, as a person, if I have a pattern of making really poor predictions about what's going to happen next, you know, I see a lion in the road and I think, oh, that's a pet lion.

I'll walk up to it and pet it on the head.

That's a really poor prediction, right?

So those kind of pattern of poor predictions might be a sign of dysfunctional cognition.

Well, how do you assess functional versus dysfunctional cognition in this group setting, right?

There's many interesting avenues just in that question alone, many interesting avenues to explore.

uh for example the brain seems to you know information flow in the human brain seems to occur at that edge of chaos concept you know it's it's not it's stable the system is stable but almost unstable and because it's almost unstable potentially an input from off to the side an intuition from off to the side can

rapidly change the setup so that i switch gears and now i realize that that lion really is dangerous and i'm going to uh you know jump out of the way really fast so that's a system on the edge of chaos really is in many ways a the most efficient processing system you know it's most amenable to

input, it's most flexible, and yet it retains its kind of core stability.

So these ideas of chaos and other ideas from complex system science could actually be used for assessing information flow in the cognitive system and kind of the quality of information flow.

That's just one idea, but there's dozens of related avenues you could follow just on that question alone.


SPEAKER_00:
I'll ask a live chat question and then anyone else write a live chat question or I'll add anything if we have time.

Andrew writes, Dr. Boyk, thank you for presenting your work.

It's a very interesting project.

Do you have any thoughts on implementation in terms of code, e.g.

any particular programming languages or libraries?


SPEAKER_01:
um well um i'm a fan of julia so in the papers i i i uh i uh suggest various uh probabilistic software programs and uh uh an algebraic julia system that i've already mentioned in this talk uh julia is fantastic uh for a variety of reasons speed and other reasons

now that being said this project doesn't have to be constructed in julia but i see i see julia as a potential resource for constructing this and and maybe as a place to start you know initially

You know, certainly Julie is an open source project, so is Python, but you would want to engage the open source community as much as possible in this project because there's, you know, around the world, there's just so much talent and so many good ideas can come from that world.

Just on that topic, maybe this is kind of an aside, but this is conceived to be an open source project.

And one of the reasons I conceive it to be that way is you could imagine, suppose that Cognar was successful.

And suppose that you had a repository of stories.

And again, each story is conveying the belief system of a human in relation to some situation.

Suppose you had a repository of a million stories.

You have this really rich information about how people think in different situations, in a variety of different situations.

And that kind of information is very powerful, very powerful.

And you would not necessarily want some private entity, like a corporate entity, to have control over that whole thing.

I think you would really want some kind of open governance, an open source project controlled by some governance framework to ensure that this whole thing is used for a common good, that it's really used for purpose, for its purpose, intended purpose, which is to facilitate a group cognition.


SPEAKER_00:
A comment in the chat, Saskia wrote, life is thriving on the edge of chaos and order.

So it's this kind of paradox and the precarious nature of the body.

Like how much oxygen storage does the body have?

Very little, how much water, how much nutrition, like there's different kinds of reservoirs, but it isn't just trying to hold on to flows.

So that gives streamlined nature adaptive and on, on the critical

frontier and then at the same time also precarious over different time scales and this is making it explicit with the narrative and cognitive infrastructure as the information processing semantic linguistic narrative elements of our ecosystem become like more and more intermediative more and more active more and more powerful


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

As an offshoot to that comment, I think that democracy, the idea of democracy, could be framed in that edge of chaos view.

in the sense that in a democracy what you would really like is that each person has the potential to influence the the group as a whole this you know the condition of the group as a whole and that's that's what that edge of chaos you know allows because it a lot it's it's it's as i said before this system is

stable, but just on the edge of maximal flexibility, so that an input from some person, like an idea, a comment in a democratic system, can actually change the system.

Or a small group of people can actually change the system with some good input.

So I think that not only is the edge of chaos model maybe useful for Cogner, but it might actually be useful as we explore the interplay between what is a political system, really even what is an economic system, what is a political system, what is an economic system, what is a legal system in the context of the goal of group cognition, either societal cognition or otherwise.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, another, I think, really important point with the juxtaposition you made of graph-based, more formalized, non-distributional semantics and using LLMs to project onto those formal structures, generate from them.

First off, how incredible that from a semantic graph, we could generate materials in many natural languages, many lengths to many different audiences, if only for a starting point.

So just on the generation side, that's very powerful.

And then an interesting thing to consider is like the information supply chain, for example, for someone's voice in a group.

so then if people's inputs are taken as a blob of text smashed into a very large model and then it comes out then the information supply chain of that perspective has been collided with a very large billions of parameters lot of tokens of training and then the supply chain of the resulting outcome is like

group perspectives provided and whatever the question mark unknown training and inputs supply chain that are obscured for a proprietary LLM.

Or even if it's an open source, totally open LLM, you'd still have a complex information supply chain.

So this opens up an opportunity for end to end or in early stages or later stages or parallel stages

to be able to have the kind of, for example, counterfactual reasoning, like, here's how this graph looked with and without.

Here's the distribution of outcomes with and without what this traceback had done.

And then there's kind of a trade-off if there's a more simple, more symbolic system, like more code-like, more formal semantics, then the traceability will be deeper.


SPEAKER_01:
Explainability, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
And then if you make it more statistical, it'll start getting blurred in with more and more other factors just probabilistically, but it still could be disentangled.

So it's like the LLM route has the fluency and a lot of other advantages.

And strengths and then also having more traceable like rails and flesh in tandem could give, it's just a design palette.

It's not that one or the other or the blender, it's situational, but using the two together.


SPEAKER_01:
Good point.

You actually raise numerous good issues there that are worthy of, you know, prolonged discussion.

But one of the points you raise, and it's a really good point, is that there isn't just one model in Cognar to digest information from a group of stories and present it to the group as a summary.

That's not just a single model doing that.

there can be many different views many different questions many different queries you can just like uh you know just like the inf like how do you summarize the information about a nation well there's all kinds of you know ways to do that there's graphs about the economy there's graphs about health there's grab you know like there's there's many ways to to to put together the information from us from a

body of information to make sense of it.

And Cognar would, you know, most likely would be multiple models, some of which would be maybe more explainable than other models.

Maybe, you know, some logic models might be very explainable.

Some results of LLM models might be less explainable.

But nevertheless, there would be a history of, you know, edits to story graphs, a history of how story graphs evolved.

There would be the possibility of looking backwards in retrospect to assess how the evolution happened, how ideas developed, how different models might have looked at that information differently.

Then you could assess the capability of Cogner in retrospect about how it

how it handled various situations you could assess the functionality of the group process like was this functional cognition were did were many voices heard was that information used did was it represent anything on the edge of chaos where you know a single voice could have an influence over the whole

You know, because there's a history, say, you could examine that trajectory in various ways and assess your system and assess the group process.


SPEAKER_00:
one interesting side inter point one to point two discussion was around like classical and quantum information fungible and non-fungible information and how like the single source of truth that you invoked last time even though that's a fractal concept just this get

branch as its own sort of time cone of traceability of classical information there are certain operations that you can do like the diff the merge the rebase and all those kinds of different decisions however the actual non-fungible cognitive entities

it doesn't work like that so it's this interesting tension between how enabled on certain dimensions these representations are but of course those are not the first person perspective on semantics the whole point of of the second paper is to to throw some approaches to this question of what can you make that

represent semantics, but then immediately to whom slash how, and they do, they represent and are different things to different views.

Like for example, just the visual view of a figure, and then the more statistical analysis on the graph, is that the same semantics?

Is that different semantics, even though it's like the same representation?

And so how does the representation do relevant work

in a specific cognitive ecosystem and that's sort of like the systems design and the metacognitive engineering question especially if not too strong of even though this is hard to to peel back to but what what biases and what priors and what biases and those are those are the same distribution


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

And clearly the system would have to be very transparent to be able to, you know, assess all of that, to assess biases in the system, to assess biases in, you know, the way Cognar assesses similarity between stories or something like that.

So there's certainly a lot to unpack with that.

I do want to just briefly mention something that we talked about in the first talk.

And that is just to emphasize that we've been talking about groups forming to explore some topic or situation of interest to them.

Cognar actually has a wide range of use cases, some of which don't look like that at all.

Cognar could be used, for example, in customer service for a corporation where people are maybe submitting a story graph to explain why they're

gadget broke or didn't work or why it broke or how it broke or whatever.

So there's really a wide range of use cases for this.

And secondly, as I conceive of Cognar, it's agnostic to how the group wants to operate.

Right.

So it's not forcing a group to use, you know, if say it's engaged, a group is engaged in decision making, it's not forcing a group to use majority, you know, you know, in voting use majority rules or or rank choice voting or some other system of voting or.

some other you know arrangement of how the group is structured you know whether it's an autocratic group or a democratic group or whatever the cognar is intended to be kind of agnostic to the group setting and so that means that there's a variety of types of groups with different interests and different structures and different rules and different methods and different approaches can all use cognar in the way that they see fit

know there obviously might be some restrictions on how it's used but by and large it's flexible and and a kind of an open system so that so that you know various kinds of groups can use it for various purposes but whatever the you know the the the system is whatever group uses it for whatever purpose the the system is learning from the engagement the system is you know the come back in computational system is learning

you know, how people think what they, what they, what they think will happen next when this and that happens, how, how better to, how better to summarize information or, you know, present information or encourage a group to move towards well-supported decisions when they're trying to make decisions or, you know, like all of that kind of stuff, the system is learning in the background, you know, uh, uh, just like, uh, an intelligent agent would learn in a, in a new setting.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So maybe just what are some of the possible anticipated milestones for the rest of the year?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, I most likely will try to... These two papers are in preprint, so I most likely will try to submit them to journals for publication.

Although they are kind of conceptual papers, they're not the normal type of research paper.

They're concept papers.

So that'll happen.

I'll start a group, a project, at the Active Inference Institute.

And I encourage people to reach out to me on that.

And really, I hope to pick one or two of these research questions myself and focus on that next.

So hopefully, there'll be a couple of more papers coming out at some point here.

and um you know really it's up to the community as to what happens from there i'll do what i can and if people like the idea maybe someone will jump in and you know participate

And maybe just in closing, and we're almost done now at the end of these two sessions, and maybe it would be just a good idea to kind of look at the big picture a little bit as to, like, why are we doing, why is this of any interest to anyone, right?

It's an interesting academic excursion for certain.

There's all kinds of, you know, basically touches on numerous scientific fields.

So there's all kinds of good research questions, but why should we even do this, you know?

and uh to that i would say there is a you know at least i'm i'm proposing that um groups can be thought of as organisms cognitive organisms and as cognitive organisms groups you know whether they're societies or corporations or civic clubs or whatever need to be able to be functional like make good decisions

act in the way that active inference kind of lays out in that they're, you know, a functional group is going to reduce the uncertainty about achieving the kinds of conditions that are good for it.

You certainly would want that for society and you even want it for human civilization as a whole, right?

It would be good if humans

reduce the uncertainty that we live in a good kind of world that people flourish in right we would want that for everybody and um when you look around today there's obviously uh many many examples of

what appear to be more decision-making on the part of humans, because we face really a poly-crisis.

Climate change and extinction rates are skyrocketing and we are in danger.

Humans are in danger, serious danger.

and um new ways of of looking at our situation our condition i think are needed in order to maybe steer a different direction to inspire a different kind of organization for society that is more functional that that does exactly what a functional organism does it

senses its world, it makes decisions that are good for it, that reduce the uncertainty about achieving the conditions that it needs to thrive and continue.

And I think that a high-level approach to small groups, large groups, societies,

holds great promise great potential to to suggest ways that where we might not be doing well and where we could do better and and opens up a whole host of really i think useful questions about how could humans humans groups whether we're talking about small human groups or

Nations and civilization as a whole, how can we reorganize ourselves to achieve what we actually want, but to function, you know, purposefully through, through organizations and institutions and rules and mechanisms that are fit for purpose, but actually our quality functional processes through which we can sense our world.

anticipate what's going to happen next, make good decisions, and reduce the uncertainty that there are future conditions are really what exactly we need to thrive.

So there's nitty gritty detail to this project,

that that are important and interesting and then there's this big picture that i think is really really useful to to think of you know of of how how viewing groups as organisms that are cognitive and that cognition has a purpose functional cognition can be you know described and used as a target for

moving human groups towards a future where we are simply more functional.

And I suspect that through the process of evolution, each of us, or most of us, crave, you know, are missing that.

Maybe we don't even know what we're missing, but once you get a whiff of what functional cognition and good decision making and

and fairness and all that other kind of you know things that go with it once that what what once you get a whiff of what that feels like i suspect that there would be a great sense of relief you know for people they would go like oh god i i'm so glad we you know we can get together as a group and be functional and make you know good decisions and we have a we have some clue as to

how to assess the quality of our interactions and our in our cognitive process so that we we know that we're aiming towards a future that is really substantially better than the poly crisis that we now exist in all right thank you john great time thanks for having thanks for having me yep okay thanks everybody in live chats too thank you
