## kXw1CPRkJCw

SPEAKER_00:
all right hello and welcome everyone to the active inference live stream this is active inference live stream number 8.0 it is november 4th 2020 and i'm daniel friedman i'll be doing a solo contextualizing discussion today

Welcome to Team Calm, everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us on our Twitter account at Inference Active, at ActiveInference at gmail.com, at our public Keybase team, or at our YouTube channel.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And as far as video etiquette for live streams, mute if there's noise in your background, raise your hand so we can hear from everyone, use respectful speech, behavior, et cetera.

So first, the announcement is that we have chosen the papers and the dates and the time for the rest of the ACT-M streams for 2020.

All meetings for the rest of 2020 will be from 7.30 to 9 a.m.

PST.

And the papers we'll be reading, number eight is Scaling Active Inference.

That's what this 8.0 is gonna be about.

And that's gonna be on November 10th and 17th.

Paper nine will be the Projective Consciousness Model and Phenomenal Selfhood, a 2018 paper.

Paper 10 is gonna be a Variational Approach to Scripts.

Paper 11 is Sophisticated Active Inference, Effective Inference, sorry, Simulating Anticipatory Effective Dynamics of Imagining Future Events.

And you can see the dates that all these events are.

So set aside the times if it's possible for you to participate.

And if you have a time zone or a kind of event that you wanna do that's not reflected here, just let us know.

And there's our Twitter address.

All right, so,

Here's what's going to happen in ActiveStream 8.0, this one.

The goal of this talk is going to be to set the context for 8.1 and 8.2, which are going to be on this same paper, Scaling Active Inference.

This is a paper by Alec Shantz, Baltieri, Seth, and Buckley from 2019 with the archive 1911.10601.

The video is an introduction to the context of some of these ideas.

It's not a review or a final word.

Definitely I learned a lot just reading through the paper and researching for this presentation.

So the idea is that this video will contextualize some of the ideas, math and notation and vocabulary of the Shantz paper.

And the video should be accessible, though this is also hopefully cool and cutting edge research.

And the punchline, and don't worry if it doesn't make sense yet or the implications aren't clear yet, is that active inference is scalable and it's homologous to, so it's similar to, and potentially preferable to other common algorithms in a similar space like control theory or machine learning.

So in 8.0, the first section is going to be

some background on all the keywords that they used in this paper that they provided, and then talk about the goals, the abstract, and the roadmap.

Then the second part of 8.0 will be the key equations and notation and quotations walkthrough.

And we're going to do like the 80-20.

So most of the notation, most of the meaning, but not all the sections, not all the symbols.

And then

talk about figure one and figure two and what they represent and how that supports the conclusions of the paper and then in 8.1 and 8.2 we will all come together to discuss the same paper so save and submit your questions or put them as a comment and then get in touch if you want to participate in this one

Okay, so let's start with the keywords.

So these were just the keywords that the paper provided.

So I would think of them, these are the topics that this research is going to be on the cutting edge with respect to that field, hopefully.

So they are artificial intelligence, machine learning, and they mention also reinforcement learning and model-based reinforcement learning.

and then systems and control and information theory and then a keyword that wasn't on the paper but we can just add here is of course active inference and the free energy principle so um each of these keywords definitely you could have a course or a phd on so each one of them is going to get about one slide so of course go deeper into the resources mentioned or

find other courses that teach these techniques because there's a lot to them.

I'm just gonna kind of go through them in a way that builds towards where we're going with the math and with this research paper, and just know that there's other people's perspectives on these topics too.

So, first, artificial intelligence.

Wikipedia, when we last checked it, was saying that artificial intelligence or AI is intelligence that is demonstrated by machines, unlike the natural intelligence displayed by humans and animals.

So even using this definition, or perhaps an alternate one, which I'll get to in a second, we can say that what AI results in today, 2020, is it results in maps, policies, individual and collective policies, recommendation engines, it results in encryption techniques and security, it relates to classification algorithms and things that influence us all.

Now, where I would come at this is by saying, well, AI is made and used by humans as part of their natural world.

And everything is natural in that it exists in the world.

And so by positing that there's an artificial type of cognition that is somehow distinct rather than extended or embedded, enacted by humans, does a few things that aren't very helpful.

And there's been some excellent other discussions of this topic.

Just to move it in a positive direction, I would just say that often other phrasing can be more helpful than calling it AI.

So here's one example.

What we're going to talk about a lot today is computer statistics.

So using computers to do statistics, but basically things that pen and paper could do slowly.

So things that are about matrix calculations or about statistics with computers on big data.

Another way that AI can be meant today is like human in the loop AI.

So human in the loop AI could describe a map or a recommendation engine to emphasize that it's human agency all the way through in the use affordances, as well as hopefully in what the designers considered.

Another phrasing of AI that can be helpful and also center the role of the human in deciding how to use it and how to design it is intelligence augmentation, which is clarifying that it's us who are augmented or even a more general phrasing than AI would just be the human technological niche, which would also include physical aspects of our niche.

For example, what we talked about in 7.2, but that would include effects that aren't just simply in the sort of silicon chips and their interactions that AI captures.

All right, machine learning.

So machine learning, there's a lot of things to say about it, it's a big area, but the main machine learning topics that come into play in this paper are reinforcement learning and model-based reinforcement learning.

So the simple reinforcement learner is an agent in an environment, and the agent

takes actions, A, that act on the environment, and then the environment sends back states and rewards.

And so sometimes it sends back just states directly, and then the reward is understood through a layer of perception by the agent.

Other times the environment directly sends reward back.

Where model-based reinforcement learning builds on that is by the introduction of this model, which is outlined in red here.

And in these types of model-based reinforcement learning, rather than learning the simple raw connection between successful behavior and

and learning that as a behavioral correlation, the model-based reinforcement learner is able to have a model of, oh, for example, running is painful now, but then I'll feel better later.

And so then it allows one to pursue goals that are transiently unpleasant in order to get at larger term goals.

So think about in a little maze, trying to get not just greedily towards the exit, but trying to take a step back to take two steps forward.

So the similarities are that agents are acting on or within the environment and that their actions arise from policies, which are models of action.

So what isn't likely, and those can be concurrent with what the organism actually can or can't do, quote, but at the very least, it's what ends up getting implemented by this organism.

The agents modify their action policies based upon their reward from the environment, either in a direct way or in a symbolic way or in a model-based way.

they learn or to use the Bayesian phrasing, they update their model.

So in any case, it's gonna be computational because we're gonna be using computers and math to describe it.

But then Bayesians would say like the priors updated with evidence to generate the posterior.

And there's various ways that this learning or update can be done.

Another similarity is that the environment sends rewards or signals to the agent.

And one area of debate or question to think about is, is the observation the reward or how is it the reward?

Is the learning itself the reward?

There's machine learning algorithms that have that kind of approach as well.

And then does the observation symbolize or signal the reward or how do we think about that?

Those are kind of the ways that reinforcement learning and behavioral algorithms can be applied to both abstract data classification approaches, clustering and things like that, as well as direct plans for action.

And it turns out that active inference is going to relate to reinforcement learning in an interesting way.

That's why the authors made it a keyword.

All right.

Now, in a modern context, this reinforcement learning is going to be implemented with a, for example, neural network.

In this case, we have the environment sending the state to state S on the agent, and that's going to go through some sort of deep neural network DNN and result in some policy selection.

So neural networks are inside the agent.

That's a way that we can implement it with basically software that's available.

And that allows for some types of scalable in the sense that we know how there's gonna be a relationship between how many models our parameters have, how big our model is and how effective it's gonna be.

And then it also allows for non-linear inference, not just a simple linear regressor, let's say.

And sometimes the little and sometimes the big theta is used for parameters, but we'll get to that later.

And the neural network can be model-free, so it can just be sort of let loose to find the patterns in the data, or it can be using a underlying model.

So if a certain type of event is a priori taken to be much more likely, those kinds of observations can be used in a more weighted way.

One example of another modern reinforcement learning is this queue learning, which was used for some games and some types of things like that recently.

And the insight is just another way of doing it is by mapping the queue table, which is the mapping of state action and reward.

So that would be mapping your current state and your behavior in that state, like, oh, I'm tired, but I'm going to keep running because it's rewarding, let's say, but in some mathematical way.

And then the deep Q learning also represented here is when, again, it's not just a table, but it's a neural network.

So kind of the modern insight, just replace any other statistical module with a deep learning something.

And that allows for apparently some more nuanced policies to arise.

And then just one slide just to throw up there.

You can pause if you want to look at it, but it's from a paper called Deep Reinforcement Learning.

And it shows just the depth of how many different areas this is kind of related to.

So these are the kind of structure of the problems and the areas that this paper is getting at with these keywords.

Okay, so let's start from this model-based reinforcement learning framework and then talk about systems and control.

So in this framing, we can look at the model-based reinforcement learning in green and the blue model-free reinforcement learning.

So model-free, again, is the direct mapping from experience onto policy.

and the increasingly abstract model-based reinforcement learning is based upon the supervised learning of experience into updates for the transition model, generative model of the world, and then using that to implement some sort of planning process resulting in some policy selection.

So control systems theory is about planning for action amidst uncertainty, because you have to plan for action and there's going to be uncertainty.

And there's various kinds of uncertainty, sometimes they're metaphors for each other, other times the methods are transferable, other times one system will suffer from one type of these challenges versus another, but it includes systems that are chaotic, like a double pendulum, stochastic, multi-scale, partially observed, noisy, et cetera.

so if you can't act you can't control you can only watch and that's really what differentiates control theory from just statistics because statistics is descriptive but systems and control approaches are more oriented towards understanding the dynamics of the systems in a way that can be intervened in so modeling this planning process and the policy explicitly and then also of course the caveat that

not present in many of these models is the strategic axiom that non-action can be a form of action so the summary here is that we want to have a mathematical model a way to talk about how a system has to supervise or model their self their action affordances and their system and their world well that's the good regulator

And also have this action policy plan.

So supervised learning is about supervising your input and appropriately updating your generative model of the world.

And then what is your generative model of the world for?

It's going to be about this policy selection.

And here's a more classic control theory diagram with the way that the system, measuring element, controller, and effector are related.

All right.

information theory another keyword so there's probably another 500 hours of youtube to watch on info theory and a lot you could say about a lot of different areas um a simple way to phrase it is that information is the reduction of uncertainty whether it's actionable or not so it doesn't have to be connected to control theory it can just be purely descriptive like taking the shannon entropy of some dna strand

Information is always contextual, it's relational, it's model dependent.

There's a lot of critiques of this sort of naive Shannon interpretation of information theory sometimes.

And the measurement or the comparison of information is challenging.

Like if you calculate the entropy of the biodiversity of insects and plants on the same island, they're not necessarily on the same scale, et cetera, et cetera.

And there's a lot of areas that info theory touches on, like semiotics and semantics, measure theory, dynamical systems, and signal processing.

Reduction of uncertainty is also not truth because, of course, wrong and precise estimates do exist.

And precise estimates of external states don't really facilitate effective action in many cases.

A lot of other related areas are the quantification, storage, and communication of information.

the measurement and comparison mentioned before how do you store and transmit information through time that's like memory how do you communicate that's about transmitting information through time and space protocols for communication um and when information

gleaned by a system, reduces its uncertainty about world states or causes or relationships.

It can facilitate the updating of effective policy models and therefore action in some cases, but not all cases.

And when the action is effective, it can be rewarding or sustainable or high fitness.

There's various ways that you can think about that kind of a success depending on the mechanism, scale of the system.

And then the parameters are updated by this rewarding.

So whether it's which genotypes of the plant are successful in a certain niche or whether it's which computer virus is mutating the best.

It's this sort of learning slash development slash evolution process that ultimately we want to kind of move towards an integration of.

All right.

Just to talk a little bit more about information theory and also introduce this conditional notation, just for those who may or may not have seen it before.

Why are we talking about information theory here?

Because again, when we reduce our uncertainty about causal relationships and the statistical regularities in the world, we can enact better policies.

So let's get a grip on some basic information theory concepts, but also introduce this notion of a conditional.

So the notation A vertical line B means A given B. So the part after the vertical line is the part you're conditioning on.

H of A is the information content.

How surprising is the random variable A in units or in bits?

And just to kind of combine these two bullet points, H of A given B is the information content of A conditioned on B. Sorry, there's a typo on there.

information of a semicolon b is the mutual information between a and b so that's shown in these sort of single overlap spaces on the venn diagram below and then also there's a triple overlap

And you can also have overlap and conditionals.

So the way that we're going to think about mathematics is just sort of like nested operations that hold different kinds of transformations and potential.

And there's a lot of cool areas of information theory.

James Gleick's a great writer.

And this book by Stone in the middle is a good example

introduction and then this book by zanil at all algorithmic information dynamics is also a cool application and theory so let's return to a little variant of a slide that we've looked at kind of before

which is this inactive versus Bayesian dichotomy slash divide that ultimately Actif is going to try to integrate.

So in the inactive worldview, we have the agent in the world, and they're enacting in this nexus of action and perception.

the outcome of this interaction is the embodied and ecological action sequence or policy from an embedded agent who makes slash is their behavior and just to go one more level now from this control theory perspective into the agent we can see that the agent has the sensory states on the in

input side then they have their causal model of the world and then their policy model in some sense these could be like one integrated unit or not we'll get there later and then we can

line that up with the bayesian structural representationalist view so in this view you have the data the observation which are sort of the base level observations or parameters in the model and then it through a recognition model hyperparameters are updated which result in a generative model of the data and this kind of a expectation maximization scheme

results in this statistical convergence of a multi-level model that's representing, hence the representationalist, structures of the world, hence the structural part, maybe.

And then just to line it up, we can think about that model that's a Bayesian control agent, let's say, it's going to have sensory states.

What is my robot sensor detecting?

What is the causal model for what that means for the

pose of the robot and then the policy selection how are we going to correct so these uh both can be these two sides of the dashed line can kind of be internally consistent and we want to return to this question which is about how the free energy principle and active inference is going to say something about the relationship between the world and the agents

So we have action and perception, and we want them to be symmetrical in this kind of niche concept way we've talked about.

We want to have the free energy principle be an axiomatic set.

We want to build on top with a multi-scale active inference perspective.

This is sort of where we want to be moving towards.

How has Active Inference stepped into this gap and built up towards this goal?

So Active Inference 1.0 and open to people building on slash correcting me on any of these parts here.

This is just very rough epoch level.

Active Inference 1.0 is an implementation of machine learning type algorithm that builds on free energy principle, as well as the inactivist approach.

And it relates the attunement of local sensory states and policies.

So in that way, it's kind of like the model-free reinforcement learner.

and it focused on very discrete cases.

So just like on a grid, for example, and it used pretty simple expectation maximization algorithms and had relatively short range spatial and or temporal reach or depth.

It was more of a, let me see if my video, not sure what happened here.

Sorry about that.

so i'm gonna just re-add my camera sorry all right well c'est la vie anyways

Actimth 2.0 added temporal depth and niche interactions into the equations with a longer term planning phase and also added in this aspect of agent embeddedness and introduced the idea of valence and learning into the formulation.

And this is kind of where Active Inference 3.0 and beyond go.

So one direction they've been going is towards learning and affect and the sophisticated or counterfactual aspects of action.

Here's a citation.

And then another direction that it was going towards is reflected by this scaling active inference paper, which is going to introduce the idea of the high dimensional data, the continuous variables, explore exploit behavior, and also homology to reinforcement learning and working at scale.

So for me, it was like the hero's journey reading this paper, because this is just a framework for a completion story.

So this is the scaling active inference journey.

So it starts off with a call to adventure, which is the question, how can we model complex control tasks with active inference?

Here's the beginning of the transformation, the challenges and the temptation.

Should one go to sleep or should they read Friston's bibliography?

The helper comes into the picture.

Here's Alec.

We have a transformative moment when we read and when we understand the paper Scaling Active Inference.

Then we have our movement from dark to light, from reinforcement learning to active inference, from failure to control.

Along the way, we receive the gift of meeting new friends, discussing cool ideas, having impact on systems, and making first-in memes, of course.

So let's get to the paper.

So scaling active inference is the paper.

The goal of the paper is presented as, we present a model of active inference that is applicable in high dimensional control tasks with both continuous states and actions.

Our model builds upon previous attempts to scale active inference by including an efficient planning algorithm, as well as the quantification and active resolution of model uncertainty.

Our model makes two primary contributions.

First, we showed that the full active inference construct can be scaled to the kinds of tasks considered in the RL literature.

This involved extending previous models of deep active inference to include model uncertainty and expected info gain.

Second, we highlight the overlap between active inference, state of the art approach to model based reinforcement learning.

So the non active inference phrasing here is how can we apply active inference to challenging control tasks and connect it formally to reinforcement learning?

So the abstract was, in reinforcement learning, agents often operate in partially observed and uncertain environments.

Model-based reinforcement learning suggests that this is best achieved by learning and exploiting a probabilistic model of the world.

Active inference is an emerging normative framework in cognitive and computational neuroscience that offers a unifying account of how biological agents achieve this.

On this framework, inference, learning, and action emerge from a single imperative to maximize the Bayesian evidence for a shared niche of the world.

However, implementations of this process have thus far been restricted to low dimensional and idealized situations.

Here, we present a working implementation of active inference that applies to high dimensional tasks with proof of principle results demonstrating efficient exploration and an order of magnitude decrease in sample efficiency over strong model-free baselines.

Our results demonstrate the feasibility of applying active inference at scale and highlight the operational homologies between active inference and current model-based approaches to reinforcement learning.

Okay, so.

For some of you, that might be a lot of new ideas.

Others may recognize a lot in there.

So let's just lay out the roadmap for how we're gonna get from A to Z, and then hopefully it will be approachable from all these different angles.

section one is an introduction and two is about active inference and what work has been done in the area three is the model which is what we're going to focus on in this discussion and 3.1 is the generative model and the recognition distribution those are the p and the q models then there's a section on learning and inference policy selection trajectory sampling and expected free energy

as well as the section on the fully observed model.

Those are the sections we won't go that much into today.

Then there are the experiments related to exploration and exploitation, and the two figures related to the comparison of exploration strategies and the comparison of performance onto continuous control tasks.

Then the relationship with previous work, specifically deep active inference model-based reinforcement learning and information gain theory.

Then there's a discussion and conclusion.

All right.

This quote, which you can pause to read in full, I'm just going to pick up on the end of the top paragraph.

While this approach, the previous work, provides an elegant framework for evaluating expected free energy, it can only be applied in discrete state and action spaces, meaning it is not directly applicable to the high dimension states and continuous actions considered in reinforcement learning benchmarks.

So this is one reason why active inference discrete states-based learners have not been compared in the author's phrasing is that the reinforcement learning benchmarks that are used to test the adequateness or the efficacy of different reinforcement learning control theory algorithms are continuous tasks like the kind that we'll talk about in the figures.

And so what this paper is going to do is employ an approach called

Amortized inference, which we'll talk about more in a little bit, which utilizes functional approximators, i.e.

neural networks to parameterize distributions.

Free energy is then minimized with respect to the parameters of the function approximators, not the variational parameters themselves.

And then they restate what each of the sections in three are.

Here's a notation reference sheet.

It's not every single parameter, especially the statistical parameters that are distributional and a lot of the later sections too, but this is the sort of parameters that we're gonna see a bunch in the coming slides.

And we...

can really just already look at what a lot of the topics that the model's gonna cover are.

So for example, the policy of the agent, the states that it's trying to estimate, and the true states with the hats, it's gonna be through time, it's gonna involve observations.

We're kind of seeing a lot of the ingredients of the reinforcement learning algorithms that we were talking about earlier.

So let's talk about this amortized inference.

Here's what they write, the author's chance at all.

Amortizing the inference procedure offers several benefits.

For instance, the number of parameters remains constant with respect to the size of the data and inference can be achieved through a single forward pass of the network rather than, let's say, back propagation training.

Moreover, while the amount of information encoded about variables is fixed, the conditional relationship between variables can be arbitrarily complex.

In equation 3, which we'll get to, the parameters of the transition distribution data are themselves random variables.

In the current context, these parameters are the weights of the neural network, F.

This approach allows the uncertainty about these parameters to be quantified and cast learning as a process of variational inference.

The prior probability of theta is given by standard Gaussian, which acts like a regularizer during learning.

And this just talks about how free energy is going to be used to select the action policy.

So what is this amortized inference?

Why is it being used?

These papers on the bottom have a lot more information, but in amortized inference, the number of parameters used is flexible.

You can have a small or a large model, but what's good about it is that you can also set the size of the model to not change even as more data is input.

So this allows you to train on devices that you know are going to have limited computational power or use a very large but defined model size to implement on larger scale networks, let's say.

Again, the model can be trained with a single forward pass rather than more complex schemes.

And then also there's all this degree of freedom when you can design the neural network because there's a lot of approaches that can be implemented with neural networks.

The general framing that they're going to be thinking about for this whole

mathematical journey that we're about to describe is a partially observed Markov decision process.

So these are the key variables that are going to be defining this organism-centric approach, let's say.

At each time step t, so that one's easy to remember, the true state of the environment, which is s with a hat, hat means that it's the real state, and the states are what are the important things.

Those are like, is the bus going to hit me or not going to hit me, let's say.

but they could be various other things so we're keeping it general and then that s hat sub t so the real states through time exists in a state space with a certain dimensionality and there's also a real transition dynamics of the real states that's related to this p s with a hat t given the previous times and the action so that's saying that the time evolution of the system the real one with a hat s of t

is related let me see if i can actually get the laser yep the s of t with a hat is related to the current time and the previous time and the actions and that has also a dimensionality

And agents do not have access to the true state of the environment, but might instead receive observations.

So O, observations, it's a good, easy one.

And those have a certain dimensionality, which are generated to an actual observation distribution T, which is related to how observations are conditioned on real states of the world.

So if it's really sunny outside, then you're really going to get photons if you look at the sun.

As such, again, this is because agents only get observations and not the absolute truth from the world.

Agents must operate on their beliefs about states.

So that's S without a hat through time.

Those have a certain dimensionality about the true environmental states, S with a hat.

And then there's a difference between the true dynamics without italics and the model dynamics, which are always with italics.

And here's how those equations are linked.

Here's where Active Inference comes into play.

Active Inference proposes that agents implement and update a generative model of their world.

italics p that means the model of the world of observations states policies and parameters of the world where the tilde is the sequence of variables through time so those are the observations and states through time and pi is the policy like if i have the policy of running every day then my observations through time are going to look like this you can imagine that one

And theta with italics is belonging to a larger version of theta, capital theta.

And that denotes parameters of the generative model, which are themselves random variables.

And also agents maintain a recognition distribution.

This is like P and Q, so mind the Ps and Qs.

of the states through time and the policies and the theta parameters of the world representing the agents beliefs over their states policies and model parameters

All right, so in this part, we're going to look at the P model.

Remember, it's the P's and the Q's.

So the P is an agent implementation, that's why it's in italics, of a model of the observations through time, O with a tilde, states through time, S with a tilde, policy, and model parameters.

So that's what this...

model is about, and it's implemented by the agent that we care about.

Here's what each of these lines says.

So the first line on the left side of the equation says p, which is that function that we have in big on the top,

is equivalent to uh the probability model of the parameters theta take those out then the probability of the policy is so if it's not possible for me to jump a thousand feet then it's not going to be part of my probability distribution if it is part of my power to jump a thousand feet then i'll consider it in my policy estimations

and then the big pi it's kind of like how sigma adds stuff up pi multiplies stuff up and so this is saying multiply it all out through time starting from the beginning t equals one and look at the p the agent model of o through time observations through time given states through time so the first part is just what's the probability of

given that I'm healthy, that I'm seeing this state.

And then that's multiplied at each time point by the ways in which states S of T are conditioned on the prior states and the prior policies and the parameters of the model.

So how all those things are linked, multiplied out through time, is what, at a first pass, describes this big equation on the top, the total model of OS pi theta.

Then to dive into this P of observations given states through time model that the agent implements.

N, big N notation means normal.

And so this is saying the model of observations given the state estimates is a normal distribution, big N, with observations through time, with a certain mean and variance, mu and sigma, with a certain parameter, this lambda.

And together, these two, this kind of like duple, tuple of variables constitute this function lambda.

So the way that we're going to estimate these median variants may or may not be a least square.

It might be not an L2 norm.

We could use a functional approach here.

That's the insight of amortization.

The probability of states, the probability transition model of how the agent believes states through time to be linked to conditional two, states at prior time and policy at prior time, and then the parameters of the world, is related to another normal distribution of states through time with another mu and sigma with a different probability.

subscript and for those mu and sigma we have f with the sub theta of how the states and the policies are related so this is another just sort of way to estimate the variance of different kinds of events happening therefore weight sensory inputs

Together, the state estimations distribution are, again, estimated by a function.

p of theta is given as a normal distribution with a mean of zero and this identity matrix of covariance i believe and uh i think this is just reflecting a neutral initiating approach or regularization but i i'm this is not 100 sure about that

And this is reflecting that the probability model of policies is related to this softmax function.

So it's a sigma, but it's not the same as sigma squared in a statistical model.

And it's the softmax function of the negative expected free energy of the policy, which we'll talk about in a later section.

So that was our P. Let's look at Q.

Q is this agent recognition distribution, the Q with the italic, of states through time, policy, and model parameters.

Here's how that one is defined.

So Q is the probability of the parameters, theta, multiplied by the probability of the policies, pi, and then that same multiplication through time for all time of Q, which is the model of states given observations.

So previously we had POS, the second line here, probability of observations given states.

Now we have QSO.

So this is kind of going the other way.

Q of theta

is a normal distribution, kind of as we saw before, with its mean and variance parameters, same as the policy, and same as the cube model of the states given the observations.

And it turns out that those mu and sigma are going to also have a functional that's going to approximate them.

So to make active inference applicable to the kinds of tasks that are considered in reinforcement learning, the authors treated reward signals, observations, as observations in a separate modality.

So that extends the generative model to include an additional scalar Gaussian, so that's another reward value of scalars like a single number, over reward observations with a unit variance in mean.

And that allows them to wrap this neural network, which is F sub alpha of the states, which is like this reward fully connected neural network with the parameters that they're then gonna train.

So that's really where the formal homology arises from the model-based reinforcement learning is that now we have pretty much the same architecture that was specified earlier in this discussion,

where the agent state is then of sensory input is run through this dnn and that results in this output of the policy or the reward but it's a little bit different but that's how we see a lot of the same homologies

All right, so what do the learners do?

As new observations are sampled, agents update the parameters of the recognition distribution to minimize variational free energy, or F. So the F of the observation

is the expectation um okay well let me finish reading first this makes the what this f is going to do is make the recognition distribution q converge towards an approximation of the intractable posterior distribution p thereby implementing a tractable form of approximate bayesian inference all right so f

of o through time with a tilde is the variational free energy of the observations through time so what is this magical free energy not magical it's just this equation in this case it is an expectation that is conditioned on a specific recognition model which is this expectation of q that's going to be related to

this um s pi policy and theta parameters uh variables what is this expectation going to be of that's everything that's about to be in square brackets this expectation is going to be the natural log ln

which is a way to turn a question about maximizing the goodness of a model's fit into this minimizing the negative.

Sometimes there's a few ways that the natural law can help.

The expectation is going to be the natural log of the recognition model minus the natural log of the generative model.

So again, that's the part that we cue that we can learn on, and then the part P that is characterized as intractable.

It turns out that this expectation is always bigger than or equal to the natural log of P of the observations.

So that's just the P model of observations likelihood.

By minimizing the free energy of the observations through time, the agent converges heuristically towards this intractable p distribution.

Given that Q is only over the states, policies, and parameters, and that P is really including and focusing on the observations, what this allows the agent to do is to focus on modeling the states and the policies and the parameters that are relevant via Q, and then potentially use math slash inactive behavior in this model

to tractably include, condition upon, or learn from its observations.

So we could bring previous knowledge to the table, just like Bayesian models allow for, but also have a way to deal with sparse or dense information as it is.

Okay.

Crucially, active inference also proposes that an agent's goals and desires are encoded in the generative model as prior preferences for favorable observations, i.e.

blood temperature at 37 Celsius.

Free energy then provides a proxy for how surprising, i.e.

unlikely, some observations are under the agent's model.

While minimizing equation one provides an estimate for how surprising some observations are, it cannot reduce the quantity directly.

So here, equation one, we defined what F was, but it's just a definition and a bounding of what F is.

It cannot reduce this quantity directly, so it's not really related to policy as directly approaches.

To achieve this, agents must change their observations through action.

Acting to minimize variational free energy ensures the minimization of surprisal, negative natural log of the probability model of observations, or the maximization of the Bayesian model evidence, p of observations.

Since free energy provides an upper bound on surprisal, that was equation one.

Active inference therefore proposes that agents select policy in order to minimize expected free energy, fancy G, where the expected free energy for a given policy pi at some future time is going to be defined this way.

So we want to do more than just update our internal model to bound our surprise on our observations.

We don't just want to fit the statistical descriptor model of the world.

We want to reduce the uncertainty in the future, which is a future time point, t tau, through the policy pi that we take now.

this minimizable expected free energy function fancy g is going to take in the arguments of the policy selection and the future time step so fancy g fancy pi fancy t that's the free energy function in this case and what that

value which optimization on it is going to allow for effective action is going to be defined as is the expectation that's going to be related to q model which is about this observation states and parameters given policy models so given that my policy is this then how will the states and transitions of the world appear

And it's going to be the expectation of this quantity that's in brackets.

It's going to be the log of states and parameters.

So that's the Q of the S sub T and parameters given the policy.

So that's what states will I be in and what will I think about along the way, potentially.

These are just first pass verbal explanations.

Just look at the math, but...

what states and parameters am I in now at a future time, given my policy?

So if I go out on a walk every day, how will it influence my states?

What does my model have to be at that time?

And then that quantity minus natural log of P, the observations, states, and the model given policy.

So that's the part that we want is actually the observations to be the correct values.

But what we can do is just condition the states on policy.

And that G value is always greater than the negative, that's this last part of equation two, than the negative expectation of this Q, which is the observations conditioned on policy.

So that's like how things will actually turn out.

of this log part of the generative model that is the observations given the policy.

That's how things will go.

So maybe there's other interpretations or other parts that are really critical, but I think this is one of the key formulations, which is that there's a policy related optimization problem that can be phrased in a variational way that is going to be bounded through a free energy like strategy

to estimate tractably some other function, Q, something related to that, of basically what we would want to know, which is like, okay, the observation that I look into my Bitcoin wallet and there's 15 Bitcoin, what policy do I have to take to see that observation or for that counterfactual to exist?

if only one knew.

So that's why there's this tractable, boundable equation.

Potentially.

I think there's a lot to say here, and Alec and anyone else, I'd appreciate any other input, but that was just one read on it.

Okay, so that was most of the part that I wanted to go through at that level of depth, but then just to convey the other sections and what they do for the paper, but not go into every equation as much and then talk about the figures.

So 3.2 is the learning and inference section.

And...

in order to actually implement this optimization scheme as it's laid out it turns out there has to be an update process so is it going to be a sort of stick with what has worked or is it going to be novelty search those are kinds of things that optimization algorithms have to navigate the trade-offs that are implicit

with different strategies, depending on different problems.

And so this section defines how this F variational free energy is defined through time.

And I'm not going to cover the implementation details, but Alec would be cool if you showed us a simulation or something like that.

3.3 is about policy selection.

Here's what they write.

Under active inference, policy selection is achieved by updating Q of policy in order to minimize free energy at fancy F.

given the prior belief that policies minimize expected free energy i the p of policy is related to this choice soft max related to the um negative g negative uh expected free energy of policy spaces with short as as specified in equation three free energy is minimized when the uh q

distribution of policy is the same as the optimal free energy minimizing expectation of policies, across policies, just like the free energy optimal policy selection.

For discrete action spaces with short temporal horizons, basically G of policy can be evaluated in full by considering each possible policy.

So that's like Connect Four.

You could just run out, or tic-tac-toe, you can run out every single option for the games at that branch point,

compute the absolute value of every single possible outcome, and then make your choice.

However, in continuous action spaces, there are infinite policies, meaning an alternative approach is required.

That's a really cool sentence because it really conveys well that actually the continuous action space, even for a single variable, is a truly different domain than a, let's just say, Prisoner's Dilemma game.

There's sometimes almost...

no overlap in the algorithms that's why this paper actually reflects quite in advance and there's more details in that section 3.4 trajectory sampling so now how do you go from just having this distributional relationship between policies and other variables like related to generative models of the world and observation models

how are they going to get there?

So to evaluate from the distribution to the specific policy.

So to evaluate the expected free energy for any specific policy, first they have to evaluate the expected future beliefs condition on that policy.

So one can't really undertake in this sort of normative framing

a secondary debate which we can definitely have about to what extent these are experienced cognitively by humans but we're just going to kind of go with it with the intentional stance and the sort of machine learning control theory take but and so beliefs it's not necessarily cognitive um we're just thinking about what the agent wants to do to succeed

But basically, if the agent doesn't have an expected future belief sequence for that policy, it will be extremely difficult for them to undertake it.

And the fact that the transition model is probabilistic and the parameters of the transition model are random variables induces a distribution over future trajectories.

So rather than just playing out every possible chess move, we're thinking about how we are fitting a...

more advanced kind of model.

Chess is still discrete, so let's choose, we'll see a specific example, but this is just continuous optimization later in this figures.

But this is like having a distribution over future branch points in a chess game.

So whether it's discrete or continuous, you can still have this element of uncertainty of a distributional range over future trajectories in state spaces.

So several approaches exist to approximate the propagation of uncertain trajectories.

For example, one can ignore uncertainty entirely and propagate the mean of the distribution, or one can explicitly propagate the full statistics of the distribution.

So those are kind of two extreme approaches.

One of them is just say, yep, ensemble modeling is tracking the mean, and so I'm going to keep that moving forward.

And then the alternative is basically to keep a summarization of the entire distribution and use that as what is being learned by the population.

In the current work, it's utilized a particle approach whereby a Monte Carlo, so sampling-based scheme, samples are propagated.

In particular, we consider this big B samples from the parameter distribution theta, which is drawn from cube theta.

These sections convey how information on policy selection is accomplished in the model and how the policy fitness landscape is explored in order to implement predictive control on trajectories.

So the policy through time implement, it must involve some element of predictive control.

All right, then there's section 3.5, 3.6.

So 3.5 has details on computing this expected free energy value, as the title might suggest.

In this section, they describe how to evaluate negative G for a policy, where they have used this notational convenience to talk about policies moving forward.

So kind of just made it like a naked pie, rather than this upper superscript that has to do with the time states.

and uncertainty.

And the negative expected free energy, which is what we are trying to get out here with the negative g, is equal to the sum of this negative expected free energies through time.

And then that is where there's a decomposition that...

not my area but just i would think what it means is that there's a decomposition into this state information game gain and an extrinsic value component so this kind of breaks down into an explore and exploit component or some other trade-off we see this a lot with this negative g i would love it if somebody could uh talk a little bit why this is or if it always is the case but it always uh seems to be presented as

model accuracy penalized by model complexity or this plus this is it always two parts in the equation is it ever just one term can it be three terms here it's three terms but what um or four so i'm not exactly sure why sometimes it has more or less terms but that's what i'm curious about

Then in 3.6, they write, the model presented in the preceding sections serves as the most general formulation applicable in both partially observed and fully observed environments.

In what follows, we describe an implementation for the fully observed case, leaving an analysis of the partially observed case for future work.

So it's just another wrapper around the fully observed case to have the partial observations.

And so they decided to use some benchmarks that facilitated them to basically have total observation.

And this isn't like cheating.

The examples they're going to describe are kind of like balancing a dinner plate on a stick.

So in that case, you do have total observation of the model.

So just because you can't control well, it may or may not be possible given a certain stick and motor reflex time.

But at the very least, you can observe everything.

So there's also unobservable control theory problems.

And then there's ones where the system is actually understandable and controllable, like the dinner plate, but you only get distorted or malicious information.

There's other ones where you get perfect information, but only at time points and there's a game going on.

A lot of different ways that that can play out, but that's sort of the parts of the model that can get switched out.

And that's what also I think it will be interesting to hear from any of the authors on.

In section four, they go through some experiments and this is kind of the results phase of their paper.

And they describe how they investigate whether one, whether the proposed active inference model can successfully promote exploration in the absence of reward observations, i.e.

exploration.

So that's what's really difficult for the model-free reinforcement learners to do is when it's not getting the reward, it doesn't do very well, can't explore very well.

because it's not winning.

And two, whether the model can achieve good performance and high sample efficiency on challenging continuous control tasks, i.e.

exploitation.

So that's what requires tracking on something.

We evaluate these two aspects of the model separately, leaving analysis of their joint performance, i.e.

the exploitation dilemma, to future work.

So again, show it separately in the kind of pure use case, show that it can do either one, and then it will be something like a trade-off between the two of them or a wrapper layer that will end up mediating this trade-off.

All right, the explore task that they're gonna do is called Mountain Car, and you're a little car on the bottom of this valley, and you can push forward with the forward pedal, or you can push reverse with a reverse pedal.

And you don't have a strong enough engine to get up to the yellow flag with just one go.

It's like you're at the bottom of the hill and you're in gear 3.7 on your bike.

But you can go up a little bit and back a little bit.

And so here you have to kind of explore and figure out a strategy that helps you explore more and more in order to get enough speed by going up this left hill in order to get to the yellow flag.

And then the exploit tasks that they're going to be talking about are twofold.

There's the inverted pendulum task.

So here we're still a little cart or something like that.

And we can move forward or backwards on a track.

And then there's the pendulum that we're trying to keep upright.

And so that's like the dinner plate on a stick.

Then there's the hopper task, which is a jumping motor coordination task.

So let's look at what they actually did for each of these two experiments and then see how the active inference learner stacked up against other algorithms.

So the mountain car example is a one-dimensional track positioned between two mountains.

The goal is to drive up the mountain on the right.

However, the car's engine is not strong enough to scale the mountain in a single pass.

Similar to what I said.

The only way to succeed is to drive back and forth to build up momentum.

So what was cool about this, I thought, was that

The code was on the OpenAI site and on their github.com link is here.

And so it could be really seen and played with and used as a standard.

So it seems pretty cool.

Didn't know about this resource for standardizing different learning algorithms.

So how did the active inference agent do?

Well, it did well in this test, otherwise they wouldn't have

Made the Pape.

And the way to read these graphs, A, B, and C are going to have the same X and Y axis.

So I put the map with a...

engine on the top left so it kind of maps on to the bottom left panel a and so the position is related to the x-axis and so that's how far to the left and how far to the right that little train car goes and then the velocity is um whether it's at rest zero whether it's moving positively to the right or whether it's moving negatively to the left

So the reward agent who just sort of pursues momentum, whichever way, I guess, only ends up getting a max speed of around 0.02 in either way, and then only moves like 0.7 or something in either direction.

The Epsilon Greedy Agent does manage to learn a short-range policy that we can see brings it a little bit further on one side, and it does take some rare excursions into slightly higher velocity regimes, but in the end, it doesn't really get too far.

It learns how to go uphill when it's going uphill, but that only helps at a limited extent.

Whereas the active inference model as implemented has not just a more broad sampling within the state space conversions after 100 epochs, but their position extends to much higher range in the X and also a higher velocity distribution range in the Y. So it was more able to get out of this little ditch

by being an active inference learner than by being epsilon greedy or just sort of model-free reward-based.

All right.

The second optimization example presented in the paper is this Hopper v2.

Again, didn't know about this resource.

So this one is interesting.

It is described as making a two-dimensional one-legged robot hop forward as fast as possible.

And the code is also there.

I'm not going to put the code up, but...

It kind of reminded me of this idea of evolutionary computation as control.

And so sometimes there's so many angles to this.

First off, just this image with a checkerboard, floorboard.

It reminded me of some simulators of evolutionary computation, like for Linux and stuff like that, where you could have these blocky aliens that would replicate and take up a ton of computational resources and just control.

clash into each other.

And sometimes it was just the outline.

Other times it was 3D blocks with this kind of a background and a floor plan.

But here, what we're evolving is control strategies, not chromosomes representing genotypes or let's just say.

But actually a similarity is this idea of the genetic algorithm and the genetic algorithm stochastic search.

because sometimes the way that these control policies are optimized is actually through steps that involve things like genetic search algorithms that switch over large sets of their parameters so there's some just interesting parallels and this i just thought was a cool example and at the intersection of motor behavior control

But also complex state space estimation, even the beginnings of an inactive and maybe even embodied approach, because at some level of movement complexity, it's going to be implicit in the system.

and distributed in it, just like other systems, that it has some notion of its own affordances.

If it had 500 muscles and it was a human leg, it would have some sort of tensegrity structure that kept it balanced in a way that facilitated some types of actions, but not others.

So very interesting choice.

And I'd like to hear from any authors or from other people, like, what are other benchmarks that are cool?

What other control systems problems are interesting or applicable?

What about social versions or networked or communication based versions?

So what were the results?

Okay, so here is how to look at these graphs.

The x-axis is the epoch.

So that's just the sampling through time.

That's how many generations of parameters are tried.

And here, the red lines indicate the same interval of time.

So C and D are related to epochs 1 through 100, and that's actually compressed up against a very small unit on A and B. And A and C, respectively, are for this inverted pendulum, and B and D are for the Haber task.

So we can talk about the same phenomena looking at A and C in reference to the pendulum and B and D in the hopper.

And in both of these cases, zoomed in or zoomed out, what is pretty apparent is that the y-axis is reward.

So that's just like in the hopper task is how far you're getting.

And then in the inverted pendulum task, it's about your time maintained given a certain parameter combination for policy.

And

In both cases, the reward sharply increases for the active inference agent.

and also just immediately uh starts climbing after some sampling within the first hundred or even the first uh several epochs probably because of the lower state space of the uh cart because all the cart can do is move forward and backwards have a policy on that like gas and brake and stuff like that that's it's all cooked into the physics of the pendulum i wonder if there's a inverted double pendulum task by the way that'd be kind of interesting

and um in the hopper task there's several more parameters at play i i didn't copy out the exact number but there's several more so it takes a couple more epochs reflected by the zero through um maybe 40 where the the average is like not really getting off the ground

And this is being contrasted against the DDPG, which you can read more about.

I'm just not going to go into what this algorithm is.

I just trusted the authors use something that makes sense.

Let's hear from anyone about what other alternatives could be tested against.

So those would all be things where I'm just not as up on the literature, but definitely would welcome the comments of someone from the machine learning field and what would be an impressive or useful demonstration of active inference or what would it mean to do a control theory simulation in this sort of a framework?

What else was used?

What else is the current state of the art for these inverted pendulum and hopper tasks?

Just, I don't know.

But it'd be great if anyone does know.

So just to close out with the relationship to the previous work.

Okay, this is from their closing section, which maybe it's a disciplinary thing, but often...

It's like a discussion section, but if it was relationship with previous work, I would have expected it to be a little bit more contextualizing and at the front of the paper.

So, but it read more like a discussion.

Related to deep active inference, which is like this through timeness of active inference, they write, our work builds upon these previous models by incorporating model uncertainty in its active resolution.

We extend the previous point estimate models to include full distributions over parameters and update the expected free energy functional such that the uncertainty in these distributions is actively minimized.

This brings our implementation in line with the canonical models of active inference from the cognitive and computational neuroscience literature.

So this is almost like saying, yeah, one more.

Moreover, it enables us to evaluate the feasibility of active exploration under the scaled active inference framework

apply the model to more complex control tasks and obtain increased sample efficiency relative to previous models so it's kind of like saying we've made this active inference model closer to what it has been speculated to be in the qualitative neurobehavioral realm which i think is a good reason to be reading it right now because it does fit in nicely with our discussions of behavior and of um

neurobiology in the variational ecology discussions.

So this is on the simulation side, how it comes to be this way.

So this is kind of cool because deep active inference is now being implementable through these kinds of models that are presented in this paper.

And previously it was like, oh yeah, I guess if it were deep active inference, then it would accommodate for narratives.

And now this is the kind of framework where, oh yeah, okay, we could talk about narrative through time in this framework.

Could we?

The second area they address, again, another key word for the paper, is model-based reinforcement learning.

In the current work, we opted for Bayesian neural networks to ensure consistency with the variational principles espoused by the active inference framework, but note that ensembles can be made explicitly Bayesian with minor modifications.

So they talked about several homologies to reinforcement learning and specifically amortized inference.

There's actually one quote that...

I pulled out from one of the papers that are on the slide and that talked about how you might get the sense that this is like a win for free situation with just wrapping a functional around the estimation of these parameters because it's like, oh, it's a neural network.

I'm implementing a neural network.

So I have an additional degree of freedom to learn nonlinear policy.

But then the paper argued that

Actually, you're constrained because the functional is estimating the mean and the variance on this Gaussian outcome.

And so it doesn't actually liberate a degree of output expressivity, but rather...

uh definable and a scalable way to implement on current computational hardware a way to implement this massive pencil and paper problem of estimating the gaussian mean invariance of super super complex high dimensional state spaces but that still is what it's doing

So, super interesting stuff, and also the note here that the ensembles could be explicitly Bayesian, so with all the kinds of variants and flavors that that introduces, so...

Anyone who's an enthusiast or expert in these areas, I would appreciate their perspective on what that means or why this is important or interesting.

Then, info gain.

This was one of the keywords too.

Identifying scalable and efficient exploration strategies remains one of the key open questions in reinforcement learning.

Model-free methods such as the Greedy or Boltzmann choice rules, paging Dr. Proton, Sean, utilize noise in the action selection process or uncertainty in the reward statistics.

A more powerful approach is to construct a model of the world, allowing the agent to evaluate which parts of the state space it has and has not visited.

This allows for measures such as the amount of prediction error or prediction error improvement to be utilized for exploration.

Okay, cool.

If the learned model implicitly or explicitly captures probabilistic features, that's the statistical regularities of the niche, then information theoretic measures can be used to guide exploration.

So there's so much to say here, and it's very interesting to bring in the information gain at the end.

Really what it's saying is this learned model of active inference and the way that the exploration is tied into the generative model of the world such that action is facilitated not just towards the straightforwardly rewarding, that's sort of the model-free RL,

nor merely the deep model rewarding.

That's like, I love running marathons because it's healthy.

I'm not saying it's not healthy.

It's the mindset that helps one get there for sure.

And then...

this is saying we can actually go another level beyond that we can say with a deep generative model of what one is likely to be doing we can maximize precision which may be something you hear amongst the you know ultra ultra um committed of an area something like this is just how and who i am

so in that sense it would be going beyond this whole oh well this many miles per day is healthy for me which is a great motivation it might be on might be a multi-scale thing um just one example and definitely i know you know even for me it's just changed like through life so it just shows how it's related to your niche your context your social relationships so many other areas and

And just to kind of close on one thought on this information gain, information gain surprised me at first because I was like trying to connect all of this to information theory.

And I realized that

what it's about is reducing uncertainty on target parameters information is about reducing your uncertainty about things and it's just about reducing our uncertainty about something else or about more specifically something else being a multi-scale model that includes some attributes that we're probably pretty familiar with like the observation model some aspects that are homologous

to a reward model like sort of a preference model let's just say but then some aspects that are mainly maybe new and that might be the part about the free energy and then that area as i understand it is related to another type of information theory and model selection and the variational framework

so if that is an area that anyone has insight into i think it's pretty cool maybe we could try to unpack that i'm not sure what it looks like but uh definitely something i wondered about and minding the p's and q's and thanks alec for a little bit of the email discourse about clarifying a few aspects of the paper because um

It was pretty interesting.

And I think there's a lot of implications and what systems we can possibly apply this to approximately or in the medium term.

So tons of interesting stuff.

We'll be talking about this on November 10th, 2020 and 17th at 7.30 a.m.

PST.

And I think that is it.

And let's see.

Yeah, one closing thought.

All we can have is a deep generative model of the space intertwined with action so that the parameters we explore are the ones that are at the trade-off of successful and optimally informative.

Sometimes we veer towards successful, which can be not optimally informative.

Other times we are getting informed greatly in a way that may not be successful.

But overall, we manage that trade-off well.

It's how we've gotten this far.

So great work, everyone.

Thanks a lot for listening.

Keep it up.

Thank you for participating.

We do provide follow up forms to live participants and would be awesome if anyone had feedback or suggestions or questions.

You can stay in communication with us and up one more slide on that parameters reparameterization trick and the slides from that paper.

But other than that,

Thanks for listening and for bearing with the anomalous camera error.

But yeah, I'm looking forward to the end of 2020 coming in with all these cool discussions we'll be having.

Would love to have some new participants come online or bring in some new perspectives that we haven't considered or...

Talk about it from a beginner's perspective, from any number of fields as a starting point.

Just let us know.

That's the kind of stuff we just always appreciate hearing about.

So have a good November and end of 2020 season.

And we look forward to talking with you.

All right.

Bye.

## zG0qP7un91k

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone to the Active Inference live stream.

This is ACT-INF stream 8.1.

It is November 10th, 2020.

Welcome to Team Calm, everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us at our website, activeinference.org.

You can find us at our Twitter, at email, our public Keybase team, or on YouTube.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And as far as video etiquette for live streams go, mute yourself if there's noise in your background, raise your hands so that we can hear from everybody on the stack, and use respectful speech behavior, et cetera.

Today, we are excitingly in Act Imp Stream 8.1, and it's going to go a little something like this.

We're going to start with some intros and warmups, and then we'll get to the sections of 8.1.

In 8.1, as well as 8.2, we're going to be discussing the paper Scaling Active Inference by Shantz et al.

in 2019, thanks to Blue for the suggestion of the paper.

We're going to go through the goals, the abstract, and the roadmap, and then we'll have a little notation and math overview.

We'll also take a look at the figures with a special focus on what each figure is showing or representing or invoking.

In today's discussion 8.1 and next week's discussion 8.2, we're gonna be discussing this same paper.

So save and submit your questions and also get in touch with us if you wanna participate.

For the rest of 2020, we're gonna be discussing this paper eight as well as nine, 10 and 11, which you can learn more about by checking our Twitter.

So check it out there.

All right, here we are in the intros.

Welcome again, Shannon.

I'll kick out other Shannon.

So for the introductions, we'll go around and just introduce yourself and your location and we'll roll with it as people gain and lose the chat.

So just say hello in a short introduction and then pass it to somebody else.

I'm Daniel.

I'm in California and I will pass it to Blue.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, I'm Blue and I am in Southern New Mexico in Las Cruces and I will pass it to Sasha.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi, I'm Sasha.

I'm also in California.

And I will pass it to Ivan.


SPEAKER_04:
Hello, my name is Ivan.

I'm in Moscow, Russia, and I pass it to Alejandra.


SPEAKER_00:
I think she disappeared for a second.

So let's go to Alex.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Alex.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm also in Moscow, Russia.

So welcome everybody.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool and Alejandra has been on before, so hopefully we know her, but when she jumps back in we can hear from her.

So for these warm up questions and also it's pretty cool to have a slightly smaller panel, so I'm really looking forward to hearing everyone's perspective on what they got out of the paper, what they brought to the paper.

It'll be really cool to hear about.

So the first question is what made you excited to read this paper and or to learn about these topics?

So while people are raising their hand and feel free to do so, something that initially made me excited to read this paper was just about learning how active inference could be applied to the kinds of problems that people apply other machine learning algorithms to.

So that's a starting point.

Blue?


SPEAKER_05:
So I pitched this paper.

I hadn't thoroughly digested it when I picked it.

I had read the first author's other paper in class computational biology, but applying agent-based models and modeling parameters to active inference was really what intrigued me.

This paper, I especially liked because of the ability to apply it in a continuous framework as opposed to like something in discrete time steps.

And I thought that that was significant and important.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Welcome, Alejandra.

Do you want to just give your quick intro and say hi?

Oh, never mind.

Anyone else want to add something that made them excited to learn about this topic or read about the paper?

Yeah, thanks again for the suggestion, Blue.

The second question is, what is your experience or background with computers slash computational modeling?

And what is something interesting that you've been learning about or studying recently in the area?

And I think that my goal with this question was to show to our listeners slash viewers that there's many computational backgrounds that intersect in active inference.

So it's a community that includes some people who are really on the cutting edge of the computational modeling.

And that's what we see reflected in this paper.

big props to everybody who is reading and talking about it because it is at the cutting edge of that type of machine learning research.

But also there's this deep tradition of action-oriented research and embodied cognition and so many other areas that might not necessarily entail a computational background or even a computational approach in how they're studied until this type of intersectional research.

So does anyone want to just...

something that they've been learning about in computers or what type of computer modeling have they had experience with.

So I can start.

A lot of my computer work had been in bioinformatics, which does deal with computers, but it's very different kinds of questions than the machine learning community.

However, increasingly, there's application of machine learning to bioinformatics.

So this was just kind of like a different perspective on machine learning outside of the biological contexts that I had mainly seen it in.

And I'll just throw up the third question in case anyone wants to answer that one, which is what kinds of problems might machine learning based upon active inference be applied to?

So you can just raise your hand if you, yep, go ahead, Sasha.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I would say, I guess, to some of all these questions is I have very limited experience in working with computers, but my background is in neuroscience and I'm always curious to learn things

what machine learning has to offer for understanding the process of learning and how that can link back to neurobiology concepts.

And so I'm interested in understanding these equations and having a better grasp on what the relationships are like.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, because learning is really a biologically inspired topic.

It's based upon learning in organisms or the kind of control that organisms enact in their environment.

And that's not even getting into the whole neural network slash actual brain debacle.

So definitely these kinds of learning questions.

Any other thoughts on this one?

Blue?


SPEAKER_05:
So like you, my background is bioinformatics, but I've branched out since getting out of my doctoral research into doing all kinds of different computational and agent-based modeling type applications, even quantum computing a little bit.

This system particularly

interests me because like Sasha, I'm interested in learning like how things learn, but also like from the beyond brain perspective, like stay in biology, but think about biological systems just at a very simple level, like slime molds or something like this.

How do these systems learn, right?

Because still there's some element of learning that happens.

And when you can kind of deconstruct it into like a computational process,


SPEAKER_00:
like model then you can start to like recognize input output into simpler biological systems beyond the brain cool and let's return to that multi-scale cognition when we're a little bit later on but i wrote that down so we can definitely return there any last thoughts on the warm-ups before we get into the paper cool

All right, so today we are going to be talking about this scaling active inference paper, which is an archive paper.

And the paper presents its goal as, or what it does as, we present a model of active inference that is applicable in high dimensional control tasks with both continuous states and actions.

Our model builds upon previous attempts to scale active inference by including an efficient planning algorithm, as well as the quantification and active resolution of model uncertainty.

Our model makes two primary contributions.

First, we showed that the full active inference construct can be scaled to the kinds of tasks considered in the reinforcement learning literature.

This involved extending previous models of deep active inference to include model uncertainty and expected information gain.

Second, we highlighted the overlap between active inference and state-of-the-art approaches to model-based reinforcement learning.

Welcome back, Alejandra.

And some of these topics were introduced or at least initially brought up in the ACT InfoStream 8.0.

So if you're a little bit just unsure what is model-based versus non-model-based reinforcement learning

What is reinforcement learning or what is machine learning?

It's all good.

There's kind of a sequence of ideas that you can follow to understand why this paper is so exciting.

And just go to Actim Stream 8.0 if you're curious.

The way that we can phrase what the big goal or question of the paper is in terms of non-active inference vocabulary

would be how can we apply Active Inference to challenging control tasks?

And like Blue mentioned, these are the ones that often involve continuous decisions being made.

So like turning up a dial or down or steering wheel rather than like chess or checkers or Connect Four or the Mario Kart example, which now I will never forget.

And then how to connect these continuous challenging control tasks, which have elements of planning and all these other things happening

and connect these tasks formally to reinforcement learning.

Any thoughts or questions on the goal of the paper?

Cool.

So the abstract, which we'll just run through, is in reinforcement learning, RL, agents operate in partially observed and uncertain environments.

Isn't that the truth?

Model-based reinforcement learning suggests that this control of these partially observed and uncertain environments is best achieved by learning and exploiting a probabilistic model of the world.

So just to be clear, this is what traditional model-based reinforcement learning is.

Model-free or unsupervised reinforcement learning would be learning the very, very direct relationships between outcomes like reward and states.

Model-based reinforcement learning abstracts a little bit above that, and it considers how learning occurs on a probabilistic model of the world.

Active inference is an emerging normative framework in cognitive and computational neuroscience that offers a unifying account of how biological agents achieve this control.

In this framework, inference, learning, and action emerge from a single imperative that maximizes the Bayesian evidence for a niched model of the world.

And so learning, inference, and action are all part of the organism's generative model, and we're going to see how that gets specified and how it plays out.

The challenge is that implementations of this process, this integration between inference and action, if you will, have thus far been restricted to low dimensional and idealized situations.

So this could be, for example, playing a very simple game or doing a two by two matrix like a prisoner's dilemma, or there are other cases where active inference has been used for slightly higher dimensional, but still quite idealized situations like reading from a known set of options.

Here, we present a working implementation of active inference that applies to higher dimensional tasks with proof of principle results demonstrating efficient exploration and an order of magnitude increase in sample efficiency over strong model-free baselines.

So just by reading that, we can look forward to some improvements on classical algorithms.

And as far as this magnitude increase in sample efficiency, the reason why they're focused on sample efficiency is because these distributions that we want to understand the shape of are not just like a simple curve.

There's a lot of dimensions to them and they're very rugged.

So small changes can change your height, so to speak, quite a lot, which means that the challenge is to sample effectively, not get trapped in one area or not to oversample one region at the cost of another.

Our results demonstrate the feasibility of applying active inference at scale and highlight the operational homologies between active inference and current model-based approaches to reinforcement learning.

So what would be the implications of that?

Well, it'd be pretty epic if all of the hype and buzz that we hear about machine learning or reinforcement learning or all the places where we know reinforcement learning gets applied, ranging from recommendation algorithms to maps to just all these types of things,

Could active inference play a role in that?

And what would that do for our conception of these kinds of algorithms?

And there's probably a lot of directions to take that, but that's the equivalence is if there is a homology and potentially even a superiority of active inference techniques in certain cases over reinforcement learning, then it liberates us from some of the baggage of the straightforward model-based reinforcement learning or the critiques of reinforcement learning

but also opens the door to some new ways to implement strategies and understand the systems that we're working with.

Cool, so the paper has a pretty clear roadmap.

This is like driving on Highway 10 in New Mexico.

And there's a introduction section.

The relationship to further work is actually section five, which we'll get to in a second.

But the paper begins with an introduction and a consideration of active inference as a topic.

It then moves directly to the model and lays it out in the six subsections, 3.1 through 3.6.

From a mathematical perspective, we're going to be focusing primarily on one

two and three, because those are the parts that we've heard the most about and they're the most relatable.

So the generative model and the recognition distribution are the P and the Q, mind your P's and Q's.

And this is everything that we've been talking about with the two directions between the agent and the world.

And whether we think about that in the Bayesian structural computationalist perspective or the inactivist perspective, the whole tale of two densities, integrating internalism and externalism, all these things come together in 3.1.

3.2 learning and inference is where we're going to draw the bow together with reinforcement learning and about other machine learning algorithms.

3.3 is where we're going to come closer to control theory because we're going to be talking about setting policies for action.

then 3.456 hopefully when alec is here next week we'll have a little bit uh more detail there maybe we could even see a simulation or hear about some of the degrees of freedom that the authors had in the model why they chose to do what they did

The part that will be very cool as an experimental biologist is the experimental section.

And here it's an interesting approach to do one set of tasks that conveys exploration of a state space and another set of tasks that conveys exploitation.

So they're saying like this model has two hands, you know, it's good at exploring, but it's good at exploiting as well.

then there's the connection to previous work and the three areas that they tie it most directly to with the keywords as well as in this closing section are related to deep active inference which in contrast to i guess shallow active inference would mean that

You're not just minimizing your surprise about your instantaneous sensory information, but you have a deep or a counterfactual model that goes through time.

So that's like the example of taking a jacket, even though you're not cold yet.

That's deep active inference.

You're reducing your surprise about future states of your temperature under a generative model where if you go outside and it's cold, you're going to get cold.

But shallow active inference would be like you wouldn't put on the jacket or you wouldn't even take it with you because it wouldn't be a relevant affordance in the one second time frame.

but it actually is relevant in the one second timeframe under a deep generative model of temperature.

The second two are model-based reinforcement learning, which we've mentioned a few times, and information gain.

Information is reduction of uncertainty, and when we're reducing our uncertainty about environmental causes, it helps us plan better actions, but we also need to reduce our uncertainty about which actions to take, and that's called policy, and that's what relates us here to control theory.

Then there's a discussion and conclusion.

okay before we jump into the math and the actual sections are there any thoughts or questions on the roadmap all right

Here is a partial notation reference, and I just separate them onto two sides.

And so if you're only gonna look at a few parameters, if your parameter overload hits in at six, the ones on the left are the important ones.

These are the ones that will help you get 80% of what is happening.

And then the next 10% are the ones on the right.

And then there's a few other ones which aren't on this page that are more like the esoteric statistical parameters.

The big parameter is S with a hat, just like Sasha with a hat.

And that's the true state of the environment.

So S with a hat is what is actually trying to be predicted.

And that's like the actual temperature of the environment or the actual amount of sunlight.

But that's not what the agent is able to track directly.

It's able to make an estimate of the environmental state.

And you can imagine there's times where that's an easy estimate to make.

There's times where it's a hard estimate to make.

And then this is the difference between the discrete and the continuous case would be if the state that you're estimating is, is it day or night?

It's a zero or one.

That's a discrete case.

A continuous case would be like, what is the amount of light?

And that's a continuous variable.

So there's a lot more options, a lot more shades of gray, infinite of them.

that's s is the agent's internal ongoing estimate of this environmental state that it's trying to track and we can think about it with just one s or there can be multiple s's like is it humid or is it dry that's one axis another one is it light or dark o are the observations so in the case of light being estimated that would be like the observations of light on the retina in the case of temperature it's like a thermometer reading

A are the policy actions by the agents.

And those are arising from pi, which is a policy.

And a policy is like a layer above action.

So for example, action would be moving my left foot.

My policy would be, if I hear this sound, then I move my left foot.

Another policy would be, I always move my left foot.

And so there's different kinds of policies that can be very nuanced, they can be conditional, they can be related to each other, or they can be very straightforward and standalone.

T with italics is the time steps of the model.

So this is just a modeling parameter that's going to come up again and again, and it has to do with how time is measured in terms of epochs or states or continually.

Okay, then just to the right side, we have little and big theta.

And a little theta is often used just to mean a parameter of the generative model.

And the bigger theta is like the space of all the parameters.

So those are kind of used similarly.

Then lambda is related to the likelihood distribution.

It relates some of the statistical parameters.

And then F is the free energy.

And this represents like, if you could be on this super smooth variational optimization landscape, just as if you would really wanna be following S hat, but you actually have to follow S,

With free energy, if we could be following F, then we'd be doing perfectly.

You just strictly cannot do any better than that.

However, we can't directly track F, so we have to track G, which is the expectation of free energy, which we'll also be able to look at.

Okay, any thoughts or questions on notation?

Anyone seeing similar notation to another field or a difference?

Is there something that you'd imagine that a control theory model would have that isn't in here?

All right.

Anyone can just raise their hand at any time.

I'm not sure where several of our colleagues have gone to.

Let's start by thinking about the generative model.

So this is a generative model P of a bunch of variables.

And this is going to be kind of like what the organism is slash does.

We're going to leave for a second some of these avenues that can be arising with the niche symmetry, which we've talked about in the context of Jelle Brunberg's and Axel Constant's work.

And there's a lot of other things that we've brought up.

Let's just try to isolate what's really relevant, which is that the agent is doing some type of an implementation or is some kind of an implementation of a generative model of a couple of things at once.

It's generating a model of observations through time.

The tilde on top of a variable means through time.

So observations through time and states through time

you can think of as a function of policy choices, pi, and parameters of the model theta.

So for example, one of my parameters in my theta is like, if I get hit by a bike, then it's gonna hurt.

And then my generative model is like, under the policy of looking both ways to cross the road, I predict that my states will include not being hit by a bike, and so I won't have any pain observations.

Under that same policy, you could imagine other types of state and observation predictions.

And then there are a few subsequent mathematical details about the insides of this equation.

It's a little bit bracketed, no pun intended, in the top, and that's a shorthand.

And then we can explore and unpack it a few more levels.

So like on that first row,

we can see that that p, o, s, pi, theta, those relationships can be unpacked on the other side of the equal sign, the right-hand side, to just the probability of the parameters existing, and then just the probability of the policy existing multiplied by this big other thing.

So why would that be the case?

we won't go through all of them in this detail but i think this one's really helpful to understand for active inference and people just raise your hand if you want to talk but just to keep it like informational and fun i'll just keep going until somebody wants to ask a question so the reason why p of pi is there the probability of the policy is like if the policy is unrealistic

you don't even want to consider it you want to basically take unlikely policies impossible or implausible policies and systematically not consider them so if if i'm trying to get out of the way of the incoming bike and i'm spending a lot of my time or my clock cycles or a lot of my cognitive infrastructure on

action strategies that involve me doing a Spider-Man and swinging from a building, it's so implausible that it's probably not going to be effective.

So we want to have something in our model that represents likely or possible policies being considered a little bit more richly than implausible policies.

And similarly for p , which is a little more abstract because it's just a parameter of the model, but it's like saying if it's an unlikely parameter state, it's also not worth thinking too much about.

I don't need to plan for it being negative 40 in California.

However, our Russian colleagues might need to plan for that.

So it's going to be niche dependent and contextual whether they need to plan for it or not.

Okay, now let's go into this big pie scenario.

notation on the right side of the right hand side of the first line of equations.

This is kind of like a sigma.

Sigma adds up the elements of a series.

So like sigma of, you know, one plus one over two plus one over four or something.

And the pi is like a big multiplier.

And it's saying from the first time step t equals one through all of the time steps, big T,

do this calculation what is the calculation well it's the probability of observations given states so and that's observation at a certain time given the state at that time so it's like if this my estimate of the state not s hat just s with no hat if my observate if my state is getting hit by a bike there's going to be a very likely observation of it hurting

Now, that doesn't say whether it's likely that I'm getting hit by a bike.

It's just that it is the case if it is that state, then there's going to be this observation.

So that's the mapping between observations and states.

But it's observations, probability, conditional with a straight line on the state being a certain way.

Okay, that's the first part.

And the second part is the probability of that state arising, conditional on...

the previous state and the previous policy and the parameter.

And so again, with this like bike model, it's like, what is the probability of my estimated state S of T at that time being hit by a bike, given that I wasn't being hit by a bike before and my policy was looking both ways and my theta model parameters tell me that if I look both ways, it's really likely that I'll stay safe, for example.

But stay safe isn't what's directly specified by the model, theta.

It's actually specifying the likelihood that a given policy and state mapping are going to relate into the future with a certain state.

And then separately, we can consider what observations arise given a state.

So it's a little bit like just...

showing our work or being very clear with what is the actual state of the world, S hat.

What's the estimated state, S?

What are the mappings between policies, states, and future states?

That's the right side.

Then what's the mapping between observations and states in that first part?

Okay.

Any thoughts or questions?

Because the rest just kind of continues from here in a similar way.

Okay, we'll just keep on, you know, write down any cool questions that are coming to mind.

Ivan, yeah, go ahead.

Well, you're muted first, but yes.

Then continue.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.

Could you please explain one more time what the small theta is?

It's a parameter of

the generative model, but what is it?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, great question.

So we can actually list, we can go, just to show it in the context of the paper.

And this, by the way, is in 3.1, but it introduces some of the other equations earlier.

the theta are the details of the model that relate the transition distribution so here we're looking at the states and the previous policy the s t minus one and pi of t minus one and how given theta it maps onto s of t so what is theta just from looking at the equation what is theta going to be telling us it's going to be telling us how to map

t-1's state and policy, state estimate and policy, to the time t states.

So let's just imagine that it were a linear model.

So I had a linear y equals mx plus b, and that was how we were going to map forward.

Just totally a simple way to do it.

Then theta would be like a vector containing m and b.

or how many dimensions of the model there are is how tall theta is gonna be in a sense.

But theta are the parameters of the model that say what the transition distribution is.

So yeah, if it was a linear model, then theta is kind of like a wrapper around the parameters of the linear model, which is the slope M and then the elevation B. If this were a neural network with a million parameters, then theta would have a million parameters.

but it's kind of specifying the likelihood that the S of T minus one and pi of T minus one map onto S of T. So let's just say that theta were one.

It just always mapped to one for some reason.

Then it's like, whatever these two are, it's going to map to one.

That's like, you know, F of X equals one.

That's the parameter.

That's the simplest possible model is whatever the previous states and policy are, we just map to one.

The next one would be F of X equals one.

you know, insert your model there.

And so it is a statistical point about what's a parameter of a model and like, aren't these all parameters?

Aren't they all variables?

Aren't they all random variables?

Aren't they all gonna be variables in my Python code?

Yes to all of them.

And that's why there's a little bit of nuance.

And that's actually why we go into the details here, because you can get pretty tangled up and confused in the gray zone with what's a estimator and what is the scientist estimating?

What is the organism estimating?

And a lot of times when we just look at it, it's a little bit clearer.

And we can think about a few layers of unpacking with the top most level of understanding is this

big P top equation.

Then we can unpack it and define, well, what does that really mean?

How do we pull out the likelihood of the parameters, like the likelihood of theta from the likelihood of policy from this time dependent series?

How do we define the distribution of P of O of T given S of T like the second line?

And so each of these, we continue unpacking, and then each of them gets specified in functions in programming, which hopefully we'll hear from Alec about next week.

And there, sometimes it becomes another level of clarity when you look at the function definition, and you can say, oh, this function is actually taking in variable A, B, and C. And then instead of seeing them as just O sub T, S sub T, the variable's name could be states through time.

or there might be a more descriptive name.

So I know that especially if you haven't looked at these equations for a long time, or perhaps many equations for a long time, sometimes you get halfway down the page, it's like, what is mu of theta again?

But it is referring to something specific.

It's just a little bit of a shorthand to make sure that it fits visibly in a containable space.

So any other thoughts?

But good question there with the parameters.

So just what are the other, um, yeah.

Yeah.

Sasha, go ahead.


SPEAKER_06:
Um, yeah, thank you.

That was really useful to walk through those steps, especially with the bike example.

And it, um, kind of brings to mind, uh, uh, cases of when something is very unlikely to happen, but the, um, but it's certain to have a really bad outcome.

So like, uh, you know, it's really going to hurt if you get hit by a bike.

versus things that are very likely to happen, but don't have, but are not certain of having a bad outcome, like, I don't know, stubbing your toe on something.

And so these are things that are weighted differently in a model based on the certainty of, and the severity of the outcome.

So I think that's really cool that this is all incorporated into one model.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and when we specify why we're making certain decisions, first, we're just laying these equations out to describe our little control theory robot playing Mario Kart or playing control theory games on N64.

But what if people had a little bit more nuanced discussion on collective decision-making topics?

Like somebody thinks, well, I think it's totally unlikely that the minimum miles per gallon of cars could be 40 miles by 2030.

And someone else says, that's super likely.

Actually, it's totally possible.

It's totally likely.

I think that it can be done.

Or I think that this other policy that you're suggesting is implausible or that it will have a bad outcome.

And so people can disagree on whether a policy is actualizable or not for various reasons.

It might come across as an ethical constraint or a legal constraint or logistical, whatever it happens to be.

But for whatever reason, that P of pi is low for them.

then we could unpack that and say okay all these different elements are there depending on the situation and then somebody else might say i'm with you on that outcome being unlikely i just don't think it's that big of a deal saying oh yep i think that that kind of a tsunami will happen once every 100 years but i think that my transition matrix from tsunami damage to being repaired it just says that that's an easy transition so we don't really need to plan so heavily around it because when it does happen we'll be able to rebuild quickly for example

so these just allow us to give a little bit more detail into our infrastructure really our architecture of decision making and so i think blue that's definitely where we can take it back to this multiple scales of decision making question just to look through a couple of these other equations before we move to q here is the probability model of observations given states

And so again, that's like if the state, my estimated state, not S hat, if my estimated state is getting hit by a bike or stubbing my toe, the observations will be such and such in my appropriate receptors.

And that is given by a normal distribution, which means big N on the variable O of T and semicolon parameterized by mu and sigma squared, which are the mean and the variance.

and then those together, mu and sigma squared, it turns out that those are the hard parts to estimate.

Just like the problem or the challenge of doing a linear regression on a billion data points would be estimating the mean and the variance.

So you could fit the mean by adding up all the numbers and then dividing it by the amount of numbers.

And for fitting the variance, you could use like a least squares model, but still that would be the computation that you could do on pen and paper, but would just be very hard.

In this case, we're going to be doing what is called a amortized learning or a functional.

A functional is like a function of another function.

And what we're going to be doing is estimating these statistical parameters with this function lambda.

And then we're going to fit the neural network about that function lambda.

And so even though neural networks are often understood as providing additional degrees of flexibility, like being able to learn conditional relationships between data, this took me a little bit to think about, but the neural network is actually just facilitating us in this model.

It's not saying that it would have to be this way for all future ACT-INF learning, but it's actually still just fitting a neural network model of a normal distribution.

So we're finding the parameters mu and sigma

use it, which are very difficult to estimate as you can imagine for nonlinear control task, but we're still fitting it with a function around a normal.

So it's kind of this interesting juxtaposition of using advanced techniques like a neural network, high parametric techniques to actually drill back down to a mean and a variance.

And then, so this is this POST is this first part of this series.

And then S of T, given the previous state and the previous policy, is the second part here.

So this part here gets estimated with F of lambda.

And then the second half of that series through time has another normal distribution with mu of theta and sigma squared of theta.

And then those two get looped up into a functional.

over those two.

Similarly, like s of t is the right-hand side, what's being conditioned on, and we're gonna be estimating the mean and variance of what is conditioned on.

And then here, it's similar.

We're making a function that is estimating what is being conditioned on.

Okay, then we have this early parts of the equation, which is the probability of the policy is basically, it's gonna be pretty simple in this case, but this is where you could have a lot more degrees of flexibility.

This is sort of like an initial skeleton paper as far as what could be done with this framework.

And that's kind of cool.

That's actually what defines it in some ways as being research and as being cutting edges.

This isn't the fine tuning of the parameters.

This is laying out the framework that's gonna help us in a lot of other contexts.

And then the probability of the policy, this is the part where we actually get to free energy, okay?

So if we remember from the notation slide,

f is like the free energy where we strictly couldn't be making any better decisions if we knew that but g is the expected free energy so just like s is the hat s with the hat is real state of the environment that's like what we'd really want to track and free energy would be what our policy decisions would strictly want to be converging upon but we don't get s hat we get s and we don't get f we get g what is g where does it come into play well the probability of a policy

is now here sigma is actually not this is sigma squared a statistical parameter and it's kind of annoying but it is this way that this sigma is a softmax function which basically is like the make a choice function in math it just is s for softmax here sigma for variance here

And what this is going to be is the negative expected free energy.

And sometimes there's some negatives and some logs getting thrown around.

And these are all just ways to really just say, pick the best given the expected free energy of policy.

And so this is how we get to certain statements, which have definitely been discussed on this live stream before, where it's like the agent picks the most likely policy.

And it's like, wait, but is it likely for me to win or lose?

What if I know that it's unlikely for me to win or lose?

If it's 1 in 100 that I'm going to win, how is that me picking the most likely policy?

But that's actually what is happening.

But it's not just simply the likeliest policy.

There's a little bit more nuance, which we'll look into with G. Okay, so that was sort of the P side.

Let's...

maybe a little bit more quickly because we will recognize a lot of the variables and also a lot of the structural relationships between equations.

Here's the Q. So we have P and Q between the agent and the environment in a sense.

These are the two distributions that are linking it.

Not that one is being computed by one or one is computed by the other, but thinking about in that Bayesian computationalist framework where we have like the data

going in one model goes to the hyperparameters and then the hyperparameters generate leading to the... Hey Shannon, welcome back.

Going back to the observed states of the world.

So Q is gonna be distinguished from P. P is this implementation of the generative model of the world.

Whereas Q is going to very distinctly have different parameters.

Instead of POS pi theta, here we have Q of S through time, policies, and theta.

So this is a slightly simpler mathematical formulation.

And it is going to be unpacked as Q of the states through time and the policy and the model parameters is again...

we see the likelihood of the model parameters and the likelihood of the policy coming out in front.

And these are similar to the P, but P doesn't have to equal Q. And then a slightly simpler piece here, which is just about the states given the observations.

And so this is like literally given the retina shadows, what is the state estimate of the world?

So this is, it's like here in P,

if we look at just this second line.

This is the probability of observations given states.

So this is given that it's daytime, there should be a lot of photons.

If the estimated state of the world is nighttime, there shouldn't be any photons, POS, okay?

But it's O given S. Now in Q,

we actually have S given O. So the P is different than the Q, but also the orders have switched.

This is called a recognition distribution because we're basically doing an estimation of the states given the observations.

So Q is kind of like the incoming way that the observations are going to be connected to the state estimators of the world.

That's the recognition.

But then the generative model, which is the P, that entails

understanding what the hidden states of the world are, S, and your estimates of them, that is, and then generating out observations that are linked up to policy.

And so here...

there's a slightly different way that the parameters of this model and that the policy mapping is done with these few more statistical parameters.

But similarly, which we don't need to go into too much detail in here is these are also gonna be distributed using some statistical distribution that's gonna help us estimate them.

And similarly, we can take all the statistical parameters.

So for a normal distribution, it's a two parameter model, mean and variance.

But you could have distributions with one or with more than two variables.

But whatever number of statistical variables you want to estimate, we're just going to wrap them into a function and figure out some way to estimate them.

And so that's a degree of freedom you can think of in the model is that there's different, you could flip out this normal for some other type of distribution, or you could have another way to estimate the distribution's normality.

Okay, that's P and Q, but it is really important and interesting what they are.

Any thoughts or questions, or we can just keep cruising.

Okay.

Yeah, Alec?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I want to ask maybe in terms of... So P is for generative model, Q is for recognition, distribution and recognition model.

And as we...

discussed in previous session, generative model exists or acts in dynamics.

So you have generative model in some way of, it's like was example with dominoes.

So when you act and act in accordance to this generative model and in example of road and a bike, this generative model

And it defines the way you are looking on both ways and when go if you don't see a bike.

And in these terms, what will be recognition distribution, recognition model?

It will be understanding how bike looks like or what is road, how road looks like and so on.

or it's the wrong direction for my understanding.


SPEAKER_00:
A good question.

And it was actually, I had to email Alec to clarify a few things because I looked at this Q distribution.

I thought, wait, it's a recognition distribution, but where are the observations?

How can Q be recognition when there's no observations?

And then it turns out there are observations that are related to Q, but he just said, basically, it's the norm in the recognition distribution literature, like this part of the Bayesian computational literature

fields this is what they call those two models the recognition distribution which is from the observations to the generative model parameters which ironically as a norm doesn't include the uh observation and then the generative model again is the one that's going from the organisms parameter estimates the world to predicted observations and that's how expectation maximization works

Now, we had all these interesting discussions, Alex, which you're alluding to, of, for example, does the organism have the internal model that's generative or is the generative model enacted in terms of the relationship?

Is it that's the internalism versus externalism discussion that we had?

And so I'm going to try to combine what Alec informed me about as well as channel a little Maxwell here.

And I think the answer is going to be there's multiple philosophical lenses that you could apply.

um to real world situations and this is only what is specified in the math and in the programming and so if you include it if you include in your recognition distribution is the uh luminosity and the edge and the color and those are the observations and you're recognizing you're doing image classification on recognizing a bike just simplifying it but there it is

then that is strictly only what is in the recognition distribution it's going to be about the mapping of the observations um to of the states given observations and your observations could include those variables that we just talked about so if it's being conditioned on that then that's what's happening and then even given a single formalization of like okay the observations are the um overall brightness and the amount of movement or something like whatever it happens to be

it could still be a a pluralistic philosophical scenario where somebody could say okay that's a modeling convenience but really those observations are in the space between the organism and the environment and someone else says yep it's a modeling convenience but i think those parameters are something about the neural firing someone else says it's both of them and someone else so

I would be open to correction and also would love to hear Alec's perspective on this.

But I think the answer would be these papers that we read, Tale of Two Densities and Integrating Externalism and Internalism are actually about how by framing it within active inference,

we move beyond those philosophical debates or another way to say that is build a bigger tent that includes both of those perspectives um in a way that's compatibilist because those are the debates that people had about these models so like in the reinforcement learning literature it's like okay is the reward the signal you know is it a pleasing you know aesthetic body form is that the reward

Or is that the signal of the reward?

And if it is the reward, then isn't that a circular definition, like organisms seek out what's rewarding, but it's not like you just wanna see the aesthetics.

There might be some second intention, for example.

And so how do you actually draw out

these questions, is it happening in the organism's head with a reward or is it enacted?

And that was sort of the philosophical groundwork.

And now we're for a minute, putting those bags of all different stripes down and looking at just the way that we're going to specify it and how it plays out in simulations.

knowing that potentially one person might have a Bayesian structural computationalist perspective of these examples we're going to look at in a second, and somebody else might take a heavily inactive example.

They might say, oh, well, the cart that's on the hill, it's like the cart-hill combo organism that's being, or something like that.

But at the end, whether the person thinks that it's enacted or it's just a Bayesian computationalist approach, they're still going to at least be able to point to the same equations and ultimately the same code as well.

So that's like a hopefully explanation of how the active inference framework and the specifics end up unifying these general debates, which potentially without such a unifying framework, it'd be intractable because somebody would say, okay, well, I think that Q is happening in the brain of the organism.

Somebody else says, I think that Q happens in between the niche and the organism.

Someone else says, I think Q is a modeling shorthand.

Someone says, I agree with person one and three or one and two.

And now we're saying, okay, they're kind of all correct.

It's just all ways that we can phrase the specifics of what we're talking about here.

Not that everyone's correct because everyone's correct and there is no wrong answer, but under this reconceptualization of action and inference, we find that some of these previous questions or phrasings become like yes and instead of either slash or.

Okay, to move a little bit more quickly just through these a few equations before we can, I think, just highlight a little bit on the experiments and then probably return to the multi-scale question that we talked about earlier and also about what other areas could control be interesting in and also what questions would we want to ask Alec and other attendees next week.

Here is equation one.

And this I put after because I think it helps to understand that P and Q and the mappings.

But this is what is ultimately being minimized.

So again, we don't get F. That's the real free energy.

And that's the one that we would really want to be converging towards, which as they put it, converging towards an approximation of the posterior distribution of P.

probably the p model of states policies and parameters given observations so that would be like the best possible state trajectory through time and the best possible policy given the observations of the world you know given that bitcoin is at this value and ethereum's at this value the state trajectory that's the best for me entails this policy so that's clearly what we want to know but

That is intractable.

So we needed to use some type of a convergence towards this intractability.

And this is where a lot of the more specific and technical details related to, for example, the Kolbeck-Leibler informational divergence, the informational distance between two distributions is related because

those distance metrics are bounded at zero.

Like if two distributions are identical, their distance is zero.

And as they get more and more distant, that number strictly increases.

And so it turns out that there's some ways to have like this hypothetical perfect distribution and then have a distance between where you're really at and this hypothetical perfect distribution, which is always a positive distance, and then try to converge towards that hypothetical perfect position by minimizing the distance function.

And that distance function is informational, but it still is a distance metric in a certain way.

and wrote out a few details.

The E is the expectation.

So it's expectation of states through time, policies and model parameters.

And it's gonna be something that combines the Q and the P, the natural log, which makes it a little bit easier to do the machine learning techniques and a few other benefits, scaling it and bringing certain values below the number line.

And then that is going to be always greater than or equal to, that's this part right here, than just the observations.

So it turns out that by doing this estimator, we can bound some, but there's a few things that get bounded, but they're not even all phrased here.

Yep.

So the last thing I wrote there was given that the queue is focusing on basically between P and Q, you get all the parameters.

So what you can do by optimizing the recognition density and the generative model back and forth, whether actually like a two cycle engine, like expectation maximization, which is how it gets implemented in code or dynamically and continuously as in the case of an active organismal behavior,

what has to get learned upon but here what tractably can be learned upon and conditioned upon is that mapping of how observations states and policies are linked in a nuanced nexus where they're all taken into account rather than running a classifier that goes from just observations to states and then a second layer model from states to policies that would be a little bit more along the lines of traditional machine learning but this is why it's a different approach

Okay, then again, we don't get G, or we don't get F, we only get G. So here is another phrasing of F that's being played out through time.

So here is building on three and four.

We're looking at the variational free energy, not just for an instance here.

This is like a kind of timeless understanding of free energy.

You don't see T in here.

It's through time with the S tilde and the O tilde, but it's like not a specific times.

And then this one is actually a function through time.

This is observation T. So this is like that specific observation.

And then here's where we see the divergence, the D distance divergence, the KL distance between the Q and the P. And those are not usually exchangeable.

So it's not like driving between two cities.

So this section, again, you can unpack some of what the equations actually say,

but this learning and inference section talks about how to update or do inference, do learning based upon the data of these parameters.

Here is where we get to G, so we don't get F, we only get to estimate G. So,

The way I kind of broke this down was we want to do more than just update our internal model to bound surprise and observations.

So if all you wanted to do was test, retest accuracy on an image classifier data set, all you'd have to do would be bound surprise on cross-validated versions of that data or on a subsample or testing and training splits.

But we want to actually do a few different things.

We want to reduce our uncertainty in the future.

So that's tau, or the cursive T, I don't know which way you'd say it.

um in terms of the policies that we take now so it's quite different than just minimizing our surprise about a linear aggressor given a static data set we want to reduce our uncertainty about observations in the future as a function of the policies we're taking now and this minimizable this tractable expected free energy function g

takes as arguments policy and the future time point.

So as a function of the policies that are available and, you know, two years in the future, how am I going to manage certain aspect of life?

And it's going to be an expectation that's conditional on

several things conditional mainly we can highlight is conditional on policy.

We're doing an expectation that's conditioned on policy because we want to know something about the states of the world and the observations and the estimated states of the world as well, given a policy.

and then that is going to be strictly bigger um and so natural log that means that it's like basically worse um in some ways but it depends a lot on whether it's like positive or negative that's kind of confusing stuff sometimes um like whether it's a negative log or like the subtracting of the positive log and what it's always bigger than is the negative expectations of the observed states in the future given a policy me here's me observing that i have 50 bitcoin um

And that's this part two, the P of observations given policy.

So what I'd really like to know would be some type of model that just tells me what states I can expect in the future, what observations I can expect in the future, which relate to the states because of the estimating the states given the observations.

But here we're going for the observations given the policy.

And it's the log.

And then this last part is kind of the important part, which is the log of the generative model, which is the observations given the policy.

That's how things will go.

That's, well, if we take this policy on miles per gallon, then we will go between, you know, 1.5 and two degrees Celsius.

Now there's so many degrees of freedom that go into that, but that's like what we'd want to estimate.

would be relating how policies literally are going to play into observations, which then tell us about states of the world estimated, like S without a hat, which should be hopefully related to S with a hat, the real states of the world.

But still, the focus here is on the observations that are conditioned on policy.

That kind of takes us to policy selection.

And they write that policy selection is achieved by updating Q in order to minimize F via G. And the need for this paper was that

When you have a short temporal horizon, you can just run out every possible policy, like every possible set of five chess moves or every possible set of all the tic-tac-toe moves.

It can't be more than nine moves in a game.

Every single step, if the branching is small and the time horizon is short, you can evaluate G in full.

So it becomes rather than sampling over a distribution, literally just calculating a table and then sorting.

However, when you have deep temporal horizons, you can't really evaluate the full branching tree because there's too many options.

So you have to sample from that distribution.

So that's the sampling problem.

The second problem, and that's the deep counterfactual sampling problem, which is even difficult under uncertainty.

The second part is the Mario Kart paradigm, which is that in continuous action spaces, there are infinite policies, meaning that some other way is going to have to come into play because not just are we sampling things

deep through time.

We're sampling potentially related to counterfactuals, which there's infinite counterfactuals.

And we're talking about continuous action spaces where there's infinite policies.

So if my only trading affordances are, should I have zero or one or two Bitcoin, then I could ask which one of those three options discreetly is better.

But if there's infinite and I can do continuous variables, even smaller than one breakdown, it's like, then should I do 1.0001?

What if that's very different than 1.0002?

Now you might say, well, those two should be super similar and you should be able just to sample every little interval and estimate the distribution.

Right.

If it's a smooth distribution, then it's going to be easy to optimize.

Maybe you could discretize it.

Maybe you could do some other way to do smooth optimization.

But the problem is actions and policies are not smooth.

So maybe if you're going into that turn in Mario Kart,

You could aim at the corner and just try to take it as fast as you can, or you could slow down and do a slightly different angle, or you could do some other skidding maneuver.

So there's multiple separate ways that you're going to be able to take this turn, potentially with different risks and reward, and they're all very nuanced.

So that is why the deep through time and counterfactual aspects, respectively, which aren't as much dealt with here, counterfactuals, but through time absolutely is.

and then the continuous actions which is really the key introduction of this model that takes it out of the paradigm of classifying images and puts it into the paradigm of continuous control theory and then it turns out that there's a lot of trajectories through time given how things can go and so there's some uh implementation of a way to sample trajectories and

that is utilizing what's called a Monte Carlo sampling approach or MC.

And there's the Markov chain, Monte Carlo sampling, MC, MC, MC squared.

And Monte Carlo just means that it's related to Monte Carlo being a card playing reference in English.

And it's like the way that you can shuffle a deck is so big.

How are you going to estimate the number of ways that you can get a Royal Flush or a pair of fours or something like that?

instead of just actually doing, well, it's 1 in 24 times 1 in 52 times 3 over 52.

The way you do it is you just sample randomly.

And then you say, OK, I took a billion samples, and 1 million of them had this feature.

And then you just take the ratio as your estimate.

So it's a sampling.

And that kind of harkens back to earlier, where we wanted to talk about getting the efficient sampling, because that's kind of what it's about, is in the Monte Carlo sampler, which could be Markov chain-based,

We want to get good sampling.

We don't want to sample only the hands with a Royal flush.

Like if we had a poor randomizer, because then we're going to get an estimate that's wrong.

All right.

Then they go into a little bit more detail about the G, the estimated or the expected free energy, which is still as it was before about policy in the future.

And now it's going to be this broken down.

And this is also where they draw some of the homologies to reinforcement learning and info gain into the informational gain, kind of like the reward and the info.

So that's,

this is where the explore exploit also comes into play which is that if one is only optimizing locally they may be exploiting they may be getting reward for a short period of time but then it doesn't lead to a um

like we'll see it in the hill climber example, but if you just reward only and only exploit, sometimes you don't do very well, but if you just explore, you might not ever get to exploit anywhere good.

And so the whole trade-off and the whole challenge of modeling is this balance between explore and exploit, between searching deeply and searching broadly.

And so the holy grail would be the right way to search deeply down the routes that are interesting and informative

but not down the ones that don't tell you that much.

But we don't know which paths are going to be informative or not until we go down them.

However, if we have a deep generative model, we can say, in terms of me winning this chess game, this branch is not informative for me to search down, not because there aren't trillions of options, but because I have two castles and they have no pieces other than their king, so I'm going to win.

So in terms of me winning, it doesn't give me any information to keep on searching down that route.

I already know I'm going to win.

And then there might be another avenue where there's fewer options per se, like less branching, but there's more uncertainty that's resolvable, more info gain is possible with respect to the policies and winning.

All right, let's just do a little bit on the experiments before we close out.

So the two experiments that they go into, so hopefully all of you experimentalists, bye, Sasha.

Hopefully all you experimentalists will like this part.

And the two examples are the mountain car and the inverted pendulum task and the hopper task.

So the mountain car is an example of exploration.

So what's being learnt is the policy between position and velocity, and then getting higher up.

The reward function is like getting higher up.

And so the car doesn't have a strong enough engine just to drive up to the flag.

So it's gonna drive up, and then the perfect policy would be right when you're stopped,

flip the engine into reverse, and keep it in reverse until you stop on this side, and then get a little bit higher up this way.

But this shows you why you can't locally optimize, why you need to explore.

Because let's just say you're driving uphill, you're slowing down, you're slowing down, you start slipping back, slipping back, and you're like, no, stay on the gas, continue accelerating forward.

Now you're slowing your descent, so when you get to here, you're not moving that fast.

So then when you're on this side, you'd say, no, no, I still want to get to the flag.

And so you'd end up just sort of like being very shallow down and focusing a lot of your time here on the middle and on the right side.

So if you just simply move towards the flag, you're probably not going to get there if the engine is too weak.

However, if you actually say, I want to explore, I want a policy that helps me increase my range.

So I want to go as far as I can here.

And then, wow, if I enact a policy where as soon as I hit my maxima, I just try to explore further this way.

And then I enact a policy switch and go back to going this way.

Wow, I might actually reach the goal purely as a function of exploring.

Now, again, this is like a little model situation where it turns out that exploring does help one realize the goal.

That's not always the case, but it isolates that feature of the model needing to be able to explore.

The second case in the exploit paradigms, it's usually a little bit more obvious what needs to be exploited and about whether you're doing it well or not.

So in the inverted pendulum task, it's like a railroad car on a rail, and there's a heavy ball M that's on top of this pendulum.

it's inverted, and then the car can like move backwards and that kind of moves this joint to the left and that pushes the pendulum, in this case, would straighten it out.

Whereas if this car starts taking off to the right, then this pendulum is just going to fall.

And so the reward is the height of the pendulum.

So it's trying to maximize its reward by enacting a policy.

And so the policy that's best would be to keep on exploiting that perfectly straight up line where you actually are in the zone of optimal control.

And then the exploit task on the right is about increasing the distance that's traveled by a little jumping thing.

Does anyone else have any thoughts on explore, exploit, or what else does that?

Yeah, go ahead, Blue.


SPEAKER_05:
So this I thought was super interesting.

As I was unpacking this paper,

So and maybe I should just kind of like lay a little bit of this out there.

So the reward is only given in this extrinsic value, which is like the exploit portion of the free energy equation, like given in number six.

And so, you know, I don't know.

You didn't say it explicitly, but like here in the exploration experiments.

The reward just uses that exploit parameter and doesn't do any exploration based on state or parameter information gain.

And then in the exploit task, it only uses that exploitation parameter.

So there's no need for exploration.

I just thought that that was super interesting.

And what would happen if they included exploration in the exploitation paradigm?

So why did they leave that out?

It was just kind of weird to me.


SPEAKER_00:
well good question like that makes me think about let's say there's some parts of the railroad track where it's different angles and so yes you want to maintain the pendulum being upright but also you might want to explore around a little bit to find a region where you can control it better so that actually makes me think of like doing a track stand on my bicycle there's some times where there's some slopes of pavement that are easy to do a track stand on and some are really hard to do it

But the way you get from a hard position into an easier part of payment, you have to explore.

And that means breaking the track stand.

So definitely real control tasks are related to the combination of explore and exploit.

Why did they use these two?

I think that the reason why, and let's hear from Alec as to the real answer, is that these are part of the open AI benchmarking set of like little micro computable benchmarks for learning algorithms.

Here's the open AI.

Let's see if we can even open it here.

Yeah.

So like here's their website and there's a bunch of documentable cases that allow comparison between different machine learning algorithms.

And so I think they're just outlining the minimal single dimensional, like sort of extreme classic test cases.

There's a ton of cases where we can already see it wouldn't work like a double pendulum that's chaotic or there's other kinds of things that this model just doesn't even try to do.

But this allows us to directly compare two other algorithms on the exact same task instead of inventing something that would like either not take advantage of active inferences strength or be like kind of an unfair example by making it

too nuanced like if we added in a reward another type of something that a generative model could take advantage of then we couldn't compare it to some of these other agents that don't use that kind of information is that i just think they were using the minimal case to ex to demonstrate what explore and exploit could look like and then future work hopefully would be about things that involve both


SPEAKER_05:
Right.

And so I get that.

But it just was interesting to me then, I guess, because there's no reward in the exploit parameter, that that's why they had to keep the exploit parameter in the explore task.

Do you know what I mean?

I just wonder what would be the results if you took out the exploit parameter from the explore task.

Would it then not succeed because it just would wander around aimlessly?


SPEAKER_00:
or would wandering around aimlessly or like without a reward to get higher would that just produce like a random result do you see what i mean i see what you mean so there's there's one there's one driving strategy where it's truly just making policy that's unrelated to its elevation and um that

depending on how that plays out it might get somewhere it might not most likely not because the space of the strategies with relationship to getting the flag is low but yes i i i agree that's an interesting question like when is it enough to just explore like when is novelty search simply enough when might novelty search be strictly the best

when might novelty search eighty percent plus twenty percent let's keep a little reminder of our elevation when might that be a relevant and tractable strategy which parts of these explore and exploit are calculatable um for example it might make sense to evaluate or exploit a current distributional uh value but how do we explore the space of economic strategies like

I can't explore every single possible economic strategy, but I might be able to exploit some ratio by doing arbitrage.

So there's some control tasks where the exploitation is really straightforward and visible and the exploration is hard.

And then there's other ones where maybe this car can't see the flag.

So maybe exploring is the only thing it can do.

so the really great question those are kind of interesting about these things being traded off so there's the explore exploit trade-off and how that gets implemented there's also the model adequacy minus complexity which is we want a good model but not too complex or overfit one so there's no a priori best way to trade off those two and then um

there's just all these interesting trade-offs that we can explore the space of.

Let's just look at what the results were.

So here the X axis is like where positions is from the other side farther to 0.5, which I guess could be the flag or at least close to it.

I tried to line it up.

Maybe it's the other way or something like that.

But we can see that the position of the greedy agent who just drives up, up, up, up, up and says, no, and then just goes up, up, up, up, no.

This one stays tightly bounded.

in a medium velocity regime and within a sort of sampling a ton from this part of the distribution.

Think about that like an upside down bell curve, and it's like sampling a ton from right here, but it's not sampling from up here.

So that's how there's a relationship between sampling and control because to get to certain states, it's like sampling those states.

The Epsilon greedy agent, which has a slightly different implementation, it does sometimes appear to get outside.

Maybe by the end of its 100 epochs, it was starting to take some trips out further and at slightly higher speeds and slightly further out, but it doesn't spend most of its time doing so.

The active inference learner, of course,

They wrote the paper, so it's going to be the one that succeeds, but it does, in 100 epochs, learn very fast, and it does get to some pretty high speeds and some pretty distant positions.

And then just briefly to compare it with the other task.

the two exploit tasks are laid out here and they are comparing it to this DDPG agent, which is a model free learner.

And so people can look into details or one could imagine that maybe there's other algorithms they could test it against.

These are all the kinds of things we can ask Alec about, but

we can see that A, which is the same as C, C is just the first part of A. It just zoomed in on really close, but it's like right away in both of these, after either like five epochs, like five trials, five seconds, or after maybe 30 or 40 or 50,

the active inference learner just starts to take off in terms of once it's hit on a solution sometimes it just it strictly improves it with some noise whereas the ddpg the two things that you see are first off it spends a ton of time near the baseline so it takes a while before it locks on to any useful combination of parameters

And then when it gets off baseline, it ends up sometimes succeeding, but still it's like perhaps because it's locally optimizing or we can ask why it is, but they're just not sampling highly rewarding states.

Even after it gets off the baseline, it does stay off baseline, but it doesn't ever get as high as the active inference learner does extremely rapidly.

So this is kind of where they're drawing their evidence for the claims about the potential superiority or preference for active inference.

Now, yes, you could probably train a DDPG on some massive data set and get better performance than they got.

They probably just used a straightforward implementation.

So that's where research happens.

That's what people study is, okay, well, can we do a DDPG, whatever that is, plus this other feature that is being used by this other group or...

What is it that's actually causing the active inference learner to get off the ground so fast?

And could we even get it off the ground faster in the case of this hopper task?

Or could we make a more reliable reward function for the inverted pendulum task?

But this is control theory at its finest, really.

And so this is what it's all about, is learning policies that map states onto reward.

So those are the key pieces.

That's why we spent so much time talking about the equations that are relating between observations, state estimates, and policies, because that's what it's all about is the observations coming in and then the policies being selected based upon the estimated states of the world and then actions coming out.

That's the Markov blanket of the organism's perspective, at least.

And then outside world in these examples is simple and unchanging.

Like gravity is gravity for the pendulum and for the hopper, and it's not changing.

But we can start to think about, well, what if there was...

diurnal gravity rhythm, how would the control theory change?

Well, there could be a generative model in the agent's control mapping of those P and Q that involved some sort of, is it day or night?

And then I have a conditional policy, whether I think it's day or night.

So we can kind of see how it starts adding layers there.

And yeah, that's basically it.

but let's have any last thoughts does anyone like what was something cool or unexpected what's something they'd like to ask alec about or that they're curious to learn more about now chill oh shannon go ahead hey um yeah so i was thinking about um blue's question and why not use the


SPEAKER_01:
exploration component in these inverted pendulum and hopper tasks?

And wouldn't it be because there's kind of only one state that is maximum reward, so if we're completely vertical or if we hop as far as possible, but if there were potential states that would have differing values of reward, then we might expect to see something different if we use the exploration component of the active reference model?


SPEAKER_00:
Great point.

Like if it were a bimodal distribution, then you can't just try to keep it as close to the maximum height as possible because you wouldn't know if you were locally optimizing or globally optimizing.

And you might want to be sampling across the whole distribution just so you know, or you might want to spend a lot of time at rewarding states, but still have some understanding of the total distribution to understand if there might be more rewarding states that you're just not visiting at all.

That is the whole challenge of local and global optimization.

And so you're right that in this mountain car example, local optimization is global.

You're going to get to the best flag just by, you know, so to speak.

I know that it was in the explore strategy, but in this one, it's clear as you brought up, if you're having the pendulum at the maximum height, you're simply doing as well as you can, period.

You don't need to explore other ways.

You could do a loop to loop and

that's the challenge though is you gotta you gotta walk through the valley of death to get from the local optima to the global and that's where these algorithms uh dare not tread because they have to walk through improbable or non-preferable like moving away from your target states in order to get to the next peak which might be absolutely higher in the exploit paradigm or might reveal new territory in the explorer paradigm

So there's reasons why you want to get through the valley of low likelihood, whether you're exploring or exploiting or a combination.

And that is where there's so many options.

There's so many weeds and tangles in the valley that the way that we're going to cut through it with a machete is infogain.

And we're going to explore paths through the valley that are the most informative for us, given our understanding of our own policies.

And so that's like, if you have a four by four versus a small team versus you're a drone, different policies, different affordances mean that you're going to be exploring this valley differently.

And then there's whether you're exploring for the sake of exploring and learning new turf or whether you're exploiting because you just want to have a high elevation or whether it's a little of both.

Those are all some nuance that you can add in, but the insight of active inference is like, let's actually think about what would be informative trajectories to take through that valley based upon a generative model of the landscape and taking our own policy affordances into account.

If you don't have a generative model of the landscape, you're gonna be doing something like locally just going downhill or locally going uphill.

So you need a deeper generative model of landscape.

And if you don't take your affordances into account, then you're lost.

Because you might be unknowingly optimizing something that's going to be appropriate for, you know, the drone to fly over, but then you're on the ground.

So you actually can't make it up that hill, but it's a policy that might work for a different organism.

And it's just not the one that works for you.

I know we're kind of like mixing metaphors, but I think it's a fun way to think about these optimizations because we are implementing a control process, something that we modeled with control theory.

And then also we're seeing it play out in like a very abstract computational framework here.

cool stuff yep so then they talk about the relationship with previous work i think i'll just put it on the screen people can um pause it if they want to look but with that i'll just say thanks to our cohort here for participating super interesting stuff and next week we hope to have alec on to discuss some of these questions so you can check the calendar event to provide a follow-up

survey where you can add some details how could we improve or what questions would you like to hear conveyed in 8.2 and for those who are not participating live please provide us with feedback or suggestions or questions that we can cover and just uh stay in touch but that was really great so thanks a lot everyone for the discussion

## gv8RuRiZTQA

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone.

This is the Active Inference Livestream.

It is ACT-INF Livestream 8.2 and it is November 17th, 2020.

So welcome everyone, listeners and participants.

Welcome to Team Calm, everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to active inference.

You can find us at our website, our Twitter, our email, on our public Keybase team, or on YouTube.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please do provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here in learning about these questions.

And as far as video etiquette for live streams goes, just remember to mute if there's noise in the background and raise your hands so we can hear from everyone on the stack.

Use respectful speech, behavior, et cetera.

Today in exciting Act ImpStream 8.2, we are going to have introductions and warmups.

And then we will, at whatever rate makes sense, welcome Shannon.

We will walk through the sections of 8.2.

As with 8.0 and 8.1, we are going to be discussing the paper Scaling Active Inference by Shantz et al.


UNKNOWN:
2019.


SPEAKER_00:
And Alec, thanks so much for coming on to the show today.

We're going to talk about the goals and the roadmap of the paper, hopefully from the author's perspective.

We'll then have a little pause just for an open Q&A because there's a lot of different directions this paper can take one.

So we'll just pause there and then we'll continue through the figures, just two of them, and just address a few different domains of follow up questions about the paper.

And then if we want to slash still have time, we can go through some of the notation and math again.

For the rest of 2020, we are going to be moving into Papers 9, 10, and 11.

So check it out on Twitter.

Paper 9 is going to be about consciousness.

Paper 10 is about scripts and about social interactions.

And Paper 11 is about modeling under the sophisticated effective inference framework.

for the intros and warmups, if everyone could just introduce their name and their location, whatever else they'd like to state, especially our first time guests, and then just pass to somebody who has not spoken.

So I'll start, I'm Daniel, I'm in California, and I will pass it to Alec.


SPEAKER_06:
Hey, everyone.

Yeah, I'm Alec Chance.

I'm based in Brighton.

final year PhD student at Sussex.

Thanks for having me on the stream.


SPEAKER_00:
We will go to Sasha.


SPEAKER_08:
Hi, my name is Sasha.

I'm also a graduate student and I'm based out of Davis, California.

I will pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen, you're unmuted, but it doesn't have any sound.

Maybe just reload and temporarily let's just go to Shannon.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, guys.

I'm Shannon.

I'm based at the University of California in Merced, but currently in South Dakota.

I'll pass it to Blu.


SPEAKER_09:
Hi, I'm Blue Knight.

I am an independent research consultant and I am based out of New Mexico.

I will pass it to Alex.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, my name is Alex.

I'm in Moscow, Russia, and I'm a researcher in systems management school and I pass it to Ivan.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, my name is Ivan.

I'm in Russia, Moscow, and I pass it to Stephen.

Stephen, are you here?


SPEAKER_05:
I'm going to try again.

Does that work?

Yes.

Yep.

Okay.

Hi, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

I'm actually studying a practice-based PhD through Canterbury Christ Church University in the UK, and I'm pleased to be here.


SPEAKER_00:
And now.


SPEAKER_10:
I am Mel Andrews and I'm in Cincinnati doing a PhD.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

A lot of different stages and areas.

So it will be a great discussion to bring to the technical side with this paper.

For the warmup questions, people can just raise their hand as they'd like to speak.

And I will just put up the first two questions.

They are, for today's discussion, what is something that you are excited about?

And then the second question is, what is a question you're wondering about?

So while people are thinking about it or raising their hand, one question I was wondering about was how do we trade off between explore and exploit?

In the two figures we saw examples of explore or exploit, but what is required to enact something that is able to mediate between the two of them or find a compromise between those two strategies.

Anyone have any thoughts or want to raise their hand.

Stephen.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I'm also excited about the explore and the exploit side as well, to be honest, because I think that opens up a big shift in the way that we socially interact, in the way that we organize ourselves.

So trying to look at a real foundational way to sort of approach that is going to be quite helpful, I think, in a lot of fields of practice.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Alec, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, am I unmuted or muted?


SPEAKER_00:
No, you sound good, sound good.


SPEAKER_06:
I just wanted to comment on your comment, because I'm also very interested in that.

But I guess I'll go on the record saying that I'm not convinced that Active Inference provides, sometimes it's said to provide a solution for the explore, exploit dilemma.

I don't think it does.

I think it recasts it, so now it's not a question of balancing

exploration exploitation, but they're both zoomed into this different objective function.

But in practice, there isn't a sort of magic balancing act that you get out of this.

So I think it's a good way to recast the exploration exploitation dilemma, but certainly not a solution to the problem.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Luke?


SPEAKER_09:
So I kind of have like a tangential question.

And thank you, Alec, for your comments, because it just plays right into, I think what's missing, it's very clear that if the environment is homogenous, there's no real need for exploration because the agent is not going to gain any, you know, any additional progress by exploring the environment.

But

I just wonder where autonomy factors in, right?

Like, so, you know, some agents have more or less control over their environment and there's no like real room for this or not that I've seen anyway in the active inference framework, like where the differing levels of autonomy of the agent play into the need to explore versus exploit.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Good question, Stephen.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think that that point about how to look at the agent starts to bring in the inactive component a lot more, I think, and the generative model that's kind of sitting inside the person and existential kind of sense making there.

so i think that's that also yeah it's like pushing this back from a real world perspective and saying okay maybe we need to work back the other way from complex multi-sensory experiences towards active inference as well as using active inference to do modeling of maybe kind of very clean sort of low dimensional

approaches it's like should we also be coming back from the other direction um and i did i've got an activity called conceptual action sociometry an activity where people move around space to understand how their orientation is during a moment of encounter and i've asked people to unpack it in terms of the three different areas of active influence the sort of pragmatic gain

epistemic foraging or risk mitigation or salience.

And it's actually really interesting when they break it down that way and start to think about what was I trying to do?

But from that kind of high dimensional kind of

synthesis of being in a really immersive moment and they actually people seem to who don't know anything about active influence actually were quite intuitively seeing quite a lot of shifts in those three different areas of focus depending on the type of um

event or moment that they were reflecting on because they were going back to an event and thinking about the focus of their attention at that particular moment in time and how much were they sort of bringing these three areas in and then i suppose between that you could infer something about the exploration

sort of desire to learn or the exploitation gain.

But I agree.

I think it does depend on the moment that's in question.

So there's a few things that kind of this is sort of tapping into, which I'm really interested in.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And to tie that just together with a recast idea from Alec, it's kind of like nature, nurture, explore, exploit.

People don't know about these binaries.

They're not natural kinds until they're taught them.

And then the resolution to these kinds of dichotomies or binaries, false or not, is not some parameter that varies from zero to one that trades off.

For example, when Evelyn Fox Keller was moving beyond nature and nurture, it's the mirage of a space between.

It's about reconsidering the situation so that there doesn't have to be something like a bipartition.

So that's definitely the direction that we will try to take it because it's a really cool idea.

The second or I guess the last warm up question is and on a related note, what would be an interesting control system or any system to model with active inference?

So we're going to go into like a trolley car and a hopper, I guess, and a pendulum.

And I think it will be fun to hear about those.

But we heard about the social and the spatial.

There's questions that we've raised about biology, communication, anything else that somebody wants to bring up or whether it's, yeah, Mel, please.

And then Sasha.


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
So what I'm excited about, I'm really excited about this kind of work.

I'm a philosopher, but with this sort of stuff, the active inference, FEP stuff, I'm like, please stop theorizing.

Just like,

Let's play with this.

So I'm really excited about this kind of work.

And the question that's motivating me is really sort of figuring out what the boundaries of these various models are.

So what boundaries of active inference are relative to the free energy principle and then relative to EG predictive coding models and that sort of thing.

Someone brought up recently

on Twitter, I guess.

There's a biologist at my university who's doing really kind of groundbreaking work in like perception cognition, perceptual cognition and stuff in, I guess, butterflies, but mostly jumping spiders, saltiste.

The Morehouse lab, Nate Morehouse is doing, for example,

Saltice Day has like very elaborate like mating dances and things and they're signaling to each other and they're doing stuff like like the evolution of color perception in in these jumping spiders it's really fascinating work and they mentioned recently or Nate mentioned recently that um

the lab is doing some like simulation work on how we evolve additional color per sets.

So you can, right, you can, if you have certain like genes and proteins for pursuing certain colors, you can kind of like shift the probability distribution, the range of color that those pick up, right?

That's something that evolution can kind of modulate.

But the evolution of an entirely different, an entirely new color percept is something different.

And so they're doing some like in silico work on that.

And I thought, yeah, that's what active inference, that's exactly what active inference should be doing.

That's what we should be doing, great.

So I think that's what we should be striving for.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for that very interesting summary, Sasha, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_08:
Thank you, Mel, for bringing up the jumping spiders.

They have incredible eyes.

You should all look it up.

But I'm interested in this from a developmental perspective and what active inference can contribute to how systems develop and communicate and specifically humans.

how our in utero environment and the activity of that process shapes the development of the human and kind of on a more broad scale how this can play into teaching and how active inference can be applied in the classroom at different educational levels but in a way that

sets up the environment such that agents are encouraged to explore instead of being dragged through the material as students often are.

So that's my curiosity in this.

And Vygotsky.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yes, a lot of Vygotsky fans slash colleagues through time on this discussion.

Any other comments?

but really great points there about like the evolution and the development of perception.

And then at the level that we can at least experience or enact agency, can we choose to see a color as different?

Can you look at that ambiguous pattern and choose to see it one way or another?

Can we understand many of these perceptive questions as being related to maybe not simply explore, exploit, maybe having an element of multi-scale agency?

I think there's a lot of ways that that could play out in people's life while also recognizing that we're not talking about just metaphors here or narratives.

We're also talking about this specific framework with the paper that we're going to discuss now.

So let's talk about those details, but then maybe we can dip back

to the other systems, but let's think about how this paper and also our special time with Alec will help us understand these broader questions, at least where we want to go after this short discussion.

So the paper, Scaling Active Inference, we read the goal last time.

Alec, maybe if you could just however you want to or however long, just what were you setting out to do or how did the collaboration come to be?

What were you asking before?

How did you get to this paper and this goal?


SPEAKER_06:
Um, so I guess historically the sort of historic, uh, lead up to the paper was just, uh, very interested in reinforcement learning, machine learning, and also very interested in active inference.

So it was a, those sort of, uh, natural overlap, but in terms of the motivation, I think the two communities don't really speak to each other.

as much as they should.

And so much of the work that's happening in reinforcement learning, especially model-based reinforcement learning, has direct analogies to the work that's being developed in the active inference community.

So stuff like the use of variational methods, variational autoencoders, the use of dynamics models, the use of trajectory-based planning, or just planning in general.

And these algorithms have a lot of similarities between the two.

The use of intrinsic objectives, these information gain terms is widespread in both.

The use of belief-based planning.

So all the things that we sort of touched on in the paper.

In my mind when I started out, the aim was really just to construct an agent using the machinery that would be common and relatable to the machine learning crowd.

But that was consistent with the active influence framework.

And I guess a secondary goal was also to put together an initial attempt to look at whether what needs to be put in to get some of these ideas to scale.

With a particular focus on, you know, this wasn't a biologically plausible suggestion, but looking at some of the objective functions, the expected free energy at scale, I think is of interest rather than, you know, where it's commonly looked at in these small discrete teammates.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, really helpful and a lot of terms that we've heard, but to link together the ideas of the variational inference with the belief and the trajectory based planning.

Those are all really cool things.

I just have a question about the at scale part.

So one aspect was that you introduced the continuous state space as opposed to the discrete.

But is there anything else that's meant by at scale or what does it mean to scale in this context?


SPEAKER_06:
Well, I mean, so I guess the scale just means it's almost defined in relation to what is currently common in the active inference literature, which is where your entire world is often designed by four or five states in those transitions.

So this paper presents a framework that can be applied to observations of

you know, 10,000, 100,000.

And so your state space or your observation space is much larger.

So that's what I meant by scale is putting forward a framework that could be applied to high dimensional tasks than the ones that we currently consider.

And there's also a second thing which is not really captured in the word scale, but also the complexity of the dynamics.

So some of these tasks actually have quite a small state space, you know, four or five, but the complexity of their dynamics requires large models of a number of parameters to learn.

So there's kind of a scaling aspect and a scaling in the space of complexity of the dynamics.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, very interesting stuff.

And at any point people can just raise their hand, but I think we can keep on walking through these areas.

And last time we did walk through the different areas in the roadmap, just how we introduce active inference and the current state, and then walk through the specifics of the model, show some proof of concept experiments related to previous work, and then discuss and conclude with some of these sentiments related to what Alec

is saying.

And I also found it interesting.

There's the scaling dimensionality.

Then there's the introduction of continuous state spaces, not just discrete.

And then often as machine learning, people might use the word scaling to mean it's about the number of observations, the size of the data set.

And that relates to the compute scaling relationship.

As you add, when you double the data set input, is it the same amount of training time?

Is it twice as long?

Is it four times as long?

Is it 4,000 times as long?

And so really interesting because there's also the scaling in terms of the understanding in the world.

And people talk about scaling and innovation and entrepreneurship and how do you scale a solution.

So there's a lot of parallel meanings and a fun and concise title because you know that the finding isn't going to be in the title.

There isn't just a simple way that says, oh, this protein does this in this species.

We're talking about developments in a modeling framework, but we also want to be specific about what those advances are

and how they relate to systems.

So maybe just on the roadmap, Alec or anyone else, just anything to say about it or why was it arranged this way?

Personally, I was just kind of wondering why the previous work is at the end.

Is that a difference in our academic conventions or is that just because it was more results oriented?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I mean, you don't get a lot of leeway in machine learning style papers.

I mean, previous work might go after the introduction or at the end.

But it's always, you know, introduction, some methods of presenting a model, normally quite short in tests, and the experiments in the previous work section in a very short discussion.

That's kind of standard across the whole field.

But the reason I think I chose previous work at the end was just because I discussed active inference, which naturally leads in from the introduction, and that introduces a little bit of maths, which then naturally flows into the model.

I feel like a previous work might have broken up that flow.

but it was more or less obvious.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Makes sense.

I think we can walk through the next sections.

So right now we're in the just open pause for questions.

I have a few written down just as far as just big questions because we're trying to be a bridge in this discussion and through our conversation between those who might be hearing about active inference for the first time, but they're coming from machine learning, thinking about how cool methods, perhaps with philosophical implications, might be utilized.

And there's also a lot of people who are in the active inference side of things or the inactivism side or the philosophy side

where the details of the machine learning might be their first time hearing about it.

So how will we just come from where we are and think about what questions and what kinds of fun things to talk about will make that bridge?

Stephen first, and then anyone who wants to.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I'm just curious because I know that the scaling question has been maybe looked at more from a philosophical perspective in the kind of active inference.

So what this paper really helped me do or helped me was it like broke that fear of questioning

the kind of these models because the like people like yourself and Anil and that are saying look there's a challenge here in the scaling like this stuff is being kind of used at these low dimensional spaces and basically it showed like a gap in the literature in terms of how to action that which kind of helped me because it sort of gave me a bit of permission to say okay it's okay there's a gap there

And it's not that I just don't understand everything.

It's just not easy to scale.

And I think this paper was the first one to explicitly say that because all the other papers tend to talk about, yes, we know how to scale, but in a philosophical way.

But this is like, OK, well, this is the problem from a practice perspective.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, just one note on that.

If anyone else wants to raise their hand, I really love this idea where there's the gap in the literature and there's a billion gaps on literature.

It's about which ones are salient and fundable and relevant.

So there's many gaps in literature.

And then when we find that gap, which is often very niche, like in a PhD,

and i thought wow this data set has been collected from this ant species but not this other ant species there's a gap in literature we don't have this data set on this ant species and then seeing that as a opportunity and something that's okay even if it's not your traditional field of study it's okay because you're at the edge like at the gap with us talking to the author and talking through the equations but this is what it looks like to look


SPEAKER_06:
across the gap and try to connect because somebody else has identified it as a research question or maybe you have alec yeah i just wanted to comment on that as well and uh entirely agree with what you're saying um to come to maybe the defense of uh the existing literature on to influence i think it's

viewed a little bit or this maybe it's just me interpreting what they're saying but um that maybe that the problems that they're um testing their agents in uh for instance something like the teammates are actually viewed uh as quite complex in a different dimension so a lot of these

reinforcement learning tasks stuff like atari uh most of atari most of you know stuff where you're really pushing to get state-of-the-art results with huge amount of compute and deep mind of computing into there they're often you can often get by with just this model free reinforcement learning that doesn't require any notion of beliefs or any notion of proper epistemics you can get away with under its expression so what i think uh

the active influence community has tried to do is look at simple tasks such as the teammates that actually, well, you can solve them without beliefs, but are far, far more amenable to being solved with a belief-based scheme and with this directed exploration and uncertainty reduction.

to show the kind of complexity that the framework can come up with.

But then you could also respond by saying that this is also thought about a lot in reinforcement learning and there is the question obviously of whether the kind of process theories they put forward will apply when you've really got the scale that reinforcement learning tends to be.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, let me add on to that because it's a really great point.

So a lot of times what's perceived as cutting edge or modern or advanced research in machine learning, I mean, go check the lay media and it's going to be about this many graphical processors or this size of data set or this accuracy or this level of skill using massive data.

And it's very much on the performance end and on the eking out a little bit more performance from increasingly large data sets with increasingly large types of models.

But it's actually in some sense of local exploration.

It's locally exploring certain frameworks and ways of doing machine learning, which is just computer statistics.

And so what this is like with this paper is a return to simplicity.

And it's a return to a slightly different way of conceptualizing some of the parameters and how they're related.

And the big data, just train it bigger, train it better is kind of like thinking that we can do

X without a belief.

We can train on Go just by watching Go, and we can train the laws of physics just by watching physics.

We can learn language by just watching regularities in human language.

These approaches, there's merit to them.

This isn't just about one way being better.

It's just that what is being done in this paper

is to take the free energy principle and active inference which previously had made these kinds of philosophically at the very least tantalizing claims like the relevance of a belief guided trajectory based optimization and search taking these very fascinating ideas a little bit out of the sandbox into the next level of the playground where now we can actually start to compete

or at least compare and contrast directly with the kinds of benchmarking algorithms that are used.

So maybe one day, you know, Active Inference Go or Active Inference Chess, but today we have the simple control theory parameters, which is one level closer to these kinds of use cases that are happening today, one level closer than the T-Maze or the three-state decision, is it a mouse or a hawk or a cat, that type of stuff.

Cool, just the questions that I put up, just thinking about how can we continue to deepen our understanding, which we'll move on from, but just like, what's something you wondered about, just always stick with that.

And anyone can raise your hand as well.

What's something you learned about while studying the paper, whether it was something that they wrote specifically, or whether it was something that you kind of went down a rabbit hole and started studying about, definitely that happened for me.

And then lastly, like what's something you're motivated to do more or learn about now

that you've read this paper and had this discussion.

Yeah, Mel, thanks.

And then anyone else?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I guess I just wanted to jump on that and say that I'm used to seeing people sort of try to compare reinforcement learning with accident inference or related approaches.

And it's nice to see something more that's more of a synthesis there.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yes.

So I think that if there's any other thoughts, feel free, but we'll look again over the experiments and then we'll sort of work kind of in and out about broader topics, but let's try to understand what was really done because this also is the point of contact with people who might be very familiar with machine learning and optimization control theory, but

for them it might be the first time hearing active inference so where's the common train stop where we're on board with the machine learning community they're interested in these kinds of tasks they frame it as explore exploit and as we've been talking about maybe there's like a bit of a re-imagination or a re-conceptualization of this

relationship, explore and exploit, or what are these variables?

That's what we want to get to at the end.

So let's for sure remember that.

But for now, let's think about being in common with benchmarking different data sets and different machine learning algorithms.

So maybe we could talk about explore and exploit, how these communities think about these, and maybe your observations about how they're different, Alec, in terms of first, the example that you chose to highlight as explore.

So maybe tell us about the mountain car.

And then when you tell me, I'll go to the figure one.

But like, what is this?

What does it have to do with exploring?

What does the machine learning community think about it?

How does active inference apply?

Like what is happening here?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, so mountain car is quite an interesting one.

It seems so simple.

When you do it in a fully observed environment, there's two states, one action.

This is the continuous version, so it's continuous actions.

So, you know, it's like the simplest task that machine learning people present in papers.

But it's actually one of the hardest.

So, you know, DQN, vanilla DQN doesn't stand a chance of solving this.

What is DQN?

Sorry.

DQN.

Q-networks, I have to remember that.

So that's the taking like the old idea of Q-learning, which is kind of was the biggest idea of reinforcement learning for this whole deep phase.

I'm just mending the deep neural networks.

It's the one that the Atari,

Uh, yeah.

The first like deep mind nature, David, I can't remember the details, but it was, it was kind of the birth of the deep reinforcement learning.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

So that one has challenges on here and then just continue.


SPEAKER_06:
I mean, basically the reason is because you only get a reward when you reach that, um, flag up at the top.

And before that,

that takes about 180 steps or 180 actions that you have to string together before you get any notion of rewards.

So just pure reward-based schemes really struggle with this.

They essentially have to do more or less random actions until you get out of the hill.

So yeah, it's a struggle.

And that's why it's kind of exemplified exploration

You need to care about learning about the dynamics or some other intrinsic quantity if you want a chance at finding out how to solve this path.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Very interesting, Blue.

This is just really reminding me of a lot of what we've talked about with Explore.

Explore a lot of the perspectives you've brought about how exploring how and when and where does it matter.

So...

Pretty interesting to hear, Alec, just how you phrased that.

And also just like to hear that it's 180 sequences of actions.

So this is not like control theory, like Connect Four.

This is like walking, you know, who knows how many degrees of freedom there are, but this is many tasks that have to get strung together in long sequences.

And then you said something about how it has to learn something intrinsic.

for example, the relationship between its velocity, position and policy, a little bit more nuanced nexus of action rather than just learning like simply whether, you know, go means fast and stop means slow.

Stephen, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, can I just ask the question about that when you say stringing together actions?

Because I kind of had this feeling that it was kind of a case of like,

you keep it by there being a desire to explore in itself through free energy that the car realized that it could go up the other side of the hill further because it could just have a reason for going there because of trying to minimize the desire to free energy around exploration and in doing so it gets that extra kind of momentum to get up the other side of the hill

but i haven't really got into a detail so just wondering how this kind of sequence of steps and maybe just finding yourself far enough far enough up the other hill to get enough potential energy just to go down and up and make it to the flag i wonder how those two sort of relate great question alec maybe if you have a thought on that yeah yeah so i think your intuition's mostly correct so


SPEAKER_06:
how it plays out is that this agent is evaluating different sequences of actions.

Some of those actions are gonna keep it where it's already been, which is at the bottom of this hill.

And then some of the actions are gonna take it into a place where it's uncertain about the outcome.

And that uncertainty is essentially valued by the agent that wants to resolve it.

So it's gonna say, okay, what happens if I do a little, cause it has to go left up the hill

I should have mentioned that before.

It has to go left up the hill.

Actually, it has to go away from the flag to gain momentum to go around.

So it's never gone left up the hill and then accelerated.

It doesn't know what's going to happen when it does that.

That's valuable to it in terms of epistemics.

And then it realizes, oh, wow, up the hill.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, let me link that to the question, the sequence of actions.

So imagine if you were gonna do a control theory optimization on shooting a bow and arrow.

So shooting a bow is a complex motor movement, uses probably many joints.

There's a lot of, you could do different speeds, different ratios.

It's gonna be dependent on the bow, just like this is gonna be dependent on the slope and the car.

So it's an enacted affordance that you're trying to develop an action sequence for.

And your action sequence in a game is often just a one stepper.

Drop the Connect Four token here.

I'll reevaluate after I see what they do.

But if you're going to be evaluating prospectively an action sequence in the world, it often has depth.

So it's like getting out of my chair, shooting the bow.

There's state spaces are very, there's multi-joint.

So it's multi-dimensional and it's continuous.

So that's why the multi-dimensional and the continuous are so important.

And then the depth through time is so important because you can't just be doing a get out of my chair or a shoot the bow and arrow short-term one-step optimization.

there's no opponent for you to then take a look at their move like in a chess checkers go paradigm or even a video game paradigm to some extent this is something about planning in an enormous state space and thinking really constructively about these intrinsic relationships so in the bow example you might be attuning to the tension between the proprioception in your shoulder and how tense the bow is

to know if you're at the end of your range of movement, or the bow is, and if you trained on one that was half size, and then you go to a larger one, or if your arm is hurting that day, or all these differences, differences in our abilities, these things all become enacted in the relationships that we're learning about the intrinsic variables.

So in the depth through time and intrinsic variables, if you learn that, hey, if I actually reverse and start accelerating downhill, a hundred time steps later, it's just better.

Like if I go to sleep at this time, a hundred times steps later, it's just better.

And so these allow for very non-linear policies to be selected because there can be temporal depth that's learnt as a function of the actual physics, basically, of the setting, not just like counterfactual, you know, if 13 moves down the row, this person does this with my rook.

That still is in a very if-then context.

And this is taking it into a totally different domain with a proactive action selection policies.

Yep.

So that's why this is such an interesting paper and approach.

And like, again, a branching off point, that's why it's foundational in the machine learning, because just like Alec described, like if deep Q learning cannot accomplish this task, then yeah, it's all great to be a human at chess or go.

But if that algorithm or even that architecture can't defeat this challenge, then

then we're developing something that's incredibly specific, which is great.

We should have good map routing algorithms and things like that.

But we're definitely going hyperlocal down a rabbit hole if it can't solve this, but it can solve Go.

I don't know if it is that case.

A machine learning person would be really welcome to help

fill us in on some of these details, but that's the kind of stuff that is interesting and broached in this topic.

So just to see what that looks like empirically, like the first hundred epochs are plotted in terms of the state space coverage, which here is just the position on the X axis and then the velocity on the Y and the flag is at 0.5, right Alec?

like the flag represents being at position of 0.5.

But yeah, continue from here.

Just anything you want to add on figure one or what does this mean?

What is happening here?


SPEAKER_07:
I guess now your description is great.

The flag's not 0.5.


SPEAKER_06:
The flag's...

is it oh yeah 0.5 yeah uh but i just kind of want to um self-deprecate myself these results kind of they're not i mean they're not bad but um we had a follow-up paper where we got this all working properly um called reinforcement learning for active inference um which is very similar but we use a slightly

I can discuss the differences, I think they're interesting, if you want, but just that the results are so much more impressive.

We can still, it's kind of both,

Hitting on this and also trying to advertise that work.

So in that work, oh yeah, if you can actually just show the figure in that.

So there it can solve the mountain car in a single trial.

And I have also the sort of state space spots that look a bit better.


SPEAKER_00:
So here's the... So just that left one.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

So if you kind of go, yeah, we should have the video.

The first time it goes into the ring, it just solves it straight away, which is much nicer.

So the other one in the paper that we're looking at today, so here it's being solved every time that it does it, and it just constantly gets outwards.

And we tried some harder tasks in this, like the half-cheater and the unmade.

Ant maze coverage, gotta love it.

Yeah, I guess that was just a caveat that I wanted to highlight there.

it can do a lot better than this.

But I'll be happy to discuss the differences because it's just one part of the architecture.


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

Yeah.

What takes us from here to what we just sort of peeked into in this paper?

Like what was the one thing that you added or changed?


SPEAKER_06:
yeah so when i wrote the original one to um so to get this kind of what what carl calls parameter uh expiration or parameter information again it's essentially trying to reduce uncertainty not about what's out there in the world but about your own model yeah beliefs about um your model uh and this kind of in a sense is you know what you don't know and to get that you have to have a distribution over your model

And in this case, our model is a neural network.

So you need distribution over your neural network.

There's two ways in the literature to do this.

In the first paper, Scaling Active Inference, we tried Bayesian neural networks.

There may be more principles.

You know, you're actually using variation inference to estimate this distribution over each of your parameters.

But in practice,

they don't work nearly as well as what we tried in the next paper, which is called the ensemble approach.

And the idea there is you just take, in this case, 25 dynamics models and train them on different batches of the data.

And that's kind of like a proxy for a non-parametric Bayesian posterior over the dynamics model.

You can do a little,

people are kind of working out how close it is to actually proper Bayesian beliefs, but you definitely get a notion of uncertainty there.

And there's lots of interesting reasons as to why, principle reasons as to why ensemble models would work better than Bayesian models.

It's also easier in practice to estimate stuff like information gain,

So that just turned out to be a hundred times better.

And in the machine learning community, people generally find more success with deep ensembles for both uncertainty calibration and directed exploration.


SPEAKER_00:
That's very cool.

Thanks for the great explanation there.

And so just to sort of rehash that or say it a little differently, the approach that was taken in this scaling active inference paper to estimating some of these essential parameters was done with a Bayesian neural network.

which Alec just described, it's like one way to do it.

It might be a way that interfaces pretty cleanly with a lot of other software packages or approaches, but it's the skeleton of the model and that's the diagram.

And then we think about how can we improve it?

And so One Direction is more analytical or more principled as you described it.

And that's like the fully Bayesian sort of specifying every little hidden state.

And that approach can provide some interesting avenues at times, but an approach that is also relatively easy to implement from a programmatic interface level, and also makes a relative minimum of assumptions about the specific mechanics of the system.

is this ensemble or deep ensemble approach.

So the deep adjective is just meaning you're going to have like a multi-scale or, I mean, a multi-level neural network with hidden layers, or it's just going to be deep and modern.

But it's kind of like just an adjective.

The ensemble approach is describing having a bunch of different models that are going to be trained up on the same or different parts of the data set.

And then you could look at the average of the ensemble, or you could look at some other weighted combination of the ensemble's performance.

And so it's almost like bridging the gap from individual testing, that's like the single model testing, to now the ensemble approach is like, we're gonna have a classroom and then the best answer from our nine group, all working on it independently, the best one will push forward or will average.

And then even another level beyond that is like the truly emergence, which is actually what the ants are doing, where the ensemble works as an ensemble in a way that is itself shaped by development and learning and evolution.

So right now the ensemble modeling is still like sort of, well, if you just split it up into many parts, you can cover more state space.

You might be able to train the model in parallel.

You might make sure that no single model overgeneralizes.

There's so many benefits that come simply from batching and ensemble modeling that go beyond just saying, well, what's the best single model?

or what's the best parameter range in this type of model, the ensemble can consist of a single type with a different parameters between the different ensemble mates, or they can be heterogeneous in some aspect.

So just really cool.

You went with what was implementable and a common point of departure with machine learning community and the Bayesian neural network kind of peaks in one direction towards a more analytical, more principled, fully Bayesian approach.

And then on the other side to modern approaches in machine learning, like deep ensemble learning.

Cool.

Let's look at figure two and what is conveyed here.

So this is the hopper task.

Oh, we'll go blue first.

Go ahead.

Sorry, I didn't see that.


SPEAKER_09:
Can you back up to the last figure?


SPEAKER_00:
Let's do blue and then mouth.

And then anyone else?


SPEAKER_09:
So I just wanted to ask, and this is kind of related to the next figure, but I just wanted to ask that...

When you did the hopper task and the pendulum, so I know that that was only based on the extrinsic value part of the free energy equation.

So you left off the exploration because exploration probably had no value in that problem.

I mean, I'm assuming there.

But I was wondering here on the exploration problem.

Sorry, did I say exploration before?

Anyway, so here with the exploration problem,

Did you ever think about leaving off the extrinsic part of the equation and just using the information gain as a reward?

Can you structure it that way?

Would it be different?

If the object of the agent was just to gain more information about the environment, do you think that it would have succeeded in climbing the hill because it would get to a new part of the environment?

Or how do you think that would work?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, not in this paper, but it does.

So that other paper I mentioned, the reinforcement learning through active inference,

because it solves it in the very first task.

It literally can't be because of reward.

We've tested it without reward as well to confirm this.

But it hasn't ever experienced a reward and it still solves the task.

So it's exactly what you're specifying.

It's just purely trying to reach all the parts of the state space.

If you just left it with explosion, what you tend to find is that it will solve it for, say, the first 10 trials while it's still the peaks of the...

hill are the most kind of interesting because they have the most extreme dynamics with the most variants.

But then after a while, the top of the hill is no more interesting than the bottom of the hill because it's kind of stored up there.

Whereas if you've got the rewards and the exploration, it kind of slowly transfers from solving it because of exploration to solving it because it knows how to get rewards.


SPEAKER_09:
Awesome, thank you.

I didn't see that follow-up paper, and I'm going to go read it right after this.


SPEAKER_00:
I know, we need to do an after-party, active after-party with the next paper.

But Mel, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, just what you were describing with stringing a bow, something like this, I think that was what really got me excited about

active inference in the 300 principle in the first place is the idea that with something like a Towers of Hanoi style problem, are people familiar with that?

It's like you've got three sticks and you've got discs of various sizes on the sticks and you've got to get them in a ascending order, right?

And the idea is that the puzzle requires that you go backwards before you can go forwards.

And if you're just minimizing or maximizing some function on a single level, if you've got a 1D optimization, you're going to not be able to solve a problem that requires that you backtrack in order to make progress.

And something like the free energy principle where we've got temporal depth, we've got hierarchical depth of the model.

is really equipped to solve these kinds of problems in a way that a lot of traditional problem solving approaches are not.


SPEAKER_00:
I totally agree.

And I think there's a quantitative and a qualitative.

So at the quantitative level, there's control policies that we can't have computers look beyond some locally non-favorable states to get around.

So we want to do these quantitative policies.

That's what this paper is about.

But at the qualitative and really the philosophical level, how do we come to grasp that?

with processes where, yeah, we're not always strictly walking a staircase directly to the top of the mountain, or it might not seem like we can do it at all initially if we just look.

And there's so much there with how we think about challenges and about exploring.

One actual link there, because Blue asked about what would happen if you just let it go wild on exploring.

And Alec, what you said is that the learning gets you to the top pretty quickly, because in that sense, it's similar to this model that also prioritizes reward.

But then after getting to the top, you spend a lot of your time learning on the most extremely variant areas of parameter space.

So it's so much like curiosity-driven learning where a lot of times curiosity-driven learning with no reward or scaffolding, it ends up learning, learning, learning a ton, shocking amounts, but then also spending a lot of time in the most extreme ranges of space.

and that doesn't always just play out like in the kind of online gutter but even in the literature we see a lot of the attention being spent on the extreme hyperboles and then the middle ground where it's like yeah it's kind of balanced and we can work on it together that is not as extreme of a viewpoint and so people spend less learning and attentional regimes on these kinds of

projects so there's a lot of like parallels that we can quantitatively model but also help us think about how we can say no you're just trying to make me explore the top of the hill i get it but the flag's on the other side so i've heard about the other side of the hill how are we going to enact a policy to get us to the flag together that's a little bit better than your hill is worse than my hill for example how could these kinds of things be ported onto like human decision making is a cool area

Any other questions on one?

Otherwise, let's talk about two a little bit.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, just one quick piece, just picking up on what Blair said there, I thought it was quite interesting, is if there's this idea of exploring the environment in different ways, but say there's exploring or information gain in terms of personal preference.

So for instance,

maybe it was a bit more of a con i like to always feel what it's like to go slightly up a slope and turn to the right that feels cool right so then you have this kind of like it's not necessarily it's like an information gain about having fun

So would it, right, say the car was like, hey, I really like to do this type of things because cars like me like doing that.

I know, you know, if it was a living animal.

So it kind of ties into what sort of exploration of the world and then what exploration of just being an entity that likes to do certain things.

And that could end up taking you there in another way or together they help.

Great.

Alec?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I just wanted to comment on that, because this is, I totally agree, and I think it's one of the most promising kind of directions or perspectives that active inference gives.

And I wrote about this in another paper that I can link afterwards, of this notion of, I don't really know what to call it, but goal-directed exploration that you derive from something like expected fringe.

And that means you don't necessarily, or it's just too inefficient just to have

everlasting exploration with no constraints.

And it's also too inefficient just to do have exploitation.

What you need is some objective function like expected free energy or model evidence that contains these two things so that you're not selecting actions to just explore or just to exploit, that each action is kind of shaded with both of these things.

And that way, you're getting an exploration that's geared towards your goals, and it greatly constrains the type of exploration you'll be doing.

And I think from an engineering, you know, that also fits with our kind of experience, maybe, of daily life, or maybe not.

But I think from an engineering perspective, that's crucial, because in real-world tasks, there's just too much to explore, and you need to prioritize that exploration.

And I think that's something that's important to focus on.


SPEAKER_00:
yep that's so beautiful and even another layer is the ensemble of mountain cars so now imagine we all see different things and we don't know the way to get to the top of the mountain we don't know the policy we don't even know what the end point is we don't know if the one that we can see close by is the best one or if there's a way better one way further away and then everybody

is who they are, and they all have their own landscapes.

And then through the ensembles modeling collectively, with or without information sharing of whatever kind, the ensemble, as we're seeing, gets better performance.

There isn't just one best policy of mountain car.

There are so many different ways to ascend the mountain, and then you open it up with what the objective functions and the policies, the goals could be, and it really is a great space.

Shannon, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, thanks.

I was just...

thinking about your ensemble of cars here and comparing this to like flocking behaviors in birds or even people who are foraging together.

And maybe I was wondering how, so maybe this entire flock is minimizing its free energy by getting closer to reward, which is food, but any individual bird in the flock is just following

local rules about like how close to fly to other agents or when to follow them or when to break off and find a new, like go away from the rest of the flock or drag the flock along with them.

And I wonder if every single bird is having their own little mountain car model, or if there's just one gross model for the entire flock as a mountain car finding, finding its food.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Well, one angle on the forging and affordances is imagine that ensemble of human forgers, but they're not exactly the same size or they don't have exactly the same preference or they have slightly different vision.

Some people see closer or further, they see color or they don't see color.

And so all these differences are what allow the ensemble to explore and exploit, especially with information sharing.

hey i was over under this tree and i found this but somebody else wouldn't have found it so we can all use the ensemble to take advantage of our um you know differences of the nest mates or the flock or cognitive diversity and then in the question that you raised about is there a single uh layer being enacted by the flock or is there a little mountain car as you said by each bird

So from a modeler's perspective, if it turns out that we can explain variance about the bird's trajectory by putting a linear regression on it, it doesn't say it's a linear regression that the bird is doing, just that it helped us explain variance in the world.

So similarly, the low bar here is that we can use this kind of model just like we could use another type of control theory model or action policy selection model to explain variance about the real world.

And especially because we see organisms succeeding, in fact, it's really the only ones that we do see,

This helps us explain those successful systems as opposed to like funny little gifs of, you know, a robot flailing.

And then whether there's like one layer that's being enacted and then the group is purely epiphenomenal and there's no downward causation or there's no influence of the group states on the lower level states, there might be some systems like that.

There might be other systems where there's an analytical solution, like a well-defined solution at the bird and the flock level.

There might be another one where it's well-defined at one level, but then because of interactions and emergence,

it isn't as defined or isn't defined by the same class of model at a higher or a more coarse-grained level.


SPEAKER_03:
Any thoughts?

Yeah, that's all great.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Cool.

Let's look at figure two.

So similarly, as you did for that mountain car, which was like such a helpful direction to take, what can you tell us about the Hopper V2 or the inverted pendulum, which I don't have here, but those were the two tasks, maybe more on the Hopper or the pendulum, whichever one, just what are they about?

What will machine learning people recognize or know these models as signify?


SPEAKER_06:
So Hopper,

isn't particularly exploration-based.

It's quite a dense reward that you get.

So you kind of get rewarded or dis-rewarded for each of your actions.

But it's slightly more high-dimensional.

It says two-dimensional there, but that's just the liquid.

When I say dimensions, I mean how many observations it receives.

It's more than two.

I think it might be like 16.

I'm not sure.

And it's just generally the dynamics that you've got to learn.

You've got maybe four actions, which are real value numbers between minus four and four.

You've got to learn how that changes 16 variables over the course of however long you're planning.

So it's a much harder task to learn.

So I guess that's why it was included in this, just that it's generally regarded as a bit of a highly tasked in the machine learning community.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And so what is happening in figure two?

What can we say?

How is it different than DDPG?

And what actually is DDPG for reference?


SPEAKER_06:
DDPG is, there's so many acronyms, deep deterministic policy gradients.


SPEAKER_00:
So what is that one doing?

And then what is active inference doing that's different that maybe enables it to have such better performance?


SPEAKER_06:
So what is DDPG doing?

So it's just, it's a model three reinforcement model.

learning algorithm so you have a policy that maps from states to actions and you essentially do a lot of maths from something like the bellman equation to get to an update for your policy parameters the reason that it's doing so much better and the reason that model-based reinforcement learning in general does so much better is because it's essentially it's a planning algorithm so

What's the best way to describe this?

Yeah.

Due to the fact that it's model-based, it can learn from every single bit of data that it receives.

So that is in terms of each state transition and as well as the reward signals.

Whereas this model-free reinforcement learning is just simply learning from that single bit of information that it gets at each time step, which is the corresponding or whatever your rewards are.

So, I mean, eventually DDBG after enough epochs would probably asymptote around or higher than model-based.

That's the kind of general pattern you get with model-based and model-free reinforcement learning.

Model-based is far more sample efficient, but model-free takes a hell of a lot more samples, but is asymptotes gets levels out at a higher reward.


SPEAKER_00:
Let me also add a layer there with a few other aspects from machine learning and the idea of the ruggedness of the landscape.

So if you're doing this task, which was described as a dense task, another way of thinking about these is you're trying to keep something upright.

So it's like very obvious if you're succeeding or failing and in the big landscape,

There's really easy to tell differences between succeeding and failing.

That being said, policy planning, especially when you have four variables of control that are projecting out to like 16 potentially non-linear connected outcomes.

When you're trying to do that, there may be many strategic mappings.

There might be many policies that help you keep the pendulum up.

Like for example, going a little bit back and forth with a certain speed.

Or you can go a little further with a different rhythm.

So there might be many, many different ways, even for a single joint of control, many policy sequences through time, many learned relationships that help you stay in that yes-no area.

Now, if you have a model-free reinforcement learner, it means it's learning basically the raw connection.

It's model-free, so-called, between the reward and the policy.

And so it may spend a lot of its time exploring locally a policy because it's like in the spotlight, it's working.

And then it goes to a slightly different area.

It's not working.

Where do we go from outside of the spotlight?

It's all dark.

No idea.

Model free.

With a deep generative model, it's not like this spotlight in or out.

reinforcement it's like we're learning these intrinsic relationships which actually helps us get a grasp of the maps that are going to guide us to search on the territory a little bit more exhaustively but then that part at the end which was so interesting that the model free sometimes gets to higher

final performance in some context that can be because a truly model-free search can result in some wacky combination that wouldn't have necessarily been approached that it just uniquely potentially not in a resilient way but it uniquely allows some performance on a task and so that reminds me of like the evolutionary computation where its goal will be to travel distance and then some will actually go down the walking road and those start slow but they can walk forever and then other ones just like fall

And so it's kind of like hacking to get over a barrier without necessarily a deeper understanding of the ecology because it's so blindly pursuing just performance.

So there's a lot of stuff there, but this is like really an illustrative example.

And it does highlight a lot of the differences between the model free performance in the state of the art in that as well as what potentially active inference could bring.

Any thoughts on two, or now we'll just have some general areas.

Basically, the first area was implications.

I know we've probably talked about some of them, but three areas that I thought about were like robotics, resources and allocation, and then rugged landscapes.

This one probably in the Southwest.

So any thoughts on these?

I think we've almost touched on related ideas, but if anyone wants to speak to one of these areas of possible implication, whether they do or they don't see what an implication could be, or what would another domain of implication be?

Yeah, Alec, go ahead.


SPEAKER_06:
So I also am becoming increasingly interested in some other people in

whether some, so I'm very invested in this idea of kind of a Bayesian brain and as active inference kind of as fast as, but whether some of these ideas from Bayesian machine learning that I used in this paper, so stuff like amortization might also be employed in nervous systems.

So, you know, we've had a few very, very big proposals for how the brain might implement Bayesian inference stuff like appropriation coding, predictive coding, the process theory that's most commonly associated with active inference in terms of message parsing.

But it might also be, you know, this amortization is also another real possibility of how the brain implements some type of inference.

So I think it could have implications for understanding neuroscience.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow, did not expect that message passing and predictive processing, predictive coding type models can be understood alongside amortization models as an alternate implementation or mechanism of Bayesian brain as a specific testable hypothesis.

So this is where the rubber hits the road with the modeling and with showing the deep mathematical isomorphisms between these different kinds of relationships.

Like there might be some paper, I'm sure there is, where like message passing is equivalent to Bayesian networks.

And then that allows us to bridge to big areas of literature.

And so if we do a lot of investigation in Bayesian brain, and then we find out, wait, there's actually multiple ways that could be implemented in different systems, whether that's through message passing.

So maybe that's more applicable to a computer network.

Maybe it's also going to be implemented by policy planning ensembles.

So then, whoa, what else is doing this kind of Bayesian-like processing?

So there's so many cool directions there.

Great topic because also robotics, or at least the question of implementation of action and selection of policy,

and from sensors and with actuators.

Resources in terms of informational, attentional, whatever they may be.

And then rugged landscapes is just, that's everything.

That is policy selection under uncertainty for any kind of system that wants to stay alive.

Let's go, oh, sorry, Sasha or Blue.

Oh, see you later, Blue.

Oh, wait, Sasha out.

Blue, please, thank you.

Wait, muted, but yeah, go ahead.


SPEAKER_09:
So I just I had the same reaction that you did like Bayesian brain amortization like wow I was just was wondering Alec if you could maybe just unpack that like in a very Simple way or elaborate more on on that Yeah, sure so The best way so I mean amortization


SPEAKER_06:
as it's realized in stuff like various normal encoders, but also other schemes.

We can maybe discuss a bit more together what defines amortization or just an instance, a way of learning a generative model and well, more precisely doing inference.

The key defining features for me, although I don't think this has ever been properly defined in the literature is this notion of having an encoder, how that would play out in the brain

how it could play out in the brain is just kind of a feed forward mapping, a feed forward part of say the visual cortex that maps from some data or a lower part in the hierarchy to some posterior parameters higher up in the hierarchy.

And when you have stuff like population coding or predictive coding, there's not this notion of quickly

in a feed-forward manner, mapping from data to parameters, you've got this kind of iterative procedure that slowly and sequentially updates the beliefs, those posterior beliefs, based on the data, based on some learning.

So it's another route towards Bayesian inference.

It's far more fast and doesn't require a current processing, and that kind of

speaks well with some things we know about the brain.

It's not all the brain.

The brain definitely does have a processing, but a lot can be done in a kind of very quickly.

And the second thing is that the parameters that you're optimizing of the encoder are optimized over the entire data set, whereas in something like predictive coding, it's optimized individually.

The posterior parameters of your beliefs are optimized based on the current data point.

And I think that has some, that might speak to some of the generalization capabilities of Bayesian inference.

And that's something that we're looking at at the moment.

So I hope that kind of answers your question.

No, definitely.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you so much.

Totally epic to connect that feed forward encoder model to the machine learning side.

So instead of doing like a back and forth expectation maximization where you're just updating back and forth or especially a

like a back propagation type thing where there's very, very complex interactions about how parameters are trained.

This allows us to kind of train on the fly and just learn as we go.

Now to the second point, which is the usage of the entire data set versus point by point.

This is like we're learning on the fly, but we're learning on the fly in the state space that we want to be learning about with respect to the entire data set that we have access to.

which is a little bit different than like you're kind of trailing your finger along a time series.

And then you're updating based upon that data point and what you believe and what you've recently seen.

That's like a kind of point by point way to use a whole data set to update parameters versus this variational approach, which actually enables like almost a simultaneous utilization


SPEAKER_05:
of the entire state space i'm not sure if that's totally correct but those are just two parts that hit me about the two sides that you mentioned alec stephen and then anyone else so i've not heard of this amortization so it's quite interesting it's it's almost like a reverse then is it it's like you you have a a big complex space of

knowing and you quickly discount stuff and the process is about discounting away rather than building up the model.

Is that kind of the idea?


SPEAKER_06:
I'm not sure if I've understood exactly what you're looking at, but for my, I'm not sure if it is, but maybe we could get into that a bit more.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, how would you define, Alec, how would you define amortized inference?

Like we see it here in the paper, but how would you define it?

You mentioned some benefits, we've talked about them a little bit, but like in this kind of new way of thinking about it, what does it mean?

Or what would it mean for the brain to do it?

Or what happened programmatically?


SPEAKER_06:
I mean, so this is what I was getting at earlier.

It doesn't really have a clear definition.

I try and define it in two ways.

One is how it's generally used.

If you see amortized inference in machine learning, you're generally, you should think of a encoder network.

So you've got a neural network that takes in your data

and it will output literal values for your parameters that would normally, and those parameters are the ones that would normally be optimized in traditional variational methods.

Here it's just, they're just spat out by the network.

And then you have some other learning method which updates that encoder for you and also your generative model.

But in terms of what amortization actually means, going back to the word, I think the word's in economics,

I think it's this idea that you, coming to the second point that I made where you're sharing the parameters of that encoder across all of your data, so you're amortizing the cost of inference is how I think about it.

I could be very wrong.

So that just means you kind of don't,

reset with each new observation, or you're not trying to optimize with respect to each new observation, and then kind of discarding information.

You're just sharing that encoder, the encoder, which is the relationship between the data and the parameters across your entire lifetime.

So you're amortizing the cost of inference, is how I think about it.

So if I find a bad quote.


SPEAKER_05:
So is it like, so as opposed to just discounting data, it's discounting ways of

chunking up the data or ways of analyzing it if that makes sense like you could have lots of different models and they say okay i'm going to apply them in a more efficient way over time as you start to infer it's almost inferring what models should be deployed is that the kind of idea and you start to take away the models which are less useful in a way i guess you could another kind of people sometimes refer to it as learning to infer


SPEAKER_06:
so in which might be what you're getting at um so in normal inference you're just doing inference but here you're learning

how to do inference.

So the learning, yeah.

So maybe that was what you were going at with your kind of model selection.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool, thanks.

Yeah, that makes sense.

I don't know, but I'm trying to find my way through.


SPEAKER_00:
There's a few dimensions, so it's really helpful to unpack it.

There's the learning how to learn, there's that meta learning elements, but also this is

really important and in the paper is the number of parameters remains constant with respect to the size of the data.

So if I'm trying to estimate the mean and the variance of a normal distribution, I know that I want to squeeze down whatever data set I have into two numbers.

And so if I have three numbers coming in the pipeline, I still want a mean and a variance.

If I want a billion numbers to come in the pipeline, I still I want mean variance.

And so it turns out that by knowing and by specifying ahead of time that you know exactly the size of the outcome,

it allows you to scale a lot better because you can know that no matter what you're going to put in on the inside, it's going to be able to be distilled down very rapidly.

Whereas another method that results, okay, well, we put in a data set and then we find out how many principal components explain it best.

that might computationally scale in a way that is very um disadvantageous with respect to the size of the data whereas this method can um do that and then as a sort of corollary there it's happening through a single forward pass of a network which can be ab initio sort of like de novo setting it up from the beginning and or updated in a learning fashion

And so there's a few dimensions.

And Alec, I'd really look forward to seeing what you continue to do with the amortized inference, seeing as that concept becomes a bit more formalized because this seems like really powerful.

And then if it also turns out that it's an implementation of Bayesian statistics or Bayesian brain, then it just taps into the entire message passing compute graph Bayesian net framework, which already has been the most helpful for machine learning and a lot of other areas too.

Very, very cool.

So I guess in the next steps, which is really, I guess the last thing that we'll talk about for the last few minutes, just thought of a few areas to go into for next steps.

So Alec, definitely you take the first pass, but the areas could be like computationally, what does that mean?

Hardware, software, from a math perspective, what could be analytically shown or what relationships would be good to know?

From an applications perspective, what robots need this kind of software update?

And then just educationally, how do we come to control our attention so that we understand these concepts as well?

or what did you start working on after this paper?

I guess it was- Oh, sorry.

Oh yeah, no worries, no worries.

I wasn't, yeah.

I guess you did this one, or where are you at now?


SPEAKER_06:
What the next steps are, I guess on this line of thinking, this line of work, the stuff that I'm still thinking about is what was mentioned right at the beginning, which is the balance of exploitation and exploration and whether the active inference perspective buys you anything in practice.

because, you know, we've got this nice objective, functional, expected free energy, and we can optimize actions with respect to it, and it does contain exploration, exploitation, and it motivates exploration and exploitation from first days and principles.

But in practice, you're gonna be, in any model, you're going to be fine-tuning those, the balance between those.

You've got a bit more of leeway to do it, because now you can

change the shape of your prior beliefs for instance uh and change a few other parameters that are gonna lead to that playoff rather than just having some uh scale or weight that defines them so some of the stuff that i've been looking at is yeah learning prior beliefs uh in order to facilitate exploration exploitation um

Because I think, to summarize that, the balance between exploration and exploitation is probably one of the big unsolved questions in control, reinforcement learning, neuroscience, et cetera, and for making these machines work as well as we'd like them to.

And active inference offers a new route to try and solve that, but I don't think it has been solved.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

That's really exciting.

There's just so many aspects to the control theory question when there's a lot of solutions that could work and maybe it's even unclear what it would look like to work, especially as we think about some of these systems that go beyond the merely just keep a pendulum standing.

But what if it's give someone a massage?

Well, that's a little bit of a different question.

It's relational or how are you going to exercise in a way that's comfortable for you?

These are control theory questions that are literally about action sequences.

And so when we start thinking about how we're going to apply it to different systems, having a framework that is at least moving in this direction of what you said is like with the reconsidering the explore exploit by adding things like reconsidering the shape of your priors.

So how can you step into a framework where the explore exploit is a dimension that could be calculated or described or kind of summarized, but isn't simply the underlying framework of the model?

We're going to get exploratory behavior.

We're going to get so-called exploitative or narrowly searching behavior.

That is not being ruled out by what we're discussing.

We're talking about another way that optimization could proceed that doesn't use simply the explore versus exploit or the coefficient weighting of these two through time or statically to outline its whole learning approach.

So Steven first and then anyone else if they want to give any like last thoughts, but this has been a great conversation.

So Steven and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_05:
I mean, also, if you go into the real world environment, you've got this explore, exploit situation.

But in high stakes situations, you also got like they often talk about risk mitigation versus gain optimization.

If you're in a kind of a conflict or, you know, a legal situation, because it may be that it's a question of, you know, which is in a way.

game optimization is a bit like an exploit but it depends which way you're going it could be an information game but whatever you're you're trying to do you those two two aspects sort of come into play depending on the state of the of the situation you know so you know explore exploit is less relevant when you're standing on the edge of a cliff


SPEAKER_00:
playing a game you know because it's like there's a risk mitigation issue so anyway i thought that might be interesting i just thought about you know doing at learning action policies but if you're learning an action policy where you could die if you're rock climbing or something it's going to change how you learn and so when you're trying to minimize risk versus failure attempt or minimize the number of opportunities you have to see it successfully performed or you can only infer it by observing it

These things may contain a ton of information in terms of how real systems learn, where failure is not an option.

Mel, and then anyone else who wants to close it out.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, sorry if this is, I guess, a sort of an ignorant question, but I thought some of the beauty of these active inference and FEP approaches is that they're sort of doing a kind of like multi-level dynamic outcomes analysis.

razor type thing.

So they're maximizing predictability while also kind of minimizing the complexity of what they're doing.

And so I guess what I don't quite understand is how the amortization of inference process works.

But if you're fixing the param, doesn't that kind of constrain the ability of these approaches to do that kind of Occam's razor type thing?


SPEAKER_06:
Not really, because the parameters of your encoder aren't the parameters that you're up to.

They're not the free energy parameters.

They're mapping to the free energy parameters.

So you could map...

you know, to, you know, just says that you've got to maximize the accuracy of the likelihood while minimizing the complexity.

So as long as your encoder maps to the part of belief space that is maximally accurate and also minimally complex, then you're still minimizing

complexity while maximizing accuracy.

And then obviously there's, what we haven't discussed is the learning schemes for, so the way you learn your encoder parameters is so that they output something that does conform to minimal variation of range.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so you're not actually constraining, you're not actually placing like additional constraints on the parameters of the actual.


SPEAKER_06:
Not on the parameters of the encoder, on the output of the encoder.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
I guess that's a good point.

So the encode, I guess a problem with amortization is that the encode is kind of not part, you shouldn't think of it as part of your generative model.

It's just almost like a tool that can map to the belief space of your generative model.


SPEAKER_00:
So yeah.

Just on a closing note there, that really returns us to this dual instrumentalism with rappers and rappers and is it what the system is doing or is it how we're looking at it?

These questions are very rich and so it's a great conversation.

Really, thanks everyone for participating.

This was such a helpful discussion and I think definitely while re-listening, we'll all pick out some questions for ourselves to follow up on and some...

curious things to learn about because there were so many good ideas brought up so people who are on live if they check their calendar event they will see a feedback form which would be helpful and anyone else who's listening or watching please provide us with feedback suggestions or questions but other than that just um stay in touch and everyone awesome work for this helpful discussion and we'll see you soon