## jHWCQ1dpoK0

SPEAKER_00:
All right, I hope we are live.

Hello and welcome.

This is Active Inference Livestream 6.0.

It is October 9th, 2020.

I am Daniel Friedman, and I'm going to be doing a solo contextualizing episode, I guess, of Active Inference Livestream today on the paper Tale of Two Densities.

Welcome to TeamComm.

We are an experiment in online team communication and learning related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter at inferenceactive, at Gmail, via our public Keybase team, or via YouTube, which is where you may be watching us now.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve on different aspects of our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And as far as video etiquette goes, mute if there's noise in the background, raise your hand, et cetera.

Here we are in ACT-INF stream 6.0.

And the goal of this stream is really to set the context for the upcoming discussion next Tuesday on 6.1.

That discussion is going to be on the paper, A Tale of Two Densities, Active Inference is Inactive Inference by Ramsted et al., published in 2020, online in 2019.

And what this video is going to do is provide context for some of the ideas, types of models, philosophical threads, and vocabulary of the Ramstad et al.

paper.

In other words, it will help contextualize why this topic is being discussed, why there's a regime of attention on this topic, so to speak.

Here are the sections of this video.

First, I'm going to frame the problem as being about what the free energy principle and active inference say about agents and the world and their relationship.

And then to contextualize different ways of thinking about that, we'll learn about Bayesian models and inactivism.

Just brief, brief takes.

Of course, you could go a lot into depth on different takes here.

I'm just trying to really cut in broad strokes.

And then in the last part of the discussion today, we'll talk a little bit about the philosophy of science as far as the difference between a principle, a theory, and a hypothesis within the Fristian sphere using his response to an interview question.

So next time on number 6.1, we're gonna discuss the paper with anyone who wants to participate.

So please save and submit your questions.

If you're interested in participating or if you're watching it after, ask your questions then, or if it's before, get in touch with us if you wanna discuss.

All right, so here it is.

The real topic that we're going to be addressing here is what does the free energy principle and active inference say about the relationship between the world and agents and how we think about this formally in terms of how we model it with computers or just cognitively as well as how we experience it.

It's just all important.

So this is a pretty general topic.

Here's one example of a world and an agent.

But world and agent are not only used interchangeably, as we'll later find out, because one agent's world is another world's agent and so on, but really just because this is a pretty general framework of relational modeling.

So it doesn't have to be the globe or the world as you exactly think of it and agent as in a robot agent.

we're going to be probably thinking broadly about what it means to be connected for two things.

And this video certainly is just an introduction to the context of some of these ideas.

It's not a review or meta analysis or final word.

It's just as I was reading through the paper, it was how I structured the information and it was how I was thinking it might make sense to read some of the quotes and use those as springboards to talk about the bigger questions

as usual, trying to start from the active inference perspective and then reach out to the broader questions as well as go the other way, I guess.

And

In this video specifically, as it relates to free energy principle, I'll just provide the punchline first.

The punchline is that generative models are not structures.

They are embodied and enacted regimes of policy, attention, and behavior.

So if it doesn't make sense to you yet why that's the punchline or why that's one of the conclusions essentially of this paper, then just keep listening and learning.

Sorry.

So in this talk specifically, the structure is going to be like this.

First, we'll go through the goals of the 2020 Tale of Two Densities paper, read through the abstract.

Then we'll talk about Bayesian inference models, kind of steel manning them, putting them in a strong light.

Then talk about inactive and action models pretty broadly, though there's a lot of nuance in both of these categories.

Then talk about agent world modeling in FEP and ACT-INF.

and previewing mainly by reading quotes from the paper and highlighting specific claims, highlighting how active inference and free energy principle build on this map and territory that are in play with Bayesianism and inactivism.

And again, the underlying question is, what do we have to say about how the world and agents and agents and agents are related to one another?

All right.

The paper is called A Tale of Two Densities, a literature reference there.

Active inference is an active inference by Ramstead, Kirchhoff, and Friston in the journal Adaptive Behavior in 2020.

And the goal of the paper, which I believe is the first sentence of the article is, the aim of this article is to clarify how best to interpret some of the central constructs that underwrite the free energy principle, FEP, and its corollary, which means related theory,

active inference in theoretical neuroscience and biology, namely the role that generative models and recognition densities play in this theory, aiming to unify life and mind.

And there'll be a consistent color scheme for the generative model and the recognition densities, because we're going to be looking to integrate these two different ways of thinking about agent world dynamics in the Bayesian and the inactivist worldviews.

And so what we're going to talk the most about here are what these two densities are.

So you can ask in the book, what were the two cities?

Here we're going to ask, what are those two densities?

Then we can ask, what is this tail that integrates these two densities?

What weaves them together into one narrative, which helps us understand and helps us learn.

So let's go first to the abstract.

We already read the title, which is the first way that the authors want to represent their work.

Now we're gonna look through the abstract, and then later on we'll end up defining and working through a lot of the words specifically, but starting with the abstract is the first thing that you're gonna read about the paper.

The aim of this article is to clarify how best to interpret some of the central constructs that underwrite the free energy principle and its corollary active inference in theoretical neuroscience and biology.

That may even be what we already read.

So same meaning there.

Namely, the role that generative models and variational densities play in this theory.

So those are the two densities that we're going to be talking about.

We argue that these two constructs, which are the two densities, the generative models and the variational densities, have systematically

been misrepresented in the literature because of the conflation between the FEP and active inference.

That's why at the end, we're going to be really specific about the difference between those two.

On one hand, and the distinct, albeit closely related Bayesian formulation centered on the brain, variously known as predictive processing, predictive coding, or the prediction error minimization framework.

And we'll return to how the prediction or the predictive brain is related or different as a

from a philosophy of science perspective and from a computational perspective, I guess.

All right, second part of the abstract.

More specifically,

We examined two contrasting interpretations of these active inference type models.

A structural, or really these two variational densities.

The things that we're eventually going to see brought together in active inference.

I believe, but if it's unclear, I'm not sure.

A structural representationalist and in an active approach.

And that's going to be our whole main discussion.

We argue that the structural representationalist interpretation of generative and recognition models does not do justice to the role these constructs play in active inference under the FEP.

So the main theme that's going to get returned to is that the computational side is very tractable and stateable.

However, it misses some fundamental components that are going to be really complementary to the insights that are brought from the inactive approach.

We propose an inactive interpretation of active inference, what might be called an active inference.

In active inference under the FEP, the generative and recognition models are best cast as realizing inference and control.

The self-organizing belief guided selection of action policies and do not have the properties ascribed by structural representationalists.

So that's just saying structural representationalists are wrong about properties in what they think because of

actually generative models being basically cybernetic policy selectors and

Their claim is that that makes some of the stances held by structural representationalists untenable.

So let's go to the paper.

Here's a quote.

The question that shall occupy us is how best to understand the function and properties of the generative and recognition models in active inference under the FEP.

What does it mean for one theory to be under the other?

We'll return to that at the end.

in light of the active processes involved in orchestrating, maintaining, and updating these models.

In particular, we examine two contrasting interpretations of these models, a structural representationalist, that's one of the schools of thought here, and an inactive interpretation.

So two different interpretations.

So we can summarize this up as a structural representationalist versus inactive.

Whose hot take on systems will reign supreme?

So first, let's just try to understand what each of these groups are really bringing to the table, because that's really interesting.

hopefully a strong starting point from each of these two sides can lead to a better synthesis in active inference.

In Bayesian inference, it's a big area.

This is just one way of presenting it.

You can definitely watch other lectures or learn from a lot of other more skilled people in this specific area about Bayesian approaches.

This is just one representation.

I was trying to make a compromise between things that were implemented, but there's so many flavors and colors of what's implemented in the literature.

So I just wanted to start with a really brief overview of the Bayesian inference.

This is a two level Bayesian inference scheme.

So variously, these two elements are known as priors and hyperpriors or priors in the data.

But here on the left side, we have data which are reflecting sensory observations like that of a sensor.

And then there's a generative model, for example, that generates sensor readings.

And so the question that is asked in the transformation from the sensory observational data, the lower level model on the left side to the generative model of the data, which is like often the higher order parameters in the computational model.

The question is, how do these observations influence or update the generative model of the world?

And so you can think about that as sort of like

empirical data coming in altering your parameters that represent deeper stances about the world so you have a sensor that fluctuates more rapidly and then you're doing some sort of stabilization of the overall readings of the sensor and that's like your higher order parameter just to give one of many examples and then the other question that's being asked in the transformation from

how the parameters of the higher order model influence the data is basically what observations are emitted here given the generative model of the world or the generative parameters of the world, which includes different things like world states, causes, et cetera.

So here's some of the features and advantages of Bayesian models.

So first, they can extend to basically arbitrary graphical models, which doesn't just mean models you can draw.

It means models that you can graph.

So it turns out that a lot of classical and non-classical statistical techniques

can be reduced down to this type of a scheme at the highest level, statistically.

It's discussed in Carl Fristen et al's textbook related to SPM, how these kind of Bayesian inference models relate to various empirical data sets.

So potentially of interest for people who want to learn more about that side.

The next thing that's good about these models is that they can be used to model multi-scale systems, so through space and time of different scales.

They have very tractable computation and implementation on hardware.

So you can take a data set and basically get useful information out of it using this type of a scheme.

So it passes the sort of utility check.

It's pretty flexible with having sparse or dense multivariate data.

I'll tie that to the second point here, which is that you can be empirical in the sense that you're learning and updating your position based upon data, but also you're formalizing the use of your prior information.

You're neither just informally combining your prior information with your newer information naively, just saying, oh, well, they're both equivalent because I have one of each, one of the past, one of the present.

It provides more formalized ways of dealing with

with information and depending on how much you rely on your prior information, you may only need very sparse inputs from your sensor.

For example, you might only need a thermometer in a certain location to know whether it was in one climate regime or another.

These models can also be fit with expectation maximization algorithms.

That's also discussed a lot in Fristin's SPM textbook and work just and in the work of people who have

done a lot more on expectation maximization algorithm learning than I'm going to go into detail in here, but it's a good topic to look into and one that I'm still learning about too.

Kind of as stated in a few points, these models are pretty deeply related to statistics.

of various kinds, as well as other mathematical areas.

So let's just go to the structural representationalist interpretation.

First, structure.

I think that there's probably wide latitude in what the structures mean, and there were several citations that characterized the structural representationalist viewpoint, so I'll let them speak to what structural representations and structural representationalism is.

I would say structures could represent data structures.

It could represent things having structure in the sense that they're distinguishable from something else.

So structure could be pretty broad.

Representations, that's a whole topic that I understand there's also a lot of debate over.

And we've read some other ACT-IMP-related papers on representations and their strengths and weaknesses.

i just think it is what it is and this structural representation is holding the views that the authors have in their citations and that's where we'll sort of end the discussion on the bayesian inference models and think about these are all really good features of the model what is going to be something that's going to complement that from a pragmatic and philosophy of science perspective

So the second category of models is this inactive or active models.

And here it's a lot more focused through a tradition of being action oriented and ecological.

It's more oriented about the relation between the world and agent.

So this comes from a lot of areas like systems and ecology.

So the two questions that are being asked in the inactivist perspective are first off, how the world is influencing the agent.

is a question about how perception is influencing or updating the action tendencies of the system and then the way that the agent is influencing the world or that causal arrow is kind of asking what actions are entertained by internal models and entailed through control mechanisms of the agent so both of the questions are about the joint niche between the world and the agent

which will be formalized later, we'll find, as a Markov blanket.

But for now, we can just think about the world and the agent being connected through this perception action loop.

So what are the cool parts about the inactive or the active perspective?

So it's interdisciplinary, which encompasses a lot of interesting work in areas like art, cybernetics, ecology, psychology, dynamical systems, sociology and tech and evolution.

So kind of also things that the Bayesian models have been applied in.

So it's not unique to this, but some of the work in these areas is very interesting.

there's a qualitative and a relational and experiential aspect.

And anything in the computational domain, it's usually a question about efficiency, whereas things that are in the qualitative domain, often it's about concordance with our experience or potentially even other things.

So it's an interesting and different development of theory to go down the route of more in touch with

phenomenologist's experience per se, rather than more implementable on modern computational hardware.

It naturally relates to things like enculturation, developmental processes, sociality, because one agent, the world could be the body of another agent or it could be a small community or something like that.

It turns out that this inactivist perspective is more amenable to this externalism, which we discussed in a previous Actim stream, and other kind of radical embodied cognitive theories.

So I'll just leave that there.

That's kind of more of a connector.

But again, there's more and more...

fusion between these two approaches as evidenced by the discussion that we're having today.

But these inactive approaches have definitely a very different literature base, different citation networks that are linking these ideas.

So I'm just phrasing them in a way that's not representing priority or importance, just sort of throwing out different features that differentiate it strongly from the Bayesian perspective, computational perspective.

All right.

Inactive models also, interestingly, and this is one of the reasons why they've recently received a lot of attention, is that they're amenable to different kinds of things that maybe people would call physical computers in 2020, like ant colonies, slime molds, landslides, quantum systems, all these different things that do what can only be described as special types of algorithms or computation.

uh yet they don't do all problems so they're they're uh more like a bitcoin miner than a turing complete processor and computing language so they're specialized computers if they're computers personally i don't think the computational metaphor applies so well because i also think that this is a a perspective that takes us beyond computationalist metaphors of

the world sometimes.

But at the very least, the inactive perspective highlighted all these ecological dynamics of intelligence that are only now being appreciated from a more quantitative perspective.

And also these active models, as you might guess, are part of a broader tradition of action and pragmatism.

So it's another interesting area that kind of intersects there.

So here's the simplification slash side by side.

First, I'm just going to, again, try to distill it another level down without leaving too many false positives or too many false negatives.

So if someone knows better about these areas, totally, I'm open to just correcting it and changing it.

I'm just, as I read through the paper, I just mocked this up to try to understand how these theories are different and similar.

A sort of quasi-Bayesian structural representationalist view.

We can distill down to this.

We can say that there's the data parameters and the hyperparameters, or just the parameters of one model and that of another.

And this can be, again, stacked up, multilevel, all these different things that we discussed earlier.

And the way that the data, like coming in from the sensor, update the hyperparameters, like the beliefs about the world, are through what is going to be called the recognition model by that community.

on the other hand the way that the predictions about the world state are used to generate the data parameters is a generative model and that is just like also considered sensory inference now it turns out that there's a lot of model and inference being thrown around and like isn't everything a model and all this sort of stuff yes it does um get a little confusing and so i've tried at a few points to be really clear and specific but sometimes in quotes um

They will use model or who's doing inference where, and we're just going to be pretty specific about what all the connections and the pieces are, and then hopefully it'll be clear what's similar and different between these two approaches.

So the outcome of the Bayesian model, like a successfully converged model that's running here on a computer, it represents a statistical converged multilevel model that represents the structures of the world.

so let's just think about the data parameters like the visual field like the sensor data on the retina so to speak and the hyper parameters being like where objects are and so even though there's no color vision in the periphery and even though there's low resolution vision in the periphery still i'm able to have a consistent uh relationship things look pretty normal because the sensory data are being generated in basic non-surprisal with the recognition model sensory data

So that would represent a sort of Bayesian computationalist perspective on vision and error correction.

and optimization on the other hand we can side by side with the inactive perspective so the inactive perspective again situates the agent in the world as being linked through perception and action and the outcome of the inactive perspective is an embodied and ecological action sequence or like some sort of niche interplay from an embedded agent who makes or is behavior and this is

a lot of the inspiration for things like plants, intelligence, or something like that.

It's just, oh, well, what time scale and what problems are you asking the system to solve?

And all these things that ultimately are the decisions and the classifications of the scientists

or so it's said, are used to talk about the different intelligence or perception or action capabilities of different agents.

So let's try to unite this under what is said by free energy principle and active inference in this gap, explanatorily and causally, between the world and the agents.

So on the top of this slide, there is a

figure one from the previous paper we discussed in five, I believe, and several other papers.

And it describes this minimal loop between the organism and the environment.

So this is the first bridge connector point.

So if you were on board with just the questions about the world and the agent, then we're still talking about just exactly that.

And

We want to build on the work and the perspective of the different insights from a few different areas.

First, from the schools of action, learning about things like inactive, embodied, ecological, pragmatic, practice, socio-technical, and experiential aspects of the inactive view that we discussed a few of earlier.

From the more inference side, again, there's a lot of directions which inference is being used in, but it's one of the words in active inference, and so that's why I'm using them here.

And on the more inference side, we can think about drawing the insights from Bayesian and computational approaches, statistical approaches, modeling, deep learning, robots.

So all these kind of interesting things that think of the world, whether

conceptually or just from a scientific modeling perspective, from a computational perspective.

And then also there's another level that, as we'll see, is related to the roots of active inference in the free energy principle.

But there's this whole root layer of physics and specifically here, things like invariant sets and manifolds

patterns, multi-scale dynamics, collective behavior, phase transitions, as well as potentially a bridge to things like unconventional computing or more advanced or more tractable world modeling.

Here we've gone one level deeper into that world agent mapping.

So we still have world on the left side in the teal and then agent on the right side in the darker blue, except they're labeled now as internal and external states.

And they're linked through these two specific types of states called sensory and action states.

So I'm going to go through a list of just features about the FEP and ACT-INF sort of skeleton of how the agent and the world are related to, and then see if that covers this diagram on the bottom left.

We'll see.

So internal and external states, so that's respectively agent and the world states, are linked through situation and model dependent blanket states.

So it's not like there's just one simple barrier.

There is something that is contextualized that's a functionalized barrier in the context of the organism or in the context of the scientist modeling it.

And so the states can be coarse or fine grain.

And that's really a map territory situation.

So

depending on how coarsely grained success in a situation can be basically achieved, then even very coarse grainings of certain strategies will work, for example.

And one thing that we'll return to again and again is that active inference is about this relationship between the sensory input and the action selection, not necessarily just the convergence on the hypothetical model.

It's about the action.

So

There's this dual instrumentalism, and I think it was a really nice sequence of points brought up by Maxwell and others in one of the five discussions about this dual instrumentalism.

And so to kind of rehearse what those two instrumentalisms are, so the first,

usage of these types of partitioning models is as a scientific framework.

Because any system of interest that you can identify, you can identify its inputs and its outputs and its internal states and its external states.

And you can almost think, well, what would make this false?

How could I be outside of the system and model it in a way where there was internal states that

influenced external states without action or vice versa so that might be something that we don't know how to measure or it could happen but if it's a part of your model you could specify it with a different topology we'll return to the question of whether you could specify different partitioning and have it all work out but i'd suffice to say that for now we're just thinking about the skeleton of this relationship between the different states and as far as modeling from a scientific framework

perspective goes, you can basically partition any measurable system into this kind of a model.

Now, the part that was referred to as speculative in the previous paper was as to whether this is actually what organisms do.

And that's sort of a philosophical area that let's touch on later on and in ongoing discussions, because I think that's sort of one of the areas that we return to almost every week in ACT-Infostream.

So just

Look at this diagram, think about whether you agree with the way that states are partitioned and keeping in mind the multi-scale insights from some of the previous discussions as well.

And could there be other ways that these are connected?

And then we're going to want to specifically draw together the Bayesian and inactivist ways of thinking about action.

Okay, so here we go to the section where I'll read some more quotations from the paper and just highlight, draw out their exact argument about what the different schools of thought bring into play.

So, first they characterize the structural representationalists as having a good take on their own models, but missing action as a fundamental consequence of

a real far from equilibrium agent existing in the world.

So the primacy of action means that, reading from the second paragraph, we argue that the structural representationalist interpretation of generative and recognition models, these two bidirectional arrows, while providing an accurate description of these constructs as they figure in some version of Bayesian cognitive science, so in other words, being a disciplinary tool,

does not do justice to the generative models and recognition densities that figure in active inference under the FEP.

So in other words, the interpretation of how those two types of models, agents and world,

models and hypermodels, how those two things are related, the computationalist perspective or the so-called structural representationalist perspective, it's missing some aspect.

And then contrasting with the second red underlined part here, in contrast to these other Bayesian, i.e.

purely Bayesian theories,

which are in effect theories of the structure, function, and dynamics of the brain.

Active inference is a much broader theory of adaptive phenotypes that centers on the control of adaptive behavior and that emphasizes the tight coupling and circular causality between perception and action.

So that's the part that draws it more naturally to systems thinking and to cybernetics.

All right, so structural representationalists argue that generative models function as structural representations, so no surprises there, with representational content.

Okay, a great summary of this view, which is a nice thing to say by the authors, reads that predictive coding theory, and this is being provided as a specific kind of sub-model within this Bayesian brain, structural representationalist

which we'll return to at the end as far as their formal relationship.

Predictive coding postulates internal structures, so that's where you get the structure part, whose functioning inside of a cognitive system closely resembles the functioning of cartographic maps.

Cool.

It might be said that on the proposed interpretation of the theory, cognitive systems navigate their actions, so is it not action-oriented, through the use of a sort of causal probabilistic maps of the world.

So there is a possible...

uh place for a structure so it's the maps are the representations that are in the neural system these maps play the role of representations within the theory okay believe it or not i guess so specifically this map-like role is played by the generative model

it is the generative models that similar to maps constitute action guiding detachable structural representations that afford representational error detection so here's what they're proposing they're saying that generated maps from some sort of map generator function are used to then do policy and agenda setting so action gets separated from second layer estimation in this way that's characterized as detachable

in that right side of the third line from the bottom.

So that's the perspective of the authors of this paper characterizing

hopefully in a positive light, the structural representationalists.

So those are all interesting things I think that are cool, as well as all the aspects of these models that are beneficial discussed earlier.

So on the other hand, let's look at what inactivism brings to the table.

In this section, we unpack the implications of the pragmatist view for understanding the relations between the generative model

the generative process and the recognition model.

According to our pragmatist interpretation, the organism embodies the recognition density and entails the generative model as a control system.

We then formulate a direct critique of the claim that generative models are structural representations.

So they're going to say because of embodied, enacted, whatever it is.

the generative model is a control system.

And then because it's a control system and not a map of the world, where are the structures, not where are the processes of the world?

There's no Google Maps for processes yet.

But they're going to formulate a critique in the end that generative models are not structural representations because they are control systems.

And control systems are not structural representations.

They're something else, process realizations or something.

So here's what inactivism ends up adding.

It ends up providing a pretty natural, pragmatic, and action-oriented perspective on active inference modeling.

It brings all of these 4E, 5E cognitive perspectives in.

This is really an interesting area of research.

Maybe there's other adjectives I can add here, but it just usually is a bunch of Es.

Inactivism is something that natural systems can carry out and it's something that we can grasp, at least at the atomic level, even simulate sometimes computationally.

And what is

being gained by phrasing the entire system as a control system for action rather than having a so-called detachable interface like we were seeing in the previous approach, by framing it explicitly about action, you end up training on small or large data sets and evolving iterations of systems with an eye towards function rather than with an eye towards structure.

um and that can look like a lot of different things in different areas so a few other examples of previous work in the control systems area are like cybernetics also control systems can include elements that are game players they can include uh elements of control that have to do with swarm control as well this was an interesting paragraph from a technical point of view active inference and perceptual inference are not merely two sides of the same coin

Instead, active inference is the name of the formulation for policy selection.

What advocates of the Bayesian brain call perceptual inference is just one moment of the policy selection process in active inference under the FEP, namely state estimation.

So your big deal is just a parameter in our model.

The issue we want to press here, repeat, is that the active inference framework implies that perception is a form of action.

That is, action and perception cannot be pulled apart as they sometimes are in the Bayesian brain framework.

So that's that detachable critique from the inactivist to the structuralism.

They say, because you're thinking structurally, whatever that means, you have some detachability between form and function.

We have a non-distinction between form and function because there's all these different inactive things happening.

So we're going to have a better perspective because we can already computationally model our perspective too, just like you could.

So closer to the end of the paper, they write, in summary, the role of a generative model is subtle in active inference.

The generative model itself never actually exists outside the dynamics.

That is, outside the adaptive actions and policy selection of the organism.

Well, and so I'll just note there that adaptive means that there's a striving for success, but just because something is adaptive doesn't mean everyone adapts.

Within the dynamics, it provides a point of reference or definition of variational free energy, or more precisely, a definition of the gradients with respect to internal and active states.

Given that the vicarious realization of the generative model through a minimization of the variational free energy can only be through action and changes in internal state, we can think of the generative model as being enacted and of the recognition density as being embodied.

So what is being said here is because there's sort of this thermodynamic forwardness that drives the active inference process as far from equilibrium systems doing what they do,

because those two things are enacted and embodied, and because it maps onto some of these previous distinctions that were raised and at least computationally resolved in the computationalist paradigm.

So we want to draw those mappings about data and about higher order perceptions of data, map that onto our understanding of the world, but not end up computationalizing the world per se.

That's one implication.

There's probably others.

And then they say, this speaks directly to embodied and inactive approaches in cognitive neuroscience and provides a computationally tractable framework for the metaphors mobilized by these paradigms.

So they're saying like, we'll be able to computationally, so more tractably, do some of the stuff that people thought philosophically or ecologically would be cool.

Representationalists argue that generative models encode exploitable structural information about the world.

Our analysis suggests that this is false.

Indeed, in this article, we sought to underpin the claim that generative models do not encode anything directly.

They are rather expressed in embodied activity and leverage information encoded in the recognition density, which is an approximate posterior belief or best guess.

Assuming our conclusion is correct, and why wouldn't you?

Our inactive inference proposal serves to free us from a standard but flawed philosophical assumption about the nature and explanatory basis of cognition and adaptive behavior.

So that's the closing words of the paper.

And they

come out hard with the implications of action on the Bayesian computationalist worldview.

Let's look a little bit about how active inference steps into that gap between the agent world gap and then also between the Bayesian computationalist and then the more inactive and embedded approach.

So here's another quote from the paper.

They write, in active inference under the FEP, which again we'll return to, the generative and recognition models are best cast as realizing inference and control, the belief-guided selection of action policies.

So again, more like cybernetics, less like image classifiers.

And do not have the properties ascribed by structural representationalists.

Again, read them if you want to figure out exactly what you think they actually are talking about.

We thus provide a philosophical and information-theoretic justification for an inactive view of generative models under the FEP.

So if you read the paper, you might learn some more details about why they argue that the generative model is inactivist

in active inference under the auspices of the FEP.

But here's what they end up coming to.

They end up linking these two states.

Now, I've actually not put any labels on either of these two nodes to emphasize that there's a wide range of relationships that the nodes can have because it's

Again, a general graphical model.

And also it's just going to depend on the scientist and how it's being modeled from a scientific instrumentation list point of view.

And then if you're talking about organism, a niche or organism, an organism like improvisation, then again, it depends on the situation and how you're going to be measuring it.

So we'll just leave the labels off.

But the model that is like the one that goes from the

data, like the retinal data, to the higher order model of the world.

It's still in orange on the top.

And that's the generative model or the inference.

And then the recognition models are actually, this one might be flipped.

I'm not exactly sure.

But so sorry if the colors are messed up on this one slide.

But the key aspect is that inference is what's happening from the data to the higher order priors of the world on the top in orange.

And so that's like a signal processing perspective, which lends itself naturally to predictive processing and all these other things we'll get to.

And then on the bottom you have on the recognition models side, you have control.

So these models are not just being used to recognize stimuli in terms of making structural representations of the world or updating them, but rather in terms of their embodied and inactive control policies.

So because of this inactive insight or interface and the pragmatic term, the FEP

frames itself especially in this multi-level embedded way as being something that integrates the two models by allowing for hopefully the mathematics to be partitioned the way that we expect and would hope that these kind of well behaved bayesian models sometimes can behave but also have all the richness of the inactivist perspective and be able to integrate these multi-scale models so

We can think of kind of a few generations of the active inference development and just think what are the commonalities here in the different waves of the development.

And this is as per a recent discussion that was really helpful.

Hopefully I'm representing it roughly accurately with Maxwell and Axel and Alec.

And in the early phrasings of active inference, there was a local one-step, you can think, expectation maximization algorithm.

So only looking one step ahead in time led to relatively local alignment of the model with the sensory data.

A second iteration or increase in the nuance of active inference came with this paper on inactive inference and others, which introduced temporal depth and niche into the equations, as well as things like planning and agent embeddedness and the beginnings of valence.

And then in some of the more recent work, like a 2019 and 2020, there's work related to agent learning and affect and these sophisticated or counterfactual aspects of action and cognition and counterfactuals about belief.

All the stuff that I really would love to learn more about.

So in the next and last slide,

part of this stream.

We're going to talk just first coat of paint about the connection between a few different topics and a few different philosophy of science topics.

So the first set of topics, the scientific topics, are the Bayesian brain, predictive coding, active inference, and the free energy principle.

And then we're going to see how these different frameworks or theories or principles or whatever they are, we'll define them.

How are they all linked specifically as theories, frameworks, hypotheses, and connected by falsification or other mechanisms of comparison?

And then on the right side is this meme.

And so on the top right, this is sort of reflected to get the punchline first here, too.

On the bottom is a 2018 Alias Bulletin interview with Carl Fristen and our departed dearly colleague Martin Forger.

And in this interview, there's sort of a philosophy of science progression that I'm going to walk through a little bit of today and lay out, hopefully to clarify the differences between some of these different theories or what level of science are they really striking at.

And in this meme on the top is the essentialist and the positivist perspective.

So the essentialist being the idea that the

Objects or things have meaning in themselves, not just as in relation with other objects.

And positivist being the idea that positive claims about nature are made through measurement and science.

Then in the second panel is the utilitarian, so defined based upon what they perceive their value functionally to be.

And then falsificationist, which as we'll return to is about a theory that makes a prediction that would make it incorrect or make it untenable or increasingly untenable to hold.

And then the third panel is the pluralist and the Bayesian.

And so in this worldview,

there's understood to be a balance between novelty and conservation, and that a somewhat optimal balance for certain types of ultimately utilitarian or pluralist views, a certain value of parameters can ultimately be struck.

But there's never going to be a perfect single value because there's still this question about values to bring to the table.

So not to take it to world modeling, but you're thinking about these issues as Bayesians, pluralists.

And then in this paper, Friston just sort of

as another level that almost merits this following chart that I'll show that really lays out again what the FEP and the ACT-INF are and how they're related to specific testable hypotheses, because I know that's a common thing that people want to talk about.

So the green is what Martin and I had asked.

We wrote

in other words what is explained by the entropic reduction within the free energy principle that is not explained by any model parameters any other frameworks so this was in an attempt to understand what a lot of people are trying to understand which is what are we getting above and beyond as a value add or conceptually or utilitarian perspective whatever it is just what are we getting by modeling this quantity as you've laid it out in these certain works

And here's what Fristin responded.

I think it is useful to make a fundamental distinction at this point that we can appeal to later.

The distinction is between a state and a process theory, i.e.

the difference between a normative principle that things may or may not conform to and a process theory or hypothesis about how that principle is realized.

Under this distinction, the free energy principle stands out in stark distinction to things like predictive coding and the Bayesian brain hypothesis.

This is because the free energy principle is what it is, a principle.

Like Hamilton's principle of stationary action, it cannot be falsified.

So that was obviously an almost inflammatory stance for many.

They fainted when they heard Friston say that FEP cannot be falsified.

It cannot be disproven.

In fact, there's not much you can do with it.

That's, you know, the other choice soundbite, right?

There's not much you can do with it.

Oh, well, then what are we doing here, right?

Unless you ask whether measurable systems conform to the principle.

On the other hand, hypotheses that the brain performs some sort of Bayesian inference

or predictive coding are what they are, hypotheses.

These hypotheses may or may not be supported by empirical evidence.

So I'm going to just lay out this chart on this continuum to get at the distinction between all these different philosophy of science terms, principle, theory, framework, everything.

This is going to be a continuum on the bottom on the X axis from the left side being more theoretical or abstract, moving through the scientific endeavor to the statistical and the applied.

So this isn't a ranking so much as it is a continuum just from abstract to practice based and individual people can can collaborate and exist across multiple layers of

wanting to understand how this all works.

And as sort of laid out in what I'll present as a slightly clarified and I believe a little bit interpreted unpacking of what Fristin wrote in that paragraph, I'm going to try to lay it out very clearly.

There's some gray area, but I think this is just one way to lay it out.

So towards the most theoretical and abstract side,

we have principles, which are axioms and invariances.

So these are some of the things that you can't falsify.

And I thought a lot about that when I was thinking about what to say about this.

And one thing that it made me think about was Gödel Escher Bach, the 1979 book by Hofstetter, which is a really exciting exploration about a lot of these topics related to axioms and logic.

And also it reminded me of the law of conservation of stoichiometry in chemistry.

So not just the law of conservation of mass or mass energy, but of stoichiometry and chemistry.

If you'll remember from taking a course, it's about balancing the equations.

And so it's a rule within a certain framework of problem solving that equations have to be balanced.

Now, there's also a slightly stronger, more general belief that there's a conservation, unless there's a nuclear reaction or an alchemical transformation, that there's a conservation of chemical elements.

That because there's such a strong conservation at the nano level, that there's also some sort of generalized conservation at a higher level.

So that's a belief in a principle, and that ends up framing what you see, how you see it, how you measure it, how you compare it.

It tends to be normative, which means using like a should or an ought, like, oh, well, this motor ought to waste heat relative to an 100% efficient motor.

So I think we can pretty much detach from some of the emotional, psychological baggage on that and just think about the scientific normativity and then what it actually says and then our response to it, which is absolutely valid and important.

is something we can work with and grow from.

The principle doesn't need to apply to all scales.

So like the laws that say, the patterns that say that the number of molecules in a chemical reaction are conserved, it doesn't need to say everything about social interactions.

So they don't need to be at all scales.

Sometimes they're sort of incorrectly called laws.

I'm just not really into thinking about nature as having laws.

I think laws are something that people make.

And then there's patterns in nature.

And whose last name you attach to which law is just Wikipedia URL bragging rights.

What matters is the patterns that we're discovering.

So again, the conservation of mass energy pattern law.

And this kind of returns us to this dual instrumentalism of principles like the free energy principle, which is that on one hand, it can be about the system.

You can choose to model the system as neither gaining or losing energy, or as always decreasing free energy.

Or you could make a stronger claim that the principle is actually how the system is, in which case you're saying that it is the system's functional principle, that it is under natural selection, or it does follow the second law of thermodynamics.

All right, so drilling down a little bit towards the scientific and the statistical.

A theory is a coherent set of ideas, claims, and logic, and it makes specific testable hypotheses that are drawn from theory that's upstream.

And so that's sort of the confusing thing is from an abstractness ranking, the principle is the ground, the bedrock of the theory, the water that the theory swims in,

But it's more on the theoretical side.

So theory isn't even the most theoretical thing.

And then people say, oh, yes, I do theory or something like that.

And that can mean a broad range of things from anywhere from the middle to the left side.

A theory, when it's partnered with tools and approaches, is a framework.

Also, community of practice is important, but frameworks are important too.

And the way that theories are compared is often through falsification or theory comparison.

So falsification is just like the best model in play is the one that we go with.

If there's some metaphor out there about hunting ducks or something with a shotgun, I don't know.

And there's other mechanisms of theory, comparison, theory, anarchy, all these wild thoughts.

But the falsificationist worldview that like we go with what works and then we end up having a paradigm shift.

moving into a new set of dorms around a scientific topic like landslide, either in a little micro sense or in a larger macro sense, all this kind of stuff.

There's a lot of depth.

I am just going to briefly just say people have thought about these kinds of theory comparators.

Now in the,

Alias interview response.

Friston mentioned two kinds of theories.

He mentioned state theory, which he used to mean something pretty similar to a normative principle.

And those were about system states.

And then he combined the normativity with it being about the system state.

So it said that there was a normative principle.

stance that the system will conform to a certain way of being and it's about the states and that was contrasted with the process theory which is about how systems change which is why it's called a process theory

All right, now to get to a specific hypothesis.

A hypothesis is a specific prediction about the system that's under the auspices of a specific theory, whether it's a state theory or a process theory.

And a hypothesis is tested with statistical approaches.

It can also be explored with visualization.

So the hypothesis is tested from a falsificationist paradigm at the quantitative level.

So at the confidence level of 0.01 or 0.001 or according to this metric.

Those are quantitative sort of in the trenches falsificationism of null hypothesis, which is that there's no influence of a certain treatment, for example.

Whereas the theory falsificationism that's like one layer higher up is a little bit more like logical battles being fought.

No single t-test brings down a theory but can take down a hypothesis.

And so let's break this down for the free energy principle specifically.

So as Fristin had mentioned, the free energy principle is this principle.

And I think in future times, it would be cool to talk about what makes it a principle.

What are the assumptions?

What are the implications?

What are related assumptions?

And for now, we'll just say that downstream of the free energy principle is active inference.

Active inference is a process theory.

It's a coherent set of ideas, claims, and logic about the world.

It is going to be making specifically testable hypotheses, specifically about the structure of action and about how agents interact with their environment.

examples of theories that have overlap with active inference for example licensing the use of the people who are structural representationalists using the bayesian brain metaphor to think about the bayesian brain as a theory we can think about the hypotheses that are specifically made by that theory so for example the claims might be something like at the first level

that the brain can be modeled with Bayesian stats.

And then at the second level, like that the brain implements Bayesian statistical algorithms in what it does in nature.

So that's that dual instrumentalism.

And then another area of theories that has overlapped with active inference, as well as the Bayesian brain, just didn't want to clutter it, was predictive coding.

And two hypotheses in predictive coding are, one would be sense data can be analyzed relative to now casted predictions, now casting.

And the second level would be something like organismal sensory relays are predictive.

So again, it's the dual instrumentalism where there's one level about how the scientist analyzes the world, which is that, yes, we can use this framework to understand data, even data about organisms or data about simulations or other systems.

And then at the second level, it's actually the claim about the world.

And so in both of these cases, there are hypotheses because they are under an axiomatic framework reflected by the free energy principle.

That's why it keeps on saying inactive inference under the free energy principle and the active inference framework also draws on not just the Bayesian brain predictive coding, but just to label one more up there is there's this inactive area that we talked a lot about today and all the cool insights that the inactive

side has to bring to the table.

So maybe another time we could think about what the principles underlying in activism are.

Are there fundamentals?

It's an area I'd love to learn more about.

Are there frameworks for inactive inference?

I know that we've had some participants on the Act-Imp stream who had a lot more experience and practice with these kinds of things.

So

We want to see how we can make Active Inference this hub for realizing the ideas and the people and the projects coming together to kind of make it real to show how these ideas are all connected and see where we can kind of take these ideas just conceptually and from an impact perspective.

So that's the end of 6.0.

Thanks for participating.

We provide follow-up forums to live participants.

It'll be pretty easy this one.

Any feedback, suggestions, or questions would be totally welcome.

Stay in communication with us.

And yeah, the next live stream will be 6.1.

That is going to be on October 13th on the Tuesday.

Then we are going to have 6.2 on the 20th.

That's going to be a follow-up discussion.

So if you're interested in 7 a.m.

Pacific time for 60 to 90 minutes on October 13th or October 20th,

Those are gonna be discussing this paper, A Tale of Two Densities.

Then on October 27th and November 3rd, both Tuesdays, same time, we're gonna be discussing another paper.

You can check it out on our Twitter if you wanna learn more

And if you're watching this after those dates, thanks for watching.

Please feel free to still leave a comment.

And yeah, thanks a lot for watching.

Just let us know if you have any thoughts or questions.

But have a good weekend or whenever it is you're listening.

Bye.

## 9IIsoNMRSb8

SPEAKER_09:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to Active Inference live stream number 6.1.

It is October 13th, 2020.

Whether you're a first-time listener or not, welcome to Team Calm.

Team Calm is an experiment in online team communication and learning related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter at inferenceactive, at our Gmail address, our Keybase team that's public, or our YouTube channel.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us feedback so that we can improve our work.

Also, all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and in service of that, remember your video etiquette, mute if there's sound in the background, and raise your hand so that we'll be able to hear from everyone.

Here we are in Act-Imp stream 6.1, and today's stream is gonna go like this.

We're gonna start out with a warmup section where we introduce some of ourselves, especially our newer participants, and just have a quick check-in.

Then we'll turn to the discussion of the paper.

Today we'll try to cover the goal of the paper, the roadmap, how they get from A to Z, go through the abstract, which is how the authors represent their work in the most distilled form, and then look

at some of the figures, see where they're going to be going with the figures, what they're going to be showing.

And then next week in 6.2, we're going to have a lot more time for further discussion on this paper and also to dive into some of the technical details of the figures.

So please save and submit your questions.

All right, here we are in the intros and check-ins.

For the introduction section, please introduce yourself and your location.

Just say a quick hello, anything else you'd like to add, and then feel free to pass it to someone else.

So I'm Daniel, I'm in Davis, California, and I'll pass it to one of our first-time participants, Matthias.


SPEAKER_06:
It's actually Mathis Pink.

I'm a master's student in Germany at the University of Osnabrück, which is in Lower Saxony.

So it's afternoon where I am.

I guess it's in the morning where you are.

Yeah, I'm excited about participating.

Thanks for having me.

Great.

Let's start.


SPEAKER_11:
don't know is there another person who's new here uh lee alex maybe let's go to lee our other new participant yeah hi um yeah i'm lee i'm based in london but i'm actually studying at the university of york studying embodied cognition and um yeah really looking forward to this um i will pass on to alejandra


SPEAKER_05:
Hello, everyone.

I'm again at Mexico, kind of tired.

Last week was very hard, but yeah, nice to be here again with you all.

And I'll pass it to Alex.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everybody.

Hi, I'm Alex.

I'm an engineer, basically, and now also a researcher.

And I'm stated in Moscow, Russia, and related to this system management school.

So I pass it to Clip.


SPEAKER_07:
Hi, I'm John Clip.

I'm in Cambridge, Mass, with the MIT Media Lab, and actually doing this in northern New Hampshire at my farm.

And I'm very pleased to be part of this and here to learn.


SPEAKER_09:
Let's go to Alex Kiefer.


SPEAKER_07:
And I'll pass it off to Maxwell.

Okay.


SPEAKER_10:
Hi, everyone.

So I was here a couple weeks ago.

I'm a philosopher, I guess, and sometime computational modeler at Monash University.

And right now I'm in New York City.

And I've been involved in this debate that's explored in this paper for a while, so I thought I would join in.

And I will pass it to, who's left?

Shannon?


SPEAKER_08:
Hi, I'm Shannon Crooks.

I'm part of the sensory motor neuroscience lab at the University of California in Merced, but currently I'm in South Dakota.

So I'll pass it to Sasha.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, everybody.

I'm Sasha.

I'm based out of Davis, California, and I'm affiliated with University of California, Davis, and also just very excited to learn and unpack some of these topics.

It's been a really great past six or so streams, so I will pass it on to Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello.

Yeah, I've been involved in this for the last few sessions as well, finding it very, very helpful and very interesting.

I'm doing a practice-based PhD into some processes to explore social topographies at Canterbury Christ Church University at the Solomon School of Applied Psychology with the help of the Professional Development Institute.


SPEAKER_03:
um and i'll pass that to maxwell i suppose isn't it i believe i'm the last one um yeah so uh i'm maxwell ramstad uh i'm based in montreal where i'm talking to you from uh at mcgill university and i'm also the first author on the paper that we'll be discussing today so i'm quite excited to discuss it with you uh

Thanks, Alex Kiefer, by the way, for showing up.

Alex and I have had a sustained series of discussions around these papers that have led to follow up papers and I think to a really robust and fun friendship through these discussions.

So I'm looking forward to discussing all these issues with you.

Thanks.

Thanks for the continued following of our work.


SPEAKER_09:
Awesome.

We bring the ideas together sometimes through the people and the friendships.


SPEAKER_03:
And I guess I'm not going to pass it to anyone since everyone else has spoken, right?


SPEAKER_09:
Yep.

I think that is everyone.

So cool.

Let's go to our warm-up questions.

And anyone who likes to speak can feel free to raise their hand or jump in if there's no one speaking yet.

So the first question is, what drew you to this paper or topic?

And while people are raising their hand, I'll start.

I think what was exciting about this paper was about just combining two different schools of thought and bringing them together in a constructive way that was really super additive rather than just choosing sides.

What about you, Maxwell?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, the motivation for writing the paper in part was that I don't think that at least at the time, I didn't think that

what the generative model business under the free energy principle is all about, really.

I don't think that was well understood at the time that we wrote this.

So I alluded to this, I think, a few weeks ago.

This paper, the Answering Schrodinger's Question paper in Physics of Life Reviews and the paper that we discussed the last few weeks, Multiscale Integration, were all originally the same paper.

It was all one big thing.

And we ended up splitting it into different papers to address different things.

So, you know, the multi-scale stuff that we'd been discussing to address like the scale-free and multi-level formulation of the FEP.

And the aim here was really to connect

the FEP to other pragmatist approaches that center on action.

And also to clarify the nature of the generative models that are at play here, which aren't just kind of brain bound statistical models, but turn out to be something like the phenotype of the organism.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Anyone else have thoughts on that?

Alex, Kiefer?


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, thanks.

So I guess, well, I was drawn into the debate because some of my work with Jacob Hovey was among the sort of target, the critical target of the article.

Although Maxwell and company were very nice to us and they didn't say we were wrong, they just said this doesn't exactly generalize to the free energy principle.

So that's how I got drawn into this.

And I continue to be interested in it because I think it, I mean, I think we've converged on more of an agreement than maybe existed at this time this paper came out, but- Oh yeah, 100%.


SPEAKER_02:
I think we've basically converged to one coherent story at this point, but this is two years in the making, so.


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, but I mean, the issues raised here are still interesting to think about, you know, and I continue to learn more by thinking about them, so.


SPEAKER_09:
Awesome.

All right, the second warmup question is gonna be, what would be something that you'd like to have resolved by the end of today's discussion?

So that could be a specific question about how to apply something to a system or- Lee would like to speak.

Yeah, Lee, go ahead.


SPEAKER_11:
Go ahead, Lee.

Sorry, I was just turning my sound off.

So.

So, yeah, essentially, I guess I was drawn to this topic because my journey towards active inference has been via cognitive linguistics.

So I started off looking into relationships between language and perception and particularly metaphor.

So I think I've got quite a different understanding of what's meant by model, probably something more kind of phenomenological and maybe epistemic.

And I'm really starting to understand that that's not really what is meant by active inference.

So I've taken a good look through this paper and I'm hoping to build some kind of bridge from where I'm at to more of an understanding of what's implied by generative model in active inference.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Well, great, because that's one of the main topics of the paper.

And Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
Actually, just bouncing off what was just said there, in some ways when you take metaphors, if you bring metaphors into embodiment and as being embodied in space and around us, actually then suddenly that whole metaphor work becomes actually almost very close to what might be a generative model in a funny way, even though it's different.

There might be some way, I'm actually, so in some ways I'm kind of interested how this sort of becomes full circle and can come back to these kind of human ways of knowing, even though we've accessing it through maybe kind of abstracted models.


SPEAKER_09:
interesting and i think we'll return to some of these ideas if anyone else wants to chime in on what they'd like to have resolved but very interesting to hear about metaphor as cognition and how we can humanize our understanding of some of these technical or conceptual issues all right well if there are no hands remaining i'll move on to the next slide so

today we're going to be talking about a tale of two densities active inference is an active inference which is a article in adaptive behavior in 2020 by maxwell ramstead kirchoff and friston and in this paper they lay out their goal really clearly which i always love to see in a paper they write at the very beginning

The aim of this article is to clarify how best to interpret some of the central constructs that underwrite the free energy principle, or FEP, and its corollary, active inference, in theoretical neuroscience and biology, namely the role that generative models and recognition densities play in this theory, aiming to unify life and mind.

So what are the two densities?

They're going to be the generative models and the recognition densities.

And we're going to learn more about them and hear about how they're related and discuss different perspectives on how the densities are linked.

And specifically, the question is, what is the tale of these two densities?

It's alluded to in the title, and it's awesome that we have Maxwell and Alex and so many other voices here to make that synthesis and that tale that we're all telling together realized.

So in the Act-Inf stream 6.0, I provided a little bit of context just from my perspective on some of these issues if people want to learn more about some of the background ideas.

But for now, we're going to just jump into the abstract.

And at any point, people can just raise their hand, and I'll just pause right there, and we'll take a comment or a thought.

In the abstract, they begin by rehearsing what I had just read, that they're looking to clarify how to best interpret some of the constructs underwriting the free energy principle.

And those two constructs are the generative models and the variational densities.

So those are the two densities and the tail is going to link them.

We argue that these constructs, generative models and variational densities, have been systematically misrepresented in the literature because of the conflation between the FEP and active inference on one hand, and distinct, albeit closely related Bayesian formulations centered on the brain, variously known as predictive processing, predictive coding, or the prediction error minimization framework.

More specifically, we examine two contrasting interpretations of these active inference type models, a structural representationalist interpretation and an inactive interpretation.

So we're setting up the two sort of sub stories.

These are the tension between these two perspectives that we're going to be looking to resolve under the FEP through active inference.

We argue that the structural representationalist interpretation of generative and recognition models does not do justice to the role that these constructs play in active inference under the FEP.

We propose an inactive interpretation of active inference, what might be called an active inference.

In active inference under the FEP, the generative and recognition models are best cast as realizing inference and control.

The self-organizing belief guided selection of action policies and do not have the properties ascribed by structural representationalists.

So for this next slide, I'll really appreciate anyone's perspective or linking it back to things they've seen before, because I just put it up there as a visual and just a starting place.

On the left side here, we have the Bayesian Structural Representationalist.

perspective that we're just trying to highlight the features that are going to be most simple to carry forward.

And the Bayesian structural representationalist story is about how data and another type of data, which are often called hyperparameters, are linked through a recognition model that takes data like sensory data and recognizes it.

And then going the other direction, you have the hyperparameters that are generating sensory data.

And we can also talk about why it's important to have this generative step.

And the outcome of this Bayesian computationalist scheme is that there's a statistical convergence of a multi-level model that represents structures of the world through something like expectation maximization or EM models.

And we can contrast that with the inactive paradigm.

And the inactive paradigm is about how agents and the world are related through perception and action.

And the outcome of the inactivist perspective is an embodied ecological action sequence, really, from an embedded agent who is enacting behavior.

And so this is always the school of thought where we see all the E's encultured and embedded in all these things.

And they're seemingly, at least at the first pass, up to two quite different...

explanatory uh outcomes they seem to be talking about somewhat different aspects about the world and they definitely link them through different ways so i'm just curious on maxwell or anyone else like what led to these two models being the two cities the two densities that were chosen how does one

come down to just two?

Why is there not one or three cities?

And then how did the Bayesian structural representationalist and the inactive viewpoint rise up as like the two kind of tier one theories that we wanted to find a synthesis between?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, so when I got into this literature, especially from the the vantage point of philosophy, what I noticed was that very little of it was technically rigorous in the sense that

You know, a lot of it was telling like a story about how, you know, the brain roughly performs Bayesian inference.

And then, you know, kind of saying, well, there's like a family of different theories that do this in various ways and grouping the free energy principle under that.

I say, yeah.

there was like a lack of technical rigor.

I want to emphasize that Alex's papers with Jacob are probably the exception to that.

When I consulted Alex's papers in 2018, I thought, well, here's some wonderful work that is really taking the time to drill down on the formalisms as they're used to study the brain.

I thought that was great.

But I spent a lot of time really drilling into the formalism of the free energy principle per se.

And one of the things that I was sort of surprised to find out as I was learning the formalism was that although everyone is talking about the generative model, there are really two models at play.

So those are the generative and the recognition models or densities equivalently.

So first of all, we say model.

By model, we just mean a probability density, so a probability distribution over a bunch of variables that are of interest to us.

And so yeah, the two models in question under the free energy principle function slightly differently than they do in more traditional brain-based.

to step back a bit in machine learning and in statistics, a recognition model basically tells you the probability of some state given a bunch of other things.

It's not a joint probability distribution.

And it's used essentially to recognize what's causing your data.

So you're using it basically to invert your mapping.

I mean, Alex, also, if I'm saying anything inaccurate here, just please jump in and let me know.

But yeah, so there's basically in traditional kind of,

You know, Bayesian brain machine learning architectures, the generative and the recognition models are basically just the inverse of one another.

So the kind of top, the kind of bottom up pass is a recognition pass.

It's a recognition model in the sense that it's starting from the data and then kind of passing through the network.

You're able to infer what must have caused your data.

And the generative model is the inverse path where you're starting from your beliefs about states and you can generate fictive data, you know, based on this model.

At least in Alex's papers, the way that this, well, the...

This is how it was described as applying to the free energy formulation as well.

And my point in this paper was that, well, this is a very technically rigorous and accurate description of what's going on in the Bayesian brain, but these constructs have a slightly different meaning under active inference.

And to bring it back, I'm almost done.

Just give me one more minute.

To bring it back to these schemas, basically, so the recognition density

is sort of like your best guess right now.

You can think about it sort of like as your posterior and your prior.

So your recognition density is a density defined over all of your states and your parameters.

It basically tells you what do I believe is the most probable value of these states and parameters now, you know, given my prior beliefs and my evidence.

Your generative model, to the contrary, is the point of reference

for the generation of free energy gradients.

So it's not your posterior, it's your prior.

It's sort of like it harnesses all of the priors, especially the priors about your preferred data distributions, relative to which the free energy and therefore the dynamics are defined.

So you write inference and control, I think you discussed in 6.0, Dan,

Yeah, so the recognition model is responsible for inference and the generative model is responsible for control, you might say.

So I'll stop there.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Alex, Kiefer, and then we'll go to anyone else with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, thanks.

So I stopped myself from jumping in.

I mean, that was that was a good summary.

The only thing the point at which I wanted to jump in was to say, well, so the recognition model isn't as construed in these Bayesian brain theories is an approximate inversion of the generative model.

So my my

If I have any complaint about this paper, it's that I think that there's a closer sort of conceptual connection between the generative and recognition densities than maybe the paper suggests.

And I don't think you can cleanly separate these things.

well anyway i don't want to launch into this yet what i wanted to do first was just address the the question was sort of how did these two visions sort of arise and my sense is that what carl friston did he did a lot of great stuff but the main thing he did that distinguished his approach from the existing stuff in machine learning a lot of which was based on free energy minimization

uh which i think he came to around the same time as people like jeff hinton but anyway he you know he added action into the picture and he pointed out that you can act so as to reduce the surprisal or the free energy cosplay or sensory states uh instead of just revising your gender just generative distribution um anyway so i think i'll hold off on on arguing for the moment


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

I just wanted to say, I agree with you now.

Uh, the, the two things do, do not really come together, uh, come apart.

Sorry.

Um, I mean, it's, it's really just an implementation of variational inference from that point of view and variational inference.

And this is why it's a tale of two densities is that to do this variational inference thing, you need both.

You need a kind of point of reference that's going to give you the free energy gradients.

And then you need a sort of what is my best guess as I am performing gradient descent on my free energy.

And yeah, I don't want to say that the two come apart.

And indeed, I think in a newer paper that I've written on this, I basically just straight up say that you were correct initially with respect to the recognition density.

So the recognition density, it's fair to say that it's a representation

in the structural representationalist sense that you've been articulating in the series of really awesome papers, which you should all read, by the way, I think.

Yeah, the one point of disagreement that I think we've clarified now is the status of these generative models.

And yeah, I'll stop there too.


SPEAKER_09:
Nice.

We'll go to Stephen and then anyone else with a raised hand before the roadmap.


SPEAKER_01:
Now, one question I've got is in terms of if these kind of hyper parameters that they use in machine learning are using a free energy, is it that they're just minimizing the kind of energy expenditure and the entropy internally and they're not using Shannon entropy, either not looking at how entropy is inferred or transmitted

sort of in a second order process from interacting in the world.

They're just minimizing it within the kind of data that's being kind of accrued, which kind of in some ways seems to happen easily when you look at like vision data, but may not be so easy to pass when you sort of look at the whole body.

But that question of entropy, is it that they use entropy in a different way and they're not really using

entropy in the kind of external entropy of interaction, but kind of just the entropy within the calculations in terms of... There are two kinds of entropy at play in general, right?


SPEAKER_03:
So entropy in the thermodynamic sense is a measure of how many macro states are compatible with

a given value of a macro state, right?

So I don't know, your temperature is 36 degrees Celsius.

How many different macro state configurations are compatible with that?

So that form of entropy is one special case of the broader kind of entropy, which is more or less a measure of how flat your probability distribution is over your states.

So if you have a perfectly flat distribution, your entropy is optimal.

And so

The entropy that we're concerned with is really the second type.

It's the information theoretic entropy.

But it's transpired over the last few years that variational free energy is also a thermodynamic free energy.

You just have to multiply by Boltzmann's constant.

Essentially, yeah, it's always information theoretic measures.

But when this is realized in actual physical systems, it is also a thermodynamic free energy.

But the variation of free energy, it sounds kind of spooky and esoteric, but it's really simple, really.

It's that you have a preferred data distribution and you have an actual data distribution.

And the free energy is just a way to quantify the difference between the two.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_09:
Awesome.

We'll go to Alex and then back to Stephen.


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, I was just going to briefly say in the earlier machine learning literature, the free energy definitely wasn't supposed to be anything thermodynamic.

Maybe that was an open possibility, but it was just a measure, as you were saying, I think, Stephen, between two internal...

internally determined distributions.

It was the top-down generative posterior versus the approximate posterior.

And any connections to thermodynamics are really cool, but I think that's an additional, very substantive question slash thesis.


SPEAKER_09:
Stephen, and then anyone else who raised their hand.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think this is quite a useful distinction, because I think that's where

a lot of the mixing gets sort of caught up at the moment because a lot of stuff has been referred to in like the last 15 years around Bayesian optimization and Bayesian stuff.

And then where it's all pretty much as if it's in contained in the data in the brain.

And then now,

it's like a reconceptualizing of that.

So I think it is a big challenge for people to like forget about what they've learned before.


SPEAKER_09:
really agreed with that steven and um that's really what this conversation and synthesis is about is about bringing those qualitative often insights from inactivism and saying well wait a minute perception isn't simply the reverse of action you know there's not photons coming out of your eye so what is different between perception and action but also recognizing that the world and the agents have this sort of symmetry and that they are linked so

Again, anyone can raise their hand, but we're going to turn to the roadmap and ask how the authors set up the discussion between the Bayesian and the inactivist approach, and then ultimately converge towards somewhat of a synthesis.

And on the right side is just the title page of the Dickens.

work tale of two cities so first there's an introduction sequence and then they talk about statistical models as representations and specifically they talk about generative models and recognition models in bayesian cognitive science as well as generative models as structural representations so that's the bayesian structural and the representational components

Then they talk about generative models and action policies, which is sort of opening the door to this potential inadequacy of the purely Bayesian approach, which is that it's not action-oriented.

In the third section, they discuss the active inference framework.

First, they start by talking about how phenotypes are conceptualized under active inference and about Markov blankets.

And there's a figure one, which we've seen before and we will see again, about how Markov blankets and active inference are linked.

They then discuss surprise, entropy, and variational free energy, which are all terms, perhaps not surprise, but the other two that we've brought up in this discussion.

And in the paper, they really go into detail a bit more about how these topics are linked.

There's then a discussion about how active inference specifically links the variational free energy with the inferential models.

In Section 4, A Tale of Two Densities, they talk about how the generative model and the recognition density are to be conceptualized under the FEP.

And specifically, they talk about the generative model and the generative process in active inference.

In Figure 2, they depict a generative model and represent it as a Bayesian network.

figure three they talk about the same generative model in active inference represented as a fourney factor graph and the similarities and differences between figure two and three we're probably gonna go into next week in 6.2 there's then a section on variational inference and recognition dynamics under the fep

In the fifth section, they turn to purely inactive inference, and they say, first, the claim that the generative models are control systems.

And so this sort of borrows on and builds on the generative model idea, which is a bit of a computationalist perspective, as well as this control systems perspective, which implicitly means action orientation, because control of action, not just control of theoretical parameters.

They then take the fighting words section.

Generative models are not structural representations.

I always like it when we can get down to specific claims and negatable statements and just really being specific because sometimes these abstractions get pretty far out.

There's then the final figure four, which depicts the action perception cycle in active inference as a generative modal and a process.

And last, they conclude with some remarks and the remarks also conclude with towards multidisciplinary research heuristics for cognitive science.

And I know we have a lot of awesome cognitive scientists and other perspectives in this room.

And so this is sort of our springboard where we can take the ideas that we're talking about here and ask, well, how does this impact how we're going to do the cognitive science research?

what kind of explanations what kind of predictions what kind of experiments are we going to do differently how will our research paradigm be different if we take this approach that is synthesizing the inactive in the bayesian approach so especially cognitive scientists would be awesome to hear any thoughts

And while people are sort of collecting their thoughts about anything on the roadmap or prior in the last 20 minutes here, we'll have good time to go through the figures and ask about how they relate to this big topic.

How are the two cities linked?

What is the highway that connects the two cities or what is the broader collaborative network that links these two?

Any thoughts here on the roadmap?

you you definitely laid out the reasoning in the paper very well so thank you good and uh these papers are uh straightforward to lay out because they really are almost a uh additive

way of laying out the topics.

First, you lay out the strongest version of the other approach.

And actually, it's the professionality and the clarity and not misrepresenting another viewpoint just to throw it under the bus or to make a straw man argument.

It's laying out the strongest form

of the, um, prior literature is what allows us to build another level of strength on top of the literature, rather than just cutting out the pillars from underneath us.


SPEAKER_03:
So I always have to say, you know, we started off with this, a much stronger position, uh, than we ended up with.

And it's, it's by engaging seriously with the arguments that Alex and Jakob had prepared.

you know, with a few other people, Paweł Gładziewski and so on had been arguing for this kind of stuff.

But I mean, thank you for saying that about the professionalism.

I really think that there is something to that argument.

And the whole point is to keep the baby, you know, with

while getting rid of the bathwater.

And the baby is this sort of idea that there is something like representations of the external world that carry semantic content and so on.

It's just that it's not the generative models.

It's the recognition densities.

That was sort of the tweak that we wanted to bring to the table.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Alex, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_10:
yeah so um yeah like like maxwell says we've had a lot of interesting questions about this um i guess the point the point on which i remain not convinced yet is that i think i still think of the generative model even in the fep as a representation so we can we can maybe talk about that um the i think to me what this brings to the table and this is like transformed how i see this stuff is the importance of understanding the generative model as a control system

um i just think you can do that in a way that also grants that it's a structural representation and that's what i've been that's still the framework in which i work um so i think there's another question that raised here about whether the generative model is sort of encoded

And I do understand where the authors are coming from on that question.

And I think it's not so straightforward in the FEP as it would be in some earlier models like the Helmholtz machine.

So I don't know.

I'm curious to see if Maxwell and I still disagree.

I have the sense that I maybe still want to call the generative model a representation more than Maxwell does, but we can get to that.


SPEAKER_09:
Can I ask Alex and again, anyone can raise their hand and have a thought here, too, is what is the advantage of wanting something to be a representation or what is the alternative to something being structural?


SPEAKER_10:
Right.

So I mean, so I don't think in those terms in terms of the advantage of it, I just think, is it a representation or not?

I think it is based on what our representation is and how this thing functions in this model.

So I know oftentimes people talk about, like, what's the explanatory value of talking in terms of representations?

But I mean, to answer more directly, so what's the alternative to it being structural?

That's another good question.

In my view, this structural representationalist paradigm really isn't anything new.

It's kind of just like the core notion of representation that's been at work in serious cognitive science since, like, Turing.

So if you go back to papers, like there's a paper from 1980 by Alan Newell

sort of foundations of cognitive science and he describes how what makes a particular symbolic physical symbol system able to

what gives it its universal computational capacity is its capacity to simulate other systems.

So I really think this notion of simulation is at the heart of what representation is supposed to be in cognitive science.

And that really just is structural representation.

And if you go back less, I won't go on forever.

Cummins's early work on structural representationalism, the S representation can also be read as simulation.

So it's not that I think that you need to call the generative model a structural representation.

I just think once you understand how it functions, I would say even under the FEP, that's what it is.

But there's still a question about how it's encoded or whether it's encoded.


SPEAKER_09:
I think that's a separate question.

Awesome.

Thanks for that response.

We'll go to Lee, and then anyone else that can raise their hand.

OK.


SPEAKER_11:
So, excuse me, I was just trying to make sure that I was understanding terms in the same way that they were being used.

But Alex, you just talked about the notion of representation as simulation.

And one of the ways that I've kind of arrived at active inference is via the work of Barsalou and perceptual symbol theory and simulation.

Does that, is that overlapping with what you're meaning by simulation or does it have a different


SPEAKER_10:
Um, meaning if you're familiar with this work, probably I'm not, I'm not as familiar with that work, um, as with, um, the, the new paper that I just, that I mentioned.

I am.

And it is just a, yeah.

Great.

No, just kidding.

I want to read it.

Um, okay.

I'll accept that.

I'll, I'll take that for the work for it.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I mean, essentially, uh, especially these deep generative models or they allow you to entertain, um,

Well, I mean, there's a sense in which the, like, the Bar-Salu, you know, idea of metaphor is just what the generative models do.

You know, if we're talking about a kind of loose associative structure that redeploys inferences about one domain in another,

I mean, this is the kind of thing that you would expect the generative model would be able to do.

So these things are definitely, I think, strongly aligned.

In effect, I mean, didn't Steven suggest something similar?

I think like the Yeah, metaphors are generative models in a strong sense.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool notion.

We'll go to Alex Kiefer, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, so that's interesting.

I don't know what to say about metaphors.

But I think the way I see this now is that I don't think what Maxwell at all are saying is at all, of course, maybe not of course, I don't think it's at all wrong, but I just think that the structural representationalist reading

My view is that it doesn't quite say enough, but not that it's wrong in any particular respect as applied to the FEP.

So after further conversations with Maxwell and also with Michael and the other authors on this, it seems to me that there's still a need for a sort of neuronally realized generative model

in addition to considering the entire phenotype to be a generative model.

So if you have a fancy organism that can do deep temporal kind of modeling and plan for the future and things like that, I think there's still a need for something that looks like a structural representation in the brain that is the generative model can be construed that way, as well as there's this sort of larger, more encompassing system.

And maybe this could be somewhat hashed out by appealing to the multi-level

active infant stuff.

But last piece of this, in discussions with Michael Kirchhoff, I hope I'm saying his name correctly.

We've never said it out loud to each other.

it seems as though at least he is thinking of top-down sort of propagation of signals as a form of action.

So the stuff that we were saying about top-down generative models might just be sort of a special case of the sort of action that this paper is talking about.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Before we go to Steven and then Lee, it really reminds me about Alejandra's point one or two weeks ago about what are the similarities and the differences between the systems that can at least appear to do these deep simulations, counterfactuals like the brain versus a embodied phenotype.

The cell perimeter is not simulating other cell perimeters.

That's a little bit different than the way that the brain might be able to do something strategic.

So we'll go to Steven and then anyone else can raise their hand.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, one thing I always look at when you think of, we talk about representation also in performance, is to think of like re-presentation, like is there another presentation in the brain, which often people start thinking of as a projection, and then you start getting into this very visually dominated view of what our knowing is, you know, so whereas it's a bit different to re-enacting or re-imagining,

So, like, if I was to reimagine as an engineer a model and then I manipulate it in my brain, well, am I manipulating it in my brain or have I reimagined it in my peripersonal space?

And am I now manipulating it actively in my peripersonal space?

And that is what I'm actually thinking of as

representation but it's not actually my brain at all it's just a reenactment in space for me to then start to work with or if i do on paper i think the mechanism for that is this is not quite clear but this sort of opens up that question cool lee


SPEAKER_11:
Stephen, I think I understand what you're talking about.

But are you just kind of mixing up the phenomenological with the underlying ontological level?

So if you have a representation in the brain and you simulate it, that it manifests in experiential space or perceptual space.

Is that what you mean?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, to manifest it in the phenomenological space is to enact, is what I'm saying.

So it's not like it's in the brain, then I project it into space.

It's not in the brain.

It might be encoded, like place cells, grid cells, all of that stuff.

with all the other stuff, but it might be encoded in a way that can reenact it.

But once it's reenacted, so with the work with clean language and micro phenomenology looks at like re-embodying concepts in space around us.

So my kind of feeling is that a metaphor is kind of like our reading on our kind of affect and our kind of,

our beliefs recreated in a kind of a physicalized way, you know?

So we actually do like, we, I feel like I'm stuck behind the wall.

Like, you can actually ask people, well, where's the wall?

And they will know where the wall is.

And what's it like to be stuck?

And where, so suddenly actually find that they've actually got like a model, but they never had that model before they kind of created it.

So the question becomes, is it a reenactment, a re-imaginization?

And how much of that was already, I suppose it's a question, was that already sitting in the brain ready to go?

Or did it only come about through the act of re-imagining?


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

In our last 10 minutes, it would be awesome to hear from anyone who hasn't spoken, as well as just to flip through the figures so that we can see where we're going to be headed to do some technical unpacking, especially next week.

So anyone can feel free to raise their hand if they have a related or unrelated point.

But in these last few minutes, let's just try to look at the figures and hear some closing thoughts.

So in figure one, we have the Markov blanket and active inference, and we've returned to this figure many times.

It's used across papers and it's really nice to see it again and again, because the context is always different.

And the part that I underlined in red was in graph theoretic terms, the Markov blanket per se is defined as the set of nodes that isolates internal nodes from the influence of external ones.

And

And in this capacity, it's really good that we had the discussion about integrating internalism and externalism, because those are also sort of like two ideas that have this tension between them.

And the Beyond Internalism and Externalism paper was about building on top of those, about taking the strengths of those two ideas and then asking how they're integrated under ACT-INF.

and today what we're doing and in this paper is about taking interpretations of internalism and externalism specifically this bayesian more computational perspective and this inactive embodied perspective and building on those strengths so it almost

reads like a recipe for how active inference can be used for synthesis which is by identifying areas of tension in the literature or previously unrecognized harmonies between different ideas and then just asking how we can build strength on strength rather than attack strength to weakness or just um you know contrast weaknesses and i'm just going to continue just to show the other figures but i'll pause anytime someone raises their hand

on figure two.

Oh, Alejandra, go ahead.


SPEAKER_05:
Actually, yeah, in that figure, I can take again the question you mentioned.

I'm still confused in terms of these generative models and their recognition density in which temporal and spatial scale

of course in each individual cell of the brain this process is occurring and then in a layer of the cortex and then in the hierarchy

of the cortical layers and then in the whole brain and then blah, blah, blah.

But so belief updating is happening in each cell.

I don't know if I'm

I'm getting to the point, but the cells have to maintain, actually this blanket contains also some beliefs that never can change, right?

So in order to continue being the cell it is.

So I don't know.

This process of the densities is occurring in I don't know how many scales and... Yes, it's all of that.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, we'll end up hopefully discussing this next week.

If it's unclear, I mean, I have to say I don't think the figures are super useful in this paper.

They're mostly there to illustrate a few things.

What's really important is the equations.

So, I mean, for next week, Dan, I'll show you which ones in particular so that we can put them up.

Yeah, so, Alejandro, what you were saying is exactly right.

All of these things are performing belief updating.

And when we talk about behavior or dynamics or whatever, it is all belief updating, right?

And belief updating just means changing the physical value of the recognition density at a moment.

So basically, in this paper, like the big kind of conceptual contribution that I tried to make to this literature is to say, well, with active inference, we can rethink what we mean by embodiment and enactment.

So embodiment means encoding a recognition density.

So your physical body is a guess about the

It's a posterior probability that you're constantly updating through this process of belief updating, a.k.a.

dynamics, a.k.a.

adaptive behavior.

We literally embody this density.

The physical states of our body encode the parameters of probability densities.

This is the idea.

And then basically the generative model is just the point of reference for the dynamics that exists in the dynamics.

The way I like to think about it is sort of like dominoes falling over where the recognition density is the dominoes, right?

Each of these dominoes is like a posterior estimate, you know, and they kind of accumulate.

But the wave is the generative model.

You see like the domino wave itself, the generative model exists in the same sense as the wave kind of making all the dominoes fall.

And the recognition model exists in the sense of the physical dominoes that are kind of encoding the process as it kind of flows over.

But this will be, I think, hopefully clearer next week.

Mathematically, it's actually pretty simple.

The generative model is the joint probability density over all of your variables.

And this density doesn't exist in the brain.

It's not anywhere.

What exists is the factorization of this density.

So, you know, you always see this in all these active inference papers.

It's like p of all of your variables, so the eta, mu, and all the parameters, et cetera, equals, and then this long factorized, which is basically, it's a product of likelihoods and priors.

So this product of likelihood and priors is the recognition density that's constantly updated, right?

And that's what exists in the brain.

But this joint density only exists as a function of the dynamics.

It's like all of these partial, like, carving ups of this density, right, this factorization, they all move together, and in their dynamics together they realize this joint density.

Okay.


SPEAKER_09:
sorry i just i i do have to end it at the 59 as we discussed but this is the perfect excitement to build for our follow-up discussion next week we're definitely gonna go into this question we'll just pick up right here we'll literally just hit play on the video and uh go into detail on the technicality and let's even have some dominoes on the screen so

again just thanks everybody for understanding about the timing i've provided a follow-up form to the live participants in the chat and we welcome any other feedback suggestions or questions and please just uh stay in touch

stay engaged if this was interesting or exciting we welcome all participants and it would be awesome to have you on this stream asking the questions and also learning by doing with us so thanks everyone for the awesome and energizing discussion and i'm really looking forward to next week when we can go another level detail into all of this so thanks so much

## y4tljwMAWho

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone to the Active Inference Livestream Take Two with an awesome set of flexible and awesome participants.

This is Active Inference Livestream 6.2 on October 20th, 2020.

Welcome to Team Calm everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter at Inference Active.

You can email us, find us on Keybase or at our YouTube channel.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and also as far as video etiquette for live stream goes please mute if you're gonna have noise in your background raise your hand so that we can get to hear from everyone and use respectful speech

Today, just as a quick point of news, our friend and colleague Jared Tumial has released a very interesting blog post called Spinning Up in Active Inference and the Free Energy Principle, a syllabus for the curious.

And it is a great place for beginners as well as for those who want to go deeper into one of the various domains that are touched upon by active inference and the free energy principle.

So today in Act Imp Stream 6.2, we are going to have a warmup.

We're gonna have take two on our intros as I kick out this other Alex.

We are going to then come to a discussion of the paper.

Last time in 6.1, we talked a lot about the goal of the paper and we went through the roadmap and the abstract in quite a lot of detail.

This time, we're gonna be highlighting some excellent follow-up comments from our participants.

We're going to be talking about pattern versus structure, metaphors, and more.

And then we'll go through the figures and make sure to talk about some of the similarities and the differences between Bayesian networks and Forney factor graphs.

Great, on to the intros and check-ins.

So for this section, please just introduce yourself and your location, say hello, provide a little short intro if you'd like, and pass it to somebody who hasn't spoken yet.

So I'm Daniel, I'm in California, and I will pass it to our first time discussant, Kate.


SPEAKER_06:
Sorry, I'm Kate.

I'm based out of the University of Edinburgh, philosophy of cognitive science, philosophy of

cognitive science student and I'm interested in life, mind, continuity and trying to find a satisfactory definition of what it is to be a living system.

And I will pass to Mel.


SPEAKER_00:
I think Mel is not joined in yet.

Let's go to Shannon.


SPEAKER_05:
I think Mel's here.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, absolutely.

Mel started her intro actually.

So Mel is absolutely here.


SPEAKER_05:
We can hear you.

I don't know if Daniel can hear you.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, weirdly, I don't hear you.

Mel, could you just reload?

Sorry.

And Shannon, go ahead.


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
No, I don't think he sees you.

This is a new and fun kind of Jitsi area.


SPEAKER_02:
Just reload the page, Mel.

Just click refresh.

Yeah, exactly.


SPEAKER_00:
Perfect.

I see that.

Mel, take it away.

Thank you.

There you go.


SPEAKER_08:
We're good?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.


SPEAKER_08:
Beautiful.

All right, cool.

I'm Mel Andrews.

I'm in Ohio.

I'm a doctoral student in philosophy of biology and company appliance.

I'm interested in the same question as Kate, and I will pass to Alex Kiefer.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, I'm Alex Kiefer.

I'm in the philosophy department at Monash University, currently in New York City.

I guess I'll probably wind up defending structural representationalism about generative models today.

I don't know.

I'll pass it to Maxwell, I guess.


SPEAKER_02:
I'll probably be agreeing with you in the end, I think, Alex.

I'm Maxwell Ramstad.

I'm a postdoctoral fellow at McGill University in Montreal.

I'm speaking to you from Montreal right now.

I work on multiscale active inference.

And I'll pass it to, I guess, Ale.

You haven't spoken yet.


SPEAKER_04:
You're right.

We are three Alex.

Well, hello, everybody.

I'm Ale or Alejandra.

I'm a professor in the Department of Psychology, specifically in the Department of Cognitive Sciences.

And well, I'm interested in also the same question that you were talking about, what exactly is to be alive and

maybe going further with cognition and perception.

So yeah, that's me.

Oh, well, I'm in Mexico.

So I'm going to pass it to Sasha.


SPEAKER_07:
Hi, I'm Sasha.

I'm based out of Davis, California, and I'm a neuroscience graduate student studying kind of the

molecular and developmental aspects of the brain.

And I will pass it to Shannon.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, I'm Shannon.

I'm based out of UC Merced in California, but I'm in South Dakota right now.

I'm also interested in how active inference can help us learn about the brain in music cognition, as well as how we can learn about how humans coordinate in music or other sort of group interactions.

And I will pass it to the other Alex.


SPEAKER_03:
Hello, I'm Alex Vyatkin.

I'm a researcher at System Management School in Moscow, Russia.

I'm trying to find possible ways of integration, active inference with system engineering and system management frameworks.


SPEAKER_00:
So who's else?

Cool.

I think that is all of us.

And thanks everyone for bearing with these funny technical glitches.

I'm also recording this locally.

So worst case, we'll just be able to have this uploaded.

Let's get on to the warmup questions.

So for the warmup questions, just anyone who wants to speak would be awesome to hear from you just to sort of get started.

What is something that you've been working on or learning about recently?

whether it's directly linked or just something that influences your mind state coming into today's discussion.

And you can popcorn in and also I'll be watching the stack if people raise their hand.

I'll start while people are raising their hand.

We just had Complexity Weekend this past weekend, which was a really exciting and interesting time.

About 100 people from 37 countries and forming cool teams on different topics really learned a lot.

Mel?


SPEAKER_08:
Hello?


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.


SPEAKER_08:
That worked great.

Beautiful.

Yeah, so recently, so I've been sort of puzzling for...

couple of years now over how to conceptualize the free energy principle.

And so that's pulled me into work in philosophy of science on models and modeling.

So all different kinds of ways of conceiving of formal models and what they do.

And then kind of parallels in biology, in

behavioral ecology and mythology and evolutionary biology with models that sort of having some sort of empirical concepts.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Anyone else want to share something they're working on?

Or I can also just raise the second warm-up question, just in case people want to answer that one, which is, what is something that you'd like to have resolved by the end of today's discussion?

Whether it's a thought about the paper specifically or something general.

Sure.

Fellow jitzer, I'm not sure that is.

Shannon, go ahead.


SPEAKER_05:
Hey, I...

Wonder whether the structural representation that we might be defending later today, whether that structure could just be a set of attractor dynamics.

Is that enough to be a structure?

So I think Alex might be raising his hand and have something to say.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, Alex?

Oh, yeah.

I mean, I was going to speak anyway.

I mean, I would say yes to that question, probably.

It's just my opinion.

But I was going to answer both questions, I guess.

So apart from trying to figure out the free energy principle still, lots of conversations with people, I've been trying to...

I've been working up to trying to implement a variational autoencoder to figure out how that actually works.

So I've been doing a lot of more technical work.

Something I'd like to have resolved is just to figure out exactly where an activism or the version of an activism that's defended in this paper is inconsistent with representationalism, if it is.

So I don't need there to be residual disagreement, but I just want to figure it out.


SPEAKER_00:
Ooh, sounds good.

Any last thoughts on these warmups before we jump into it?

We have a lot of very interesting slides.

Kate, go for it.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I guess the biggest thing that I want to resolve by the end of the session is I'm still not really clear on the status of the generative model, because at some point it sounds as if that's something that's almost causal, that it's controlling the animal's behavior or the organism or the system's behavior.

And at other points, it sounds more like it's a model that we use to describe the system dynamics rather than something that is encoding beliefs or being causal.

And that's something that I'm still not entirely clear on.

So I think that's a big thing I want resolved.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

All really interesting topics.

Thanks for sharing.

And we're going to jump into it because a lot of these are on the slides ahead.

So the paper that we're going to be coming back to today is A Tale of Two Densities.

Active inference is an active inference by Ramstead, Kirchhoff, and Friston.

And just to rehearse the goal of this paper, they aimed to clarify how best to interpret some of the central constructs that underwrite the free energy principle and its corollary active inference in theoretical neuroscience and biology, namely the role that the generative models and the recognition densities play in this theory, aiming to unify life and mind.

And so last week we talked about what these two densities are, and we talked about the tail that integrates the densities.

We also walked through the roadmap, how they build from A to Z by talking about statistical models and representations, introducing active inference, and then combining that with inactive inference in this sort of inactivism 2.0 framework before building towards multidisciplinary research heuristics for cognitive science.

So that was last week.

Let's get into the new and exciting parts.

So this was one of the feedback comments from a participant last week.

And what they wrote was, a key learning goal for me in building my understanding of active inference is to develop intuitive examples for the critical concepts that can act as the basis for abstraction later on.

It seems to me like there is probably something like a logical sequence in which this should be done, but I don't necessarily always know which concepts and ideas from active inference to prioritize.

As an example, coming from a cognitive linguistics background, I tend to think of beliefs as either causal reasoning or the underlying sensory motor simulations that connect to linguistic concepts.

I've been trying to find new intuitive examples that can help me to understand beliefs as probability distributions, as clearly this is the key for making progress in understanding active inference.

So my question for all of you is, what is a system or a metaphor that helps you understand active inference and why?

And while people are raising their hand on the bottom, we have just a few of the systems that we've been discussing over the last weeks.

We have a brain, the technical and the artistic parts of the brain.

We have insect colonies.

We have dance and embodiment and movement.

And then on the right, I guess it reflects something like the economy or changes in dynamical systems.

But what is a system that helps you understand through specifics something about active inference?

Any thoughts on this?


SPEAKER_02:
I hate to be that guy, but I started understanding active inference when I went into the math.

It's a formal theory, and I think we can actually be misled by metaphor.

Some of my reservations about the philosophical work that's been done on active inference is that

it it operates on the basis of you know um kind of informal intuitive conceptual understandings rather than trying to see what the math that says so i hate to be that guy though no that's perfect we'll go to alex fiatkin and then to kate go ahead alex yeah for me most important change to my views was uh


SPEAKER_03:
taking seriously approach from like for process and understanding concepts about states and steady states of possible processes and the later on all this concept with Markov blanket as a border and underlying structure like generative models in links with cybernetics

It's bringing me some kind of top-level picture, and now I'm trying to focus on different parts to have more detailed understanding.

Cool.

Kate, and then Mel.


SPEAKER_06:
I was also going to say cybernetics, I think.

I only really started to understand what was going on once I started seeing the links with, like, Ashby and accounts of survival as stability.

That was when things started to make sense to me.

And there's also just, like, a nice metaphor I quite liked in, I think it's a paper by Yelly Brunerberg, I think, with Julian Keaton and Everett Reitfeldt, with the crooked scientist metaphor, where the scientist is trying to obtain the result that it's looking for, so it has to have some sort of,

latch on the world in order to bring about that result, but it's still trying to obtain the result that it wants in the first place, rather than passively find out what will happen.

I thought it was quite a nice metaphor.

So do you think we are helpful?


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Mel?


SPEAKER_08:
So I remember, I'm remembering my first sort of aha moment with the FEP and active inference.

I was explaining this stuff to my friend who works on

on similar things, but in a very different framework in the MIT Media Lab.

And we had like papers strewn everywhere and we were scribbling all over them.

And my realization in explaining this framework to him was that there is fundamentally at the lowest level, at the level of the simplest sort of systems or at their kind of lowest scale, right?

No difference between

belief updating and action.

So a change in the system is a change in the system, right?

And that is both a belief update and an action, right?

And once you build in further levels of hierarchical organization and complexity, you get this strong differentiation between them, but

at the lowest level of the same thing.

Cool, and Kate, did you... And that's the probability distribution point.


SPEAKER_00:
Kate, had you raised your hand there?

And also, I'm just going to... Yeah, Alex, Kiefer, go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, yeah, I mean, I was going to... I like that point that at least at the lowest level of belief, updating and action are kind of the same thing.

I guess that's one reason...

That's one reason that I'm skeptical that we need to explicitly, I think implicitly, more traditional Bayesian brain stories are built on that claim as well.

But I was going to say what got me into active inference, also sort of a technical point, was just that you really can't optimize the thing.

You can't minimize surprisal just by adjusting

At least not, OK, the survival depends in part on the sensory observations, right?

So you can't minimize that just by changing your generative model.

You have to change the observations.

So that's the technical thing that got me into it.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And yeah, thanks everyone for being flexible and fun on the tech.

Maxwell, I really agree that the metaphor, as always with metaphors, it's a question about compression of semantics and meaning.

And at the end of the day, we're talking about something specific.

And so we can think about different systems that help us understand how active inference is deployed in the real world.

But often metaphors will take us off the mark because it removes us from the real underlying details.

let's return and the details are really where the devil's at uh in this case uh i think but yep i i agree we're hopefully in the end with the figures we're going to be able to look at those details really specifically and i think that the way that figure two three and four lead into each other helped me understand a lot about the system so just to

take another look at these two cities, the two cities that are being linked, the densities.

On the left, we have the Bayesian structural representation list.

And Alex freely added any details here.

But Bayesian models move between the data parameters, the observations, and hyperparameters or higher order parameters.

And from the data to the hyperparameters, we call it a recognition model.

And to go from hyperparameters to a set of data or observations, that is a generative model.

And the outcome is a statistical convergence of a multilevel model that represents structures of the world, for example, through an expectation maximization scheme.

We can contrast this with the inactivist school of thought, which has linked rather than data and hyper data, but rather has focused on the world and agents and how they're linked through perception and action.

So a lot more adjacencies to areas like niche construction and ecological psychology.

And we remember hearing from Maxwell last week about how it was the desire to mathematically rigorize some of the inactivism

that led him to the Bayesian approach.

And let's now think about how these two densities are linked with a little bit more feedback from one of our participants.

They wrote, the domino metaphor finally makes sense.

The physical dominoes are the physical state of the system corresponding to the recognition model and the falling of the dominoes is like the process or the dynamics of the system reflecting the generative model.

So here we've kind of combined these two different ways of thinking and we're looking at the relationship of the world and the agent or the system and the system's surroundings and directly went ahead and combined perception with the recognition model and action with the generative model.

And then also just to combine that with what Kate was just talking about with cybernetics, this is a quote from the paper that says, on this view, active inference can be read as a new take on the good regulator theorem proposed by Content and Rosh Ashby in 1970.

active inference tells us about the relation between a control system the generative model with priors over action policies and the system being controlled the organism and its adaptive behavior the actual actions undertaken in and part of the world so what exactly does this clarify about active inference or what do people think about this metaphor um or at least way to think about how uh if not necessarily a metaphor

how would we apply active inference to this system?

What are we getting at here with these similarities and differences between the two models?

Sure, Mel.


SPEAKER_08:
Well, so the good regulator theorem, the idea is that any good control structure for some larger system has to

be a model of that system.

It has to contain in it all of the key variables for that system.

And basically what this says to me about active inference is that in order for a system in an environment to be able to adequately react to whatever kinds of perturbations are happening in the environment, it has to contain all of the key

I call them existential variables, the variables in the environment that would lead to the system continuing to exist or not continuing to exist.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And so how exactly, I'm just curious, does the system come to embody all the key variables of the outside world?

Like, don't the models of the organism reflect a simplified version of the outside world?

Otherwise, there kind of is a Borges story about the map that represents the territory exactly.

So how does a good regulator arise in the context of an environment like that?

Shannon, and then Maxwell.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, I don't think the key is to be an exact like imitative model of the world or an exact map even of the world, but just a model that is good enough to enable you to act and adjust in the world.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Maxwell and then Mel.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

I mean, uh, so formally speaking, there's a difference between external states and hidden states.

Um,

And I mean, when everything is going well, the external states that are modeled by the system coincide with the hidden states that are actually out there.

And this is more of this.

I mean, it's not.

I'm not sure if it's guaranteed, but it is strongly implied by the fact that we're minimizing variational free energy.

If we're not generating a lot of free energy, then the external beliefs that we have about the environment tend to reflect the causal structure of that environment.

But I mean, Manuel Baltieri and Chris Buckley have done some interesting work showing that actually

There isn't a necessary kind of entailment relation.

The system can be acting that don't actually exist.

And I mean, this makes sense also just evolutionarily.

perceptual systems don't track truth they enable adaptive behavioral loops so if you're a prey item like a bunny it's adaptive to generate a lot of false positives uh compared to you know allowing for false negatives and in terms of like predator detection it's it's more advantageous to you know make a few less costly mistakes than make a big one so uh

I mean, yellow Breenenberg and Eric Roosevelt make, make that point in the paper that Kate was mentioning just earlier, but, uh, yeah, the, uh, it doesn't actually have to hook up to anything in the real world though.

Usually it will end up doing so.

Cool.

Mel and Sasha.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah.

So the, the key term in what I said is, is key actually.

Um, so the key variables, right.

That's just what keeps the system alive.

And we can imagine that we first get a system on the scene that needs just basically one parameter in its environment to be correct in order to continue to exist as a system.

And then we build up from there to systems that are progressively more and more complex and need progressively more and more complex sort of environmental scenarios to survive.

And then

they themselves in order to survive in those more complex regimes need to build in complexity right in in terms of their their the models of the world that they enact right and i think that says something interesting about um how we conceptualize uh cognition and the onset of cognitive complexity um as sort of um and this is peter godfrey smith's line on the subject is

is it's a response to a complexifying environmental circumstance, right?


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Sasha, then Alex Kiefer.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah.

One key phrase that really helped me better understand active inference is good enough.

And that's what really kind of put it all together that while we're going about and reducing uncertainty,

about our system, it just has to be good enough to make the next action or in the evolutionary sense to survive.

And that metaphor has really helped me go through all this, all these high-level concepts.

So thank you for mentioning that.


SPEAKER_00:
Alex Kiefer, then Alex Vyatkin.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

Yeah, I just wanted to just note that you don't need to contrast accuracy or, you know, answerable to the truth-ness with enabling adaptive behavior as like a dichotomy.

I'm not sure if that's what was intended or not, but there's one reason I've had trouble getting into understanding the sort of anti-representationalist

viewpoint is that, you know, structural similarity is a matter of degree.

Accuracy is a matter of degree in this sense.

So, I mean, yes, your hidden state representation doesn't have to map completely accurately onto reality.

It doesn't have to capture every detail.

But if it doesn't do that to any degree, you're screwed.

So, you know, maybe we need systematically sort of simpler or biased representations in order to do the job.

But I think there's still an implied relationship to the truth.

There.

Cool.

Alex?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, thanks.

I want to change the system's level of consideration of possible application of Active Inference.

And for me, interesting on a personal level in terms of day phenomenology and especially professional or working day phenomenology,

how it works, what is a generative model, and like an example, and what I want to discuss, if I get it correctly, or how it could possibly develop to think about it.

But if, for example, some doctor, he knows different disciplines and these different ontologies,

And when he met a patient, he started his action by his generative model, which activates with recognition models to serve as a doctor, depends on exact situation and exact case.

and if it's so from for example from another level from team level if person behave professionally in some discipline it's became like a perception model for generative model of the team and what does it mean in terms of learning and education of team members because if we can how

some in some way to link recognition models with ontologies and starting to work with it more again cybernetically it's possible could be very interesting at least for me cool agreed the the ontologies the how we think about the world definitely influences our perception and sasha do you have something else otherwise okay shannon go ahead


SPEAKER_05:
I was just going back to Alex Kiefer's point that your model, like there has to be some truth relationship with the world.

And if we're going to the dominoes and the process needs to be that the dominoes fall to make some cool pattern, if there's an interruption, like, so now this domino can't reach the next domino, like that's akin to a disruption and how truthy the model is of the world.

And it disrupts the action that you're able to take or it disrupts the, um,

you die instead of being able to survive because your model isn't accurate at that stage for the processes to continue happening to do the next action or to survive.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Cool discussion on this domino system.

Let's talk about counterfactuals and also return to some of the great questions Alejandra raised in previous weeks.

This is from another participant's feedback.

They wrote,

What I'd like to clarify, if possible, is the following.

Am I right in understanding the generative model as a control system that is dynamically instantiated between an organism and an affordance in the context and the recognition density as a relation between the sensory inputs and the possibilities for action policies encoded in the organism?

If so, how does this work when action is instantiated by counterfactual forms of cognition or simulation, i.e.

those that do not rely on affordances in the current external context?

And so on the bottom right, there's a younger person looking into the mirror or maybe vice versa and seeing an older person.

And this is reflecting how not only is there a deep temporal aspect to our action in the current moment,

meaning that there's often affordances that aren't available to us at the second that we're actually making the decision but also that we think about future possible affordances that don't exist based upon the sensory data that we're getting or do they and then on the right side i have a few bacteria because this is like an example of a system that we might not think of as having a simulation or counterfactual based

mechanism of action, often bacterial behavior can be summarized quite concisely by just the short term gradients that it's ascending or descending.

So for anyone to raise their hand and chime in, how do counterfactuals play into this and how do we make sense of affordances that aren't in the current ecosystem but are still important for behavior?

Maxwell?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I just want to comment on the first part of that question.

Um, so, I mean, I think it's a bit simpler than that in terms of the relationship between the recognition and the generative models or densities.

Um, so your recognition model is just your post, your posterior, the, all of your posteriors, basically all of the, all of your posterior estimates over States and precisions.

It's like my best guess as to, you know, what the value of all these States are.

Um,

And you can think of that as the system's current physical state.

So under the active inference formalism, the current physical state of the organism encodes basically the specific parameters of these beliefs over external states.

The actual physical states of the system encode these parameters.

Yeah, you embody a best guess.

The generative model is the point of reference for the free energy gradients.

So you can think of one as like, you know, the inference model and the other is the control model in the sense that the inference model or the recognition density is sort of like my best guess right now.

And the generative model is essentially, you know, a model of what my phenotypic preferences are.

And it's the tandem between the two that kind of gets you behavior.

as in the generative model provides the point of reference for the definition of the variational free energy gradients, i.e.

how close am I to my desired sensory distribution?

And the recognition model tells you where you are effectively.

So it's like where I am, where I want to be, and the free energy is sort of the difference between the two effectively.

So, I mean, the first part of that question, yes, you're right in understanding the generative model as a control system.

The recognition density is just the best guess.

It's the posterior.

So, I mean, yes, it is harnessing these relations that are being described here, but that's precisely because it's a posterior estimate of states and precisions and all that.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And one more thought on that is for an agent who knows about, for example, how hammers and nails are related through their internal models, they might look at hammers and nails and pieces of wood and think, you know, later on I could build a house with this.

And so it's actually a future affordance, but it's based upon sensory input at the current moment.

Cool.

I'm gonna just move on to the next slide.

And just a short little quote by Buckminster Fuller, because sometimes I just have to.

He wrote, rope may not be much like water, but knot is like the wave.

And this is from the Synergetics Framework.

And it's getting at this notion that there's a difference between structural integrity, which is like the rope and the water, which are quite different.

They're both static and stable, to pattern integrity.

And knots and waves can travel through medium.

And so by virtue of traveling through medium, kind of like that domino wave, there's something similar about these traveling waves that goes beyond the mere structural integrity of their media.

And so I just, a thought question for later is really, is active inference a structural integrity or a pattern integrity?

I would say that it's a pattern integrity.

And just bringing up this notion that many far from equilibrium systems, though their mechanisms are extremely different, for example, the bacteria and the person, there's going to be similarities because of the way that they're needing to persist from a cybernetic perspective.

Enough there.

Let's get to that question about structural aspects of attractors.

So here, a participant provided feedback and wrote, why can't the recognition and generative models be considered as structural representations?

So they're coming from a structural representationalist perspective.

They wrote, in which case the dynamics of the structure are taken into account as part of the representation.

Even if we're appealing to dynamical systems, the states of any particular dynamical system over time make up the structural representation.

Take the Lorenz attractor.

The Lorenz attractor has a specific approximate structure around two attractor states, but the states and the trajectory of any point are sensitive to initial conditions.

So any two initial points will lead to different precise physical states and dynamics, but will still travel through a very similar trajectory which hovers around these attractor basins.

The states and the dynamics of a set of points over time can be taken as a whole and be identified as embodying structural representations of the Lorenz system.

So this is something from the realm of chaos and complexity theory.

And the Lorenz attractor is an attractor that describes a simplified system of equations describing the flow of fluid.

And it's a fluid of uniform depth.

And there are also parameters for the imposed temperature difference, the gravity parameters, the buoyancy, the thermal diffusivity, and the kinematic viscosity.

And the simple physical analogy here is like heating up a pot of water.

There's heat coming from the bottom and there's cooling coming from the top.

And there's this churning happening and it goes around these two different attractor states.

So in this case, maybe Alex or anyone else who raises their hand, what is structure and what is representation?

And if we agree on what this system is, then what is this representation debate that's happening?

Mel?

Mel?

Unmuted, Mel?

Or Maxwell, go ahead.

Okay, let's go to Alex.

Yeah, Mel, if you want to speak, your hand is raised.

Then we'll go to Alex Kiefer first.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, Mel raised their hand first, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I was going to say.


SPEAKER_08:
Alex and me.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, perfect.


SPEAKER_08:
Then Maxwell.


SPEAKER_01:
OK, well, I was going to say, hey, let Mel talk.

I don't have much to say about the Lorenzo tractor.

It looks like a, I mean, I'm not sure what's supposed to be represented in this case.

I have an intuition in the case of dealing with a biological system, because we're intuitively representing some kind of environment.

I'm just not sure.

I'm not sure how to begin with this example.

Right, we've got the state space and this nice graphical representation of the state space, but unless we interpret this entire system as representing something, I don't know what to say about its sort of content.

Okay, cool.

Mel?


SPEAKER_08:
I don't know what a recommendation is, and so I

For that reason, I guess I think that the question of what a representation is and what in the world is a representation is maybe too ambitious, only because I haven't solved it.

But there's a related question that's less ambitious, which is what is the difference between a biological function and a representation?

And that, I think, is more manageable in some respects.

In PhilBioMindCogSci, we speak of the disjunction problem.

So we speak of, and I know Maxwell hates this framing and thinks it's outdated and we don't need it anymore.

The idea is that in order for representation to be a representation, it needs to have the capacity to represent.

And we have a similar idea in biological function, which is that in order for a function to be a function, it needs to have the capacity to malfunction, right?

So you need malfunction to have function, you need misrepresentation to have representation.

But how do we differentiate a function from a representation?


SPEAKER_00:
Good question.

Maxwell, then Alex.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Well, so regarding the question, what is a representation?

We targeted a very specific account of representation.

I mean, in the philosophy of cognitive science, a representation is basically an internal thing within an organism that stands for some feature of the environment or the organism's own body in a way that the organism can leverage to do something interesting.

We focused more specifically on the claim that generative models are structural representations.

I mean, this has been an account that's been, you know, Opie and O'Brien first worked on this in the mid-2000s, and then Vlad Zayevsky and Milkowski in the context of predictive coding, and then Alex Kiefer and Jakob Howie, you know, built on that, I think, in a very interesting way.

And, you know, from that point of view, structural representation is an internal structure that's internal to an organism that gets its representational content.

Because it stands in a relation of structural similarity to some target domain in the sense that second order structural features of that target domain, like the statistical properties of the domain are recapitulated or like mirrored in the actual properties of the representations themselves.

That's the first.

There's a structural similarity, first property.

Second property, it's not just that these structures are in the organism, they have to be exploitable in some sense.

So the organism needs to be able to use the content encoded in the representation to guide intelligent adaptive behavior.

And then there are these two other points that I think are pretty minor.

It has to be detachable, meaning that the system can use it offline.

like as in, you know, not like actually engaging with the environment, and it has to be able to afford representational error detection in a manner similar to maps.

So those are the main features of structural representations according to the philosophical account on offer.

And in this paper, we propose that generative models are not structural representations

Precisely because these properties don't seem to be true of the generative models.

I mean, yeah, I think Alex and I are going to still disagree about this even after talking about it for like dozens of hours at this point.

But yeah, the main reason why in this paper we argue that they're not is that the generative model isn't encoded in anything.

And this is like one of the main differences between more traditional Bayesian brain architectures and active inference.

As Dan was pointing out really early on in traditional architectures, well, the recognition and generative models are just inverse the ones of the others.

The recognition model is a mapping from the data to states and the generative model is a mapping from states to data.

So it's really just the same.

kind of set of connections and everything, but it's just like, which direction are you considering it?

Like from the top down flow,

are from the top-down flow or the bottom-up flow of information.

In the active inference scheme, it doesn't work like that.

The generative model is nowhere in the physical organism.

It's only in the dynamics.

So it's very much like these dominoes falling over.

The wave of falling dominoes isn't present in any of the kind of it

single dominoes falling over, the wave is part of the dynamic phenomenon.

And it's the same with the variational free energy and the generative model.

The generative model just is not there at any time slice.

It only exists insofar as we consider a lapse of time as the point of reference for the free energy gradients.

So from that point of view, it can't possibly be a structural representation because it's not encoded by anything.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

That's the point.

A lot there.

Let's go to Alejandra, Mal, and then... Okay, we'll go to Alex, Alejandra, then Mal.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, please do.

I figured you'd have something there.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, well, I mean, that was a really nice explanation of what structural representationalism is, so I don't have much to argue about there.

And in general, I don't want to argue more than is necessary.

You know that about me.

But I think the reason I want to insist on some of this stuff is just for my own basic sanity to just feel like I have an understanding of what's going on with this stuff, right?

So the reasons, despite, I understand, I think I understand exactly why from an active inference perspective,

you wouldn't want to say that the generative model is encoded.

Let me just say at first, I think the question of whether or how it's encoded is maybe a slightly distinct question from whether it's a representation.

And the reason I think that it has to be a representation

Well, there are many reasons.

One argument, the recognition model is an approximation to the generative model, right?

And so that's one example of like a rational or probabilistic relationship between these models.

And I don't think that that makes any sense if the generative model is not a representation also.


SPEAKER_02:
So that's how that works under active inference.

I agree that in a more traditional Bayesian brain sense, the recognition model is trying to approximate


SPEAKER_01:
uh generative model i mean that's that's essentially how it's working um it's an approximate posterior approximately yeah it's an approximate posterior but it isn't approximating the generative model well it's approximating the posterior under the generative model right so so that means right and both both the generative and the recognition models are concerned their distributions in part over uh

I have to be careful here.

Not the actual external states necessarily, but over hidden states.

I don't know how on earth you get those into the picture if it's not a representation that you're talking about, because the hidden states are environmental states.

They're not necessary, right?

We have to be, as you point out in the paper, we have to be careful to distinguish the generative model from the generative process.

We can't just identify what actually happens with the generative model.

I think we need to have

This is one of the fundamental questions that I think in activism often is faced with is how do we deal with, yeah, I mean Mel brought up misrepresentation.

So the fact that, the point is the way that you see the world, the organism or creature system sees the world is not necessarily the way it is, but we still have that distribution over external states as essentially part of the generative model.

Let me just say one more thing here about encoding.

So the reason

I think if you look under the hood a little bit, so the generative model under active inference, as I understand it, can roughly be identified with the non-equilibrium steady state density, right?

Something like that.

So I mean, I would just say, right, the dynamics sort of instantiate the generative model.

I think that's a really cool point.

And I actually think that structural representationalists didn't do quite enough to

emphasize the fact that the generative model is used as a control system.

But I think if you look under the hood, there will be some features of the system, like stable structural features in virtue of which it has that nest density.

So in fact, you will find some stable thing that you could think of as encoding the generative model, maybe.

At least that's why I still have, you know, I'm still attached to my views on this.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Let's do Alejandra, then Mel.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think I agree with Alex.

I'm kind of confused how the generative model can be conceived just like this inactive process.

Really, I was reading the paper all over again.

I actually don't get it.

For me, it was the recognition density is the inversion of the generative model.

So if it is not encoded like anywhere, I feel kind of lost there.

For me, yeah, these top-down connections, this is the generative model, talking about the brain specifically.

And the recognition density is related with this button of connection.

So you can recognize your best guess, right?

So if it is not encoded, what can be said about these top-down connections?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_02:
Maybe I can jump in here and just provide some points of clarification about the generative model, if that's okay.

Yep.

Okay.

So is screen sharing activated?


SPEAKER_00:
You could share your screen if you want.

Yeah, you probably should be able to.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, let me try this.

Okay, so this is from a paper called the graphical brain.

And this is what the generative models look like.

All right.

Can everyone see my screen?

Yep.

Also, we're going to be returning to this in the show.

Yeah, so the generative model is defined as a joint probability density over all of the variables of interest in the system, right?

So

In this case, the variables of interest are the states that we're trying to infer, which are here S, the policies that I'm trying to pursue, which is here pi, and the data that I'm observing at any given time step, which is here denoted O. Just so everyone is clear, time flows from left to right.

So this is the first state, this is the second state, this is the third state.

And essentially, the model, you only have access to this data point.

These are counterfactual data points.

And the whole thing is updated basically at every time step.

And so look, the generative model itself, like I said, is just a joint probability density.

It's like the probability of all these variables connected with ands effectively.

And when we say that the generative model is not present in the system, I mean that this density here, this joint probability density is never encoded anywhere in the system.

because the generative model itself is factorized.

So basically you take this joint probability density and then using some Bayes rule and other chain rule, et cetera, manipulations, you can write this joint density as the product of a bunch of likelihoods and priors.

And it's these likelihoods and priors that are updated constantly as part of the recognition density.

So this prior about your data given your states and this other prior about your states given the next state and the policy and all this, these are updated dynamically.

And their current value, like all of them together,

collectively comprise the generative model.

Yeah, that's right.

Sorry, the recognition model.

The generative model is how these quantities are all connected, the ones to the others.

So if you want to think about it heuristically, all of these specific parameters, like the s, the pi, the o, all that, all of those values together, as they're being updated,

comprise the recognition density.

And the generative density or the generative model is really just these relations between the different quantities as they change.

So it's literally that the inference process itself

is what holds all these quantities together.

And the generative model is just a description of how those quantities flow together.

Yeah, so again, it's like the dominoes falling over thing.

The wave of dominoes only exists in that motion.

And similarly, the generative model only exists in that kind of coordinated inference or update dynamics of the quantities that are part of the recognition density.

And the reason it's called a generative model at all is just because it's a terminology borrowed from machine learning.

In machine learning, the joint probability density over all of your variables is known as a generative model.

So it's called that way just because that's the technical term.

It's also called that way because if you're starting from a joint density over all of your variables, you can actually generate

fictive data that you would expect under this configuration of different parameters.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for that clarification.

Maxwell will have those models.

Well, Mel, and then we'll carry on with that all sounds pretty good to me.

Go for it, Mel.

I think Kate and Mel have Yeah, yeah.

Okay, Kate, and then Mel, I just wanted to, um,


SPEAKER_08:
follow up to what Maxwell was saying about structural representation.


SPEAKER_00:
Can you all hear me?

Yep, go for it.


SPEAKER_08:
Can people hear me?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Yes, we can hear you.


SPEAKER_08:
Beautiful.

Awesome.

Yeah, just to follow up to what Maxwell was saying about structural representation, the sort of detachability of the representation, right, that's what should get us the distinction between

a biological function and at least a structural representation, right?

Because my feet and legs and knees are a representation of ground in some very minimal sense in the same way that fish fins are representations of fish fins and bird wings are representations of fluid dynamics, right?

But this isn't

detachable from immediate environmental circumstance for offline use, right?

So that's what should get us the difference between functional representation.

But I'm curious to see what role that plays in the FEP and active inference, if any.

Do we want to, is there merit in retaining a distinction between functional representation under active inference in the FEP, or are they just sort of continuous with one another?


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Very good question.

Kate, did you have something there?

Okay.

Okay.

I'm going to just continue with the slides because I'm not sure.

I think Kate's up next.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
I wasn't sure if you wanted to reply.

I think I'm still with the, in the case of the, the paper was really useful for me in like helping me understand what the generation model is.

was in the FEP almost all the way, like when it's described as like a statistical description of the generative process and the way you've explained it here, all of that makes sense to me.

But then there's also parts in the paper where it says, where you think it's like the generative model sort of is what the organism expects and it guides what the organism does, which makes it sound like the generative model is playing this kind of causal role, not the generative process but the generative model itself.

And I find that kind of confusing, given that the generative model isn't something encoded by the organism, or by the system.

I get the idea of it as a statistical description of the dynamics, that sounds right.

I just don't understand how, if that's all it is, that it's something the organism uses, it seems like it's something we use to describe the organism, rather than something the organism itself is in any way using.


SPEAKER_02:
That's a good point.

I proposed in a recent paper that came out in Entropy not too long ago that both are correct.

So you basically, the correct way to interpret the FEP is as instrumentalism nested within instrumentalism.

Meaning that we can have a model theoretic philosophy of science reading of the FEP and, you know, for that matter, any other theory of cognition as this is a model that we as scientists are using to explain the behavior of organisms.

What I've been trying to argue is that the FEP itself at the theory level is also saying the organism is exploiting the statistical structure of its body and movement, aka the generative model, to guide adaptive behavior.

So the model really is these harnessed relations between the variables that have to obtain for survival to persist.

And, you know, so it's sort of this idea that once the system kind of gets moving, then there's kind of an inertial dynamic thing kind of keeping it moving.

So like, you know, my core body temperature is 36 and a half degrees.

And the fact that it is keeps a bunch of other processes in play that in turn keep me preserving my temperature, you know, by initiating adaptive behavior, like putting on a parka when it gets cold and so on.

So, yeah, I mean, both kinds of generative models are used separately in dynamical causal modeling of the kind that the Friston group used to model the spread of COVID.

We're not assuming that the process that we're modeling is itself an active inference agent.

And so you can do that, but you can also make the additional assumption that it is, and then you're in the game of active inference proper.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Thanks, Maxwell.

Oh, go ahead, Kate.


SPEAKER_06:
Can I come back to that?


SPEAKER_02:
Go ahead.

Yes, absolutely.


SPEAKER_06:
I think the kind of where I get there then is it sort of seems like you're losing the distinction between the vehicle of the model and the target of the model, such that I worry it sounds a bit like just saying everything is a model of itself, essentially.


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, effectively, that is what we're saying.

um and that's where it gets a little hazy for me like you know that's probably the point of disagreement between alex and i also i want to say the generative model just is the organism in the sense that like this this specific you know statistical structure that harnesses all of these different you know existential variables as mel was saying like this really just is the organism like this kind of statistical structure that keeps kind of reiterating itself and

coming into existence.

That just is the organism.

And that's one of the reasons why I don't want to say that this model is a representation of anything.

You could just call it the phenotype.

We call it a generative model because, formally speaking, the same construct is borrowed from a field in which it's called a generative model.

But you can think of it as the organism's phenotype.

And precisely because it's a bit weird

to think of the model as modeling itself, I kind of resist that interpretation and say, well, you know, if anything is a model really in the more traditional sense, it's this recognition density that's performing posterior state inference.

And I'm sure that Alex will tell me why I'm wrong in a second.


SPEAKER_00:
It's a great response.

Let's just move on through a few more of the slides because there's a lot in the figures that I think gets at this.

Mel has her hand up.

Oh, sorry.

Go ahead, Mel.


SPEAKER_08:
Oh, I just wanted to interject that I think Maxwell is possibly mismodeling himself.

I think he's actually a tad bit more realist than he's letting on.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, Maxwell, a realist at heart.

On my bad days.

Exactly.

If you can't take care of me, I'm my most real.

So in this next slide, one of the feedback just from a participant, just to give an example, and we won't spend too much time here, but I like this idea that the beliefs don't have to be verbal.

uh that the physical therapy context shows us how the range of movements that the body does not want to go to for example due to a traumatic experience or injury embodies a belief that doesn't involve language and this was a paper with uh limanowski and friston from 2020 where a person's hand was opening and closing and then they were getting a vr

visual that was delayed or was inaccurate.

And so there's so much here about how our sensory feedback, our proprioceptive, as well as our visual feedback, multimodal systems are being used.

And that's the mess that would take us so many hours and more to clarify.

This is what the representation questions are about.

So it's like the person, what is the representation of the current state of their hand being closed?

at that just pure phenotype level, maybe somebody with a ruler says, well, it's whether the hand is closed or not.

But it's not just that, because if you're getting visual input that's messing with you, it changes your behavior.

So there's something else happening, and that's really a lot of what we're talking about.

I think going through the figures two, three, four are gonna be really helpful before we have closing thoughts.

And thanks everyone for bearing with, this was sort of a weirdly technically altered stream.

Briefly, the Bayesian networks.

So Bayesian networks are from Bayesian statistical sciences.

And in these diagrams, the nodes are variables.

They're like random variables, stochastic variables, or parameters.

The edges are statistical relationships.

They're probabilistic relationships, and they can be undirected or directed.

These models are quite common in statistics, and also there's some really nice aspects about them in that you can bring prior knowledge to the table with your priors, and you can also estimate it directly from the data with a parametric empirical base.

And to give an example about what this looks like, here on the top right, we can see how like an accident increases the likelihood that you'll hear sirens.

An accident also increases the likelihood of having a traffic jam.

Bad weather can increase the likelihood of accidents or traffic jams.

So these Bayesian networks are pretty commonly used in a lot of statistical areas.

And we can contrast that with what are called Forney factor graphs.

And working through this De Vries and Friston paper was definitely quite an experience.

This is a complex paper and there's a lot in it.

But in a Forney factor graph,

as they write in the paper.

It's a type of graphical model that shares qualities with Bayesian networks and Markov random fields.

For any factor graphs afford a visually insightful representation of generative models, especially beneficial for complex models underlying hierarchical active inference.

In a Forney factor graph, each factor is represented by a node and each variable by an edge.

So it's like a flip of the Bayesian.

An edge attaches to a node if the edge variable is an argument of the node.

And so here on the right is a table from the paper of de Vries and Friston, and it shows how we can think about these functions like addition, subtraction, multiplication as having variables coming in and out.

And just to really quickly summarize the similarities and differences, in the Bayesian networks, the nodes are variables, whereas in the Forney graph, the nodes are the factors or the functions.

In the Bayesian networks, the edges are the probabilistic relationships amongst variables, whereas in the Forney factor graphs, the edges are the variables themselves.

A cool trick about Bayesian networks is this model inversion, which is that the model can be gleaned from the data, and also the data can be generated from the model.

Another cool trick of Forney graphs is that they specify a specific order for factorizable computation, making extremely massive models tractable.

And then a last cool fact about a Bayesian network is that's where the Markov blanket formalism comes from, which is it's the set of nodes that insulates one part of the network from each other.

from a probabilistic perspective, though there's a lot of nuance in how it's used in the free energy principle framework.

And the cool fact about the Forney graphs is that it's linked to information theory and message passing, computation, and other math.

So in figure two,

we see this generative model in active inference.

And this is actually the model that Maxwell had on his screen earlier.

And I annotated all the pieces.

So just as Maxwell was saying, time flows from the left to the right.

And this is, again, a Bayesian network representation.

So the boxes or the circles, and there's different types of them, which are described in the caption, the boxes and the circles are like variables.

So the initial state is a vector.

The hidden states are variables.

The state transition matrix is how the hidden states map to each other.

That's B. A is the map between the states and the observations.

And then figure three,

is the same thing as a Forney factor graph.

And so this is showing that there's this equivalence with representing something as a Bayesian net and a Forney factor graph.

And the Forney factor graph allows for these extremely large scale hierarchical models to get factorized and then computed in a tractable way.


SPEAKER_02:
And so- I should say like the advantage of using a Forney style factor graph is that the message passing is just, you can just read it directly off

the Forney style factor graph.

And there's an algorithmic way of moving from a Bayes net to a Forney style factor graph.

So typically intuitively the Bayes net is easier to write.

Cause you can, you know, you can just literally write down the dependencies between all of your factors like this.

So, you know, like, I don't this state depends on this other state.

And, you know, there are these transitions and etc, blah, blah.

And so, you know, from this, you can move to the Forney style factor graph.

And that tells you just directly how that will be implemented in active inference.

I should say that the reason why I we discussed these at all is really just to show in the next figure how the figure for how the generative model and the generative process kind of link up.

To me, this is where the interesting stuff happens, where literally the generative process, and this is a model of the generative process, how we think it's structured.

It's in this little box here, and then the Forney-style factor graph represents the message passing that is ongoing outside the box to keep all the quantities within phenotypic bounds consistent.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Maxwell.

And yeah, I know that was a little bit of a rapid sprint through these figures, but it's so cool that there's a formal way to relate the Bayesian and the factor graph models.

And just as you specified, it's easy to specify sometimes the Bayesian network, just like, oh, well, the traffic jam depends on the weather and the weather depends on this other feature.

And then the factor graph,

allows us to have an order of computation and a really implementable way to compute it.

And also it has some similarities with message passing, for example, in neural network systems.

So it's an interesting question that I've been having is, okay, we talk about this as a Bayesian theory, but if it can also be represented in another way,

Is it really a uniquely Bayesian theory?

Or what do we gain by saying that it's a Bayesian theory?

It's within the domain of Bayesian inter-transformability or interoperability, but that doesn't uniquely disambiguate it.

And that's why I think some of these philosophical questions that we're talking about here, like about representation and about cause, are so open because it's not uniquely specified by...

the free energy principle or by active inference, like how exactly we should answer these philosophical questions.

Because in the end, as Maxwell said, it's the technical details.

This is what we're talking about when we're talking about the free energy minimization and how that bears upon the policy selection.

This is what's happening.

And also one more point before, if anyone raises their hand to provide a comment, is notice that the free energy is linking to the policy selection, PI, P for policy.

And that means that the organism isn't just minimizing the free energy of the observations given a sort of neutral representation.

Actually, the policy representation, specifically how it bears upon how states transition into each other, that's what the actual computation is being done upon.

So the observations are being used to run then upstream through the hidden states and their transitions into the policy that ultimately dictates what's going to be done by being selected by the organism or the system as the most likely.

So this is really how deeply action is embedded in these models.

It's not that there's a latent representation of the external states and then you're doing a best guess on what you should do.

It's actually like

Action is at the top here.

The policy is at the top.

And so I think that's really a nice feature of these models.

And it becomes graphically clear.

And then if somebody wants to have philosophical framework A or philosophical framework B on top of this structure, or if they want to propose a different structure for how observations and policies are linked, that's something great.

It's something tractable that we can talk about.

But this also returns to the metaphor discussion.

This is the real thing as it is.

Cool.

I know we had to sprint through there, but it's just coming near the end of our time.

So any thoughts on these images or are people ready to sort of go to our closing thoughts?


SPEAKER_02:
I would just say the equations are more interesting, but just saying.


SPEAKER_00:
the equations are interesting and and the 2017 de verizon friston and this model it just reminds uh me that if we can write down that bayesian relationship the probabilistic relationship between variables then there's going to be a process model that is going to be how we can link it and uh these captions are very informative and there's really a lot to say here but

Enough for today.

Let's close it out.

We can hear any last thoughts, but while people are preparing their last thoughts and raising their hand if they'd like, I would just like to thank everyone for participating.

We're learning and developing each time, figuring out the tech each time.

We provide follow-up forms to the live participants, so just check the calendar invitation and it would be really helpful to have feedback.

we also request feedback suggestions and questions from the participants live in the comments or otherwise and uh just stay in communication we really appreciate everyone's engagement here and it's been such a great learning experience so if anyone wants to raise your hand alejandra first and then followed up by anyone else who wants to let's just have some closing thoughts


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I was wondering if it's possible to model updating when you are doing offline cognition without an explicit policy?

you are not doing something online when this interaction, bodily interaction, you are thinking about something and then you have like this, like Mel said, like this eureka feeling.

So this is kind of a model of dating without action.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_02:
The short answer is yes.

I just linked a paper to it.

we've created a ruminating agent.

So basically this agent combines the affective inference scheme that we have developed over the last two years, where you're effectively inducing a new hierarchical layer of state inference based on state and precision estimates at the lower level.

And these are affective states that then guide lower level precision estimation.

So we combined that with what's called sophisticated inference, which is the new generation of active inference agents, vanilla formulation, current vanilla.

You could see that in the generative models that we just showed.

They include beliefs about counterfactual observations that we would make as we propagate states into the future.

Sophisticated inference is about propagating your beliefs about the observations that you would make in counterfactual futures.

And so by combining these two things, we have an agent that isn't acting but that ends up ruminating and catastrophizing about its own cognition.

So I just linked the paper in the chat.

We submitted it to the International Workshop on Active Inference.

So it's a little poster now, but we're slowly expanding that into a full manuscript.

But the kind of summary six-pager that just does what you were suggesting, Ale, is, this is it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

Thank you, Maxwell.

But this is kind of confusing with the inactive


SPEAKER_02:
view of cognition but this is why we're not we're not like uh classical and activists yeah we we reject the equal partners principle it's just not the case that uh the body uh the brain um and the cultural like melior are going to be involved in the same way for every task

So like for rumination, you know, you could, you could, I guess, you know, appeal to a history of interaction, which is, you know, the reason why agents are able to entertain beliefs about other agents at all and so on and so forth.

But yeah, you're right.

There isn't much inaction here and that's fine.

I think.


SPEAKER_00:
Alex Kiefer and then anyone else who wants to raise their hand.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I guess in lieu of a proper closing statement, I just wanted to point out that Maxwell has some really cool new work on how the neuronal populations sort of can be seen as an acting inference on their own level, and that this is one way you could see structural representations being sort of realized.

So that's one thing we didn't have time to get into, but I just wanted to say in general, I think regardless of the precise philosophical take that you have on all this stuff,

It's cool to disagree on that level, but this literature has produced some really amazing work, and I think it's pushing forward in a really interesting way.

And one advantage of active inference certainly is that you can actually write down the generative model and sort of transparently see how it works.

And you don't get that out of just unsupervised learning.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Any other thoughts?

Awesome.

Well, thanks so much for the discussion.

We're going to rewatch, understand technologically what did and didn't work.

And for next week, provide all of you, plus anyone else who wants to participate with more of a specific spec sheet for how you can prepare and make sure that it will be a really seamless experience.

And as far as the timing goes as well.

Next week, we will move on to Act Dymph 7.

which is going to be about variational ecology, which is a really awesome paper close to my heart as a biologist as well.

And we would really appreciate anyone who wants to participate in these conversations next Tuesday at 7 a.m.

Pacific or the following Tuesday.

Both of these discussions will be really great and it's quite a complex paper, so I'm sure we'll have a lot to go into again.

So once again, thanks so much everyone for your participation.

Really brought up some awesome ideas and I hope we conveyed to those within and without of the field that there's a lot of discussion ongoing.

By no means are these questions resolved and it's an opportunity for people to bring their unique perspectives to the table.

So thank you all again for your participation.

Really appreciate it and we'll see you later.
