Fraser Paterson:
all right hello everyone so we're here to it's june the 30th uh 2026 we're um in a bit of a sort of intermediary session for the fundamentals of active active infants textbook uh we have officially finished part one now yay so chapters one to four one to five sorry um and that marks quite a quite a milestone for for what we've done so we've kind of gone through the the fundamentals as it were the fundamentals of the fundamentals in some sense

And we're now going to be moving into part two, where we don't initially start making contact with action, but we're going to bring in action in part two.

We're going to do active inputs proper, which is going to be very, very exciting going forward.

So we've seen a huge amount of background, appreciated a lot of where things come from, general ideas, general concepts.

that we're going to start doing actual, quote unquote, active inference in the second part.

But this session, and indeed the session on Friday, which I will also host, at least going forward, that's the plan, this is meant to be just kind of reflection.

We're going to sort of slow down and think about part one in general, chapters one to five.

This will be an opportunity for people to ask questions to myself and Andrew live or otherwise about anything to do with part one.

you know, going so that we can be adequately grounded going forward.

I will say we have one one question is, you know, we've done each chapter across two weeks.

Historically, you know, chapter one, we've had two weeks going forward.

depending on what people might like we might like to do a review yet another week of review uh so you know this week and then next week as well and then go into chapter six from part two i know that there are there are a lot of people who are excited to have this review session basically um for you know part one not immediately jumping into part two so we're definitely gonna have this week but i would be interested to see if what what people's kind of thoughts are around maybe having an additional week

of getting more kind of review in part one where we can really consolidate really get our teeth around right you know sink our teeth into to the ideas that might be too much for some people we might lose momentum um maybe some people are eager to get the part two so it's an open question and we we can sort of do what we want we can decide you know do we want a second week or not um i see a lot of people in the chat are saying yes please so maybe

It would be a good idea to reach out through the blankets email.

Maybe if you are interested in a second week or on the Discord as well, that would be a very excellent place.

That would be amazing.

Good idea.

Yes, please.

I see a lot of people are saying yes.

In this chat here, it would be very helpful if you could give your yay or nay to that as well.

So we can actually look at that just directly through the chat here.

So if you want a second week review, yes.

If you don't, no.

And then we can go forward.

All right.

Enough of that.

I'll start sharing my screen here.


Fraser Paterson:
Probably my entire screen.


Fraser Paterson:
Okie dokie.

So people should be able to see.

Maybe just get rid of...

The session so people should be able to see chapter five I can't currently see you guys, so if you can't do do make some noise.

about what you are not seeing right now i'll just say so, you know we did chapter five last week in the week before what i've done is down here.

So you've got your overview.

I've added one or two additional resources.

So these actually came up.

Andrew shared the first of these.

These are all videos.

One of them is an active inference

coding and active inference.

So that's Ryan Smith and his team.

They've done excellent work on predictive coding.

I'll play that just now.

This is a great stream just about predictive coding more generally and its relation to active inference and its relation to

you know, its status in actual brains.

So if you're interested in more context, this would be excellent to go through.

And there's two more links there as well.

One by Jakob Howie, he's a philosopher over in Australia in the University of Monash.

What is predictive processing and what is it good for?

Another excellent talk.

And then a very, very good talk, which I absolutely love and adore, by Dr. John Verveke.

from the University of Toronto.

He's actually speaking about Neoplatonism and mystical experiences, believe it or not.

And I know it sounds weird.

Predictive processing actually shows up in here in a very significant way.

So that might be a nice mood setter, as it were.

So there's some additional resources there.

I've begun filling in the map for chapter five.

So you see chapters, well, section 5.1 and 5.2, there's a still lying fellow, I'm afraid.

the past week i've been horribly ill and i had a lot of deadlines to attend to so i've not been as attentive as i should be the sections 5.3 and 5.5 the the map is now there for those sections what i've tried to do i'm i'm going back and forth about this i'm of two minds i tend to express the mathematical equations in terms of latex formatting i don't expect that

A lot of you will be fluent in LaTeX, but this is a way to express mathematical notation.

What I'm going to do is I'm going to come back and I think I have a link to the existing equations in the actual equations tab in the coder so that you don't have to either directly read the LaTeX or try and put it into some place that will render it for you.

You can maybe just put this directly into an LLM that will explain what it is and maybe even render the text for you.

So it's not ideal, but the content is there at least.

And especially for those who don't have the book, I think this is quite useful.

So the idea with the chapter maps is that we do the same kind of thing we did for the overall content, so out here in the full chapter.

I try and break things down into what's the core idea, what are the core shifts in understanding, and then what's the core concepts

uh i don't know if i have that here what's previewed what's deferred and what's optional and then maybe some minimal takeaways and then i do that for each section in the book as well so hopefully that's somewhat useful especially for people who don't have the uh the book um but yeah as i say check i i need to uh let me get going with type of 105.2 so are there

Any questions?

Before we do, I'll just give, I think, a very brief 10-minute recap of chapters one to five, and then we can maybe get into some questions, live questions and written questions if people are wanting to do that.

I'll start my share temporarily.

Just coming back.

Very good.

Yes, but it's limited.

Formatting in LaTeX is a bit strange in Coda.

We have looked into that, but we'll be hopefully trying to make things a little bit easier in terms of the ability to read the equations that are displayed in Coda.

OK, so I'll share, come back.

Let's go all the way back, hopefully people can see my screen again, to the introduction.

So everyone's seen this figure here.

This is essentially the first figure in the book.

This is the breakdown of the partitions of the book, so part one, part two, part three.

We finished part one, so we've done chapters one to five, hypothesis, testing, brain, all the way to predictive coding.

Part two is active inference core.

So this is the heart of the book, really.

This is the fundamentals of active inference per se.

what we've done is we've looked at the kind of mathematical constituents and the sort of surrounding set of ideas in which active inference lives in terms of the bayesian brain hypothesis in terms of bayesian updating more generally approximate bayesian inference variational inference and then we've seen a slight twist on those ideas with predictive coding right at the very end

But as has been the case, everything has been just perception only.

So we haven't actually dealt with actions.

And we're going to be moving into that with part two.

But even more fundamentally, everything has been static.

So all of the models we've been looking at, I don't know if I can get a nice example.

All of the models, so this is chapter one.

Let's maybe go down to some of the equations.

They've all been static.

So the environment hasn't really been changing at all.

And this is very simple.

So part one, really going to chapter two, I think.

So we have an environment.

This is one we've seen this many times now.

This is a representation of the generative process, the real process in and of itself out there.

This is fairly static, so nothing is really changing.

The hidden states aren't really changing from moment to moment.

We're just presented with a situation and we have to update our beliefs about what hidden states might be.

That's been constant throughout all of Chapter 1.

Things have gotten progressively more complicated.

We've looked at univariate hidden states where there's literally just one hidden state.

We've looked at multivariate hidden states that came up in Chapter 3 where suddenly we're dealing with vectors of things.

But in every case, it's been static.

The dynamics of the hidden state have been non-existent.

That is going to change going into part two.

We're going to start looking at generative processes which change over time.

And they're the interesting ones.

They're the ones that are actually useful.

And they're the ones that allow us to actually begin to have a reason to act in the environment.

We haven't really had any reason to perform actions yet.

So that's a big move that's going to take place and that we're going to have to deal with.

So maybe just coming back.

So chapter one was about, what was this about?

It was about perception.

Okay.

So like in terms of how we're going to think about perception in active inference.

So in chapter one, we cast or we framed

of perception as bayesian inference okay that's kind of the stance that active difference takes to the question what is perception what is perception it's bayesian inference or rather approximate bayesian inference so that was that was chapter one chapter two was then kind of an unpacking of this in terms of the mathematics um so we're still doing just perception we looked at

you know, how to do like exact Bayesian inference, okay, if we were able to do everything.

We saw how to use Bayes' rule basically.

So we cemented the distinction personally before that around the difference between the generative process and the generative model.

So I come all the way down to the figures here.

I don't have a particularly good figure for that.

Here we go, 2.4.

The really crucial distinction was this distinction between the environments, the generative model, the real world, and the agents, and its model of the real world.

This was the crucial thing, I think, in chapter two, basically.

And we have a way of notating this convention.

We have a convention for notating these differences that is used in the book where we say starred variables, so theta star, x star, blah, blah, blah.

These belong to the generative process, the real world out there.

Okay, and then modeled variables are without a star.

So they correspond to our model.

And what is our model?

It is quite literally a joint probability distribution over hidden states, latent states, and observations.

We use x for latent states and y for observations.

But you can see, of course, the x in here is our model of the real latent state outside of here, x star.

And they need not agree with each other.

They need not be the same.

But what we need is we need a generative model that allows us to make counterfactual predictions about what the hidden states might be.

That is p of x and y.

And then if we have the model evidence, the probability of observing anything,

or some particular observation given any hidden state, we can then do exact Bayesian inference to get our posterior belief about the hidden states given our observation.

And that was kind of chapter two.

And we saw ways of talking about this by talking about specific kinds of probability distributions, namely normal distributions or Gaussian distributions.

And these are very ubiquitous.

They show up everywhere.

We're going to continue that.

In fact, we're going to really intensify our use of normal distributions going into chapter six with continuous active inference.

There are other distributions as well.

We haven't really looked at those yet.

But the real sort of, there's a problem with this, which is that, yes, we can do inference.

Yes, we might even be able to do exact inference for really, really simple problems.

But in chapter two, we said, all right, we've got parameters, which are sort of like the settings on dials on our generative model.

And then we're going to do inference.

And inference is like, I set the dials, and then my machine does some inference stuff, right?

that was cool but the question about how to set the dials was completely skipped in in chapter two we just sort of assumed that the dials were set to be good and then we could do inference but really we need to figure out how do we actually set the dials on the inference process itself and that was chapter three so chapter three is kind of chapter two redux we were doing everything we were doing in chapter two we assumed we could do exact bayesian inference with grid approximation

And we're doing good old fashioned Bayesian inference.

But now we're having to do parameter learning and estimation as well.

And we saw for the first time that this is the first flavor that we have of what it means to be doing learning in active inference.

So we have these two processes, inference and learning parameter estimation.

And they're both able to be done by means of Bayesian inference.

That's the crucial thing.

So really a lot of this is just chapter two again, but we expressed, let me, uh, so yeah.

And look, one of the very, very crucial and central, um, ideas or mechanisms that is used for doing learning where we need to figure out what should the setting of the parameters be this idea of gradient descent.

And we saw many versions of this across the chapter and indeed in other chapters.

It's a very ubiquitous strategy in machine learning and artificial intelligence more generally, where you can imagine you've got some surface that corresponds to a cost of a certain setting of parameters.

So let's imagine we have our two parameters, I don't know, beta 1, beta 0.

And what you do to set the parameters to be good parameters is you have a notion about how costly each point is in this space.

That's this surface.

And then finding good parameters corresponds to descending this surface in such a way to get to the lowest possible point.

And then those, the setting of the parameters, those parameters at the lowest point, they're going to be your best parameters.

Very general way of doing optimization.

However, we saw that we could actually do that process can itself correspond to a process of inference where we're inferring what the parameters should be.

And that, so, you know, we saw that up here in 3.5 when we began to do expectation maximization.

So the idea is that, and this, believe it or not, is actually relevant to what we saw in chapter five, although we haven't really, we hadn't been able to appreciate that until now.

A lot of the time, because chapter five is about predictive coding and hierarchical models, hierarchical predictive coding.

um and we'll get to that we haven't got to that just now and a lot of the time with hierarchical models uh we we use them one of the reasons why we like to use them is because we imagine that there's multiple different kinds of processes that are happening at the same time and they might be happening at different time scales okay and indeed it is very very very common that when we're trying to solve the problem as to what should the good parameters be for our model

And also, how should I use those settings to do good inference?

It's very common to set the parameters and do inference at one time scale, and then at another time scale that's ticking along at a slower pace to do learning when we update our model parameters.

So imagine you've got learning up here.

What should the model parameters be?

And you can do inference on model parameters.

And then that can inform how you do inference at the low-level hidden states.

So there's kind of these two processes that are happening in two different timescales.

That's a very common framing for the problem of Bayesian inference and indeed machine learning more generally.

So that's kind of chapter three.

I'm going to race through this.

And we'll get to chapter five and then to some actual questions from you guys.

Chapter four, then, was a crucial turning point for us in terms of our understanding of the problem that needs to be solved in active inference.

So chapter three, we're still doing exact inference.

But we saw that really we culminated in an algorithm

allows us in so in chapter three we didn't know about hierarchical models yet okay we didn't really know about that language and it culminated in a very very important algorithm which is the expectation maximization algorithm which is to say a way to solve the problem of what should my model parameters be and then also what should my infinite hidden states be

Those two problems are related to one another.

To know the hidden states, you need to know what the good parameters are.

But to know what the good parameters are, you have to know how to infer hidden states well.

So to separate this problem, we came up with and we saw the solution to the chicken and egg problem, which was the expectation maximization algorithm.

I won't go over that again here.

Maybe we will if people want me to.

But that was the solution to the problem of chapter 3, that chicken and egg problem.

The expectation maximization algorithm, as it was presented there, assumes that we can do exact inference to find our exact Bayesian posterior of hidden state skewed observations.

And that, unfortunately, is usually not something we can do.

Being able to find the exact posterior is usually impossible, for reasons that we saw.

We can review again if you want.

So then chapter 4 says, all right, well, we can't do exact Bayesian inference.

What are we going to do?

We're going to have to approximate the exact Bayesian inference somehow, because we'd still like to be able to do something expectation maximization-like.

So the idea with chapter 4 is, ah, OK, we're going to now

have a look at one way of doing approximate Bayesian inference, which is to say variational Bayesian inference, where we say we're not going to try and find the exact posterior.

We're going to try and find a posterior that's close enough to the true posterior.

And this then motivated the idea of variational free energy as a quantity that is a measurement of how well

an approximate posterior fits or how close it is to the true posterior.

And that's kind of where we saw the idea that minimizing variational free energy is a bound, an upper bound on surprisal.

We saw from chapter three that surprisal is something we want to make very small.

So by minimizing this tractable quantity variational free energy, we can get something approximately, well, something that's approximately good enough to minimizing surprisal,

which is something we can't do directly, and therefore we can do approximate Bayesian inference.

So in a lot of ways, that really kind of spiritually is the end of part one, I would say.

The motivation as to where variational free energy comes from, its relation to surprisal, its relation to the minimization of surprisal, and the various forms of variational free energy, we saw that there's at least four kind of canonical ways to express the VFE.

That's, in my mind, really kind of the end of part one.

Chapter five was a nice kind of detour into a different way of thinking about what the VFE is.

So, you know, it's a different kind of a specialization about what it means to be doing variational free energy minimization.

we saw we could express the vfe in terms of prediction errors and specifically precision weighted prediction errors and there's interesting notions about how this relates to things like attention um and various disorders of attention and so on a lot of this you know in terms of the historical development came from uh you know an independent line of inquiry to um the hardcore statistical

know physical methods from which variational free energy free energy minimization came from a lot of predictive coding and predictive processing this came from you know we're doing sort of studies on neurobiology and neuropsychology and we're looking at how literally how neurons do things and so on but then later it was

lots of crosses and bridges were observed to be possible to make between these two different ways of thinking about how intelligent things like brains do their intelligent things like inference and learning.

It turns out that we can very fruitfully re-express all those kind of same ideas that we saw in chapter four with variational free energy minimization

in terms of this you know precision weighted prediction error machinery okay and this is a very big sub uh discipline or sub you know a different way of thinking about that whole procedure

And indeed, there is an entire theory called predictive coding that kind of swings alongside active inference as a slightly different take on the Bayesian brain hypothesis, the idea that the brain is doing some kind of Bayesian inference somehow.

And that's kind of where we left off with part one.

So that is, in effect, what we've done, where we've gone.

That's a lot of stuff to cover, but again, we haven't looked at actions yet.

We're gonna be doing that in part two, and that will bring us full circle to active inference.

And we're gonna see there's all kinds of problems associated with how to do, how to select actions, how that relates to the problem of inference, sorry, just perception.

Okay, we're gonna see that these are deeply related to each other.

But that's the ground that we've covered.

I'd be interested if people have questions related to that.

I see that there's lots of questions.

Stop sharing.

And I see Mark has a question.

Please fire away, Mark.


Marc Broberg:
As usual.

Thank you so much for this review.

This is great.

I was wondering if you could pull up that slide that showed the generative process and the generative model.

That might be helpful as a reference.


Fraser Paterson:
Oh, yeah, okay.

So let me come back here.

That's the one in chapter two, I assume you're referring to?


Marc Broberg:
I think so.


Fraser Paterson:
This one here?


Marc Broberg:
Yes, thank you.

Yeah, I really just kind of appreciate what this textbook is trying to do.

And I think it took me a while to appreciate that.

But nonetheless, so we've got this model of the we've got this in the generative process, right, which is happening.

in the environment and we we kind of make the commitment that this is the ground truth right in a sense and the only noise comes from our observations is that is that a fair uh summary of that well yeah so so far uh given that we've only conceived of things in terms of perception the only sort of source of noise


Fraser Paterson:
in terms of our observation channel yeah so um it's maybe not as expressed here or as easily expressed here as one might like but yes so we can take in observations and we can emit actions uh and the only source of that noise is over the observation channel yeah precisely right okay my overall question uh is that i guess it has to start with the background of


Marc Broberg:
It seems like chapter four kind of serves as a background where the story gets started for the most part.

And this is kind of more of a ground level

view, which is nice and helpful.

What was new to me, and I'm still trying to wrap my head around, is this idea of the linear generating function.

Because in my mind, I'm kind of conditioned to seeing these Gaussians, right?

You've got your prior and your likelihood, and these are all affecting each other when you get to the posterior.

However, here we have this linear function, which I guess is

then becomes part of, say, a likelihood.

And I'm just not quite able to make that bridge of reconciliation between the linear function and these Gaussian curves that we're seeing, if that makes sense.


Fraser Paterson:
Yeah, yeah.

No, absolutely.

I mean, so that's a good point, because for a lot of part one, we have assumed this linear relationship between hidden states and observations.

um so well in terms of the generative process and we notate this here i think this is in terms of this is um i want to give you an equation in terms of where it is so 2.10 okay that i'm not sure which pages is on just yet this is our representation of the generative process the real thing in itself the real environment um for the for our purposes we're going to assume the real environment is constituted like this okay so

This is, in some sense, still our assumption about what the relationship is between observations and the hidden states.

For our purpose, we've assumed that the real world, we're sort of creating a world here.

This is the example of the food size and light intensity world.

This is the really simple world that we've seen for all of part one.

So what are the hidden states?

They are the sizes of the food.

And we can see that there's five different sizes, one to five.

That's the hidden state.

And the observations are light intensities.

So light comes in, hits the food, and you get some sort of light intensity.

And depending on the size of the food, you get some specific light intensity.

So as the food size is larger, what happens in the real world is that the light intensity grows linearly with the food size.

So we're saying that the relationship between the observation you get in

is just equal to the size of the food times some number plus some number and this relationship is a line it's linear so that's the relationship between the hidden states and the observations but the question about the belief that we have about the hidden state that's where the Gaussian stuff enters

So again, this is the environment regenerative process.

The corresponding model is this one, 2.11, equation 2.11, I believe.

now here initially uh sanjeev is motivating things in terms of you know we need to have our likelihood about you know what we think of what we think we will get in terms of observations depending on the hidden state and a prior belief about what we think the hidden state is really like and those two things correspond to our generative model but precisely you know those beliefs

are usually expressed, at least in this stage, in terms of Gaussian distributions, normal distributions, Gaussian distributions, same thing, really, or uniform distribution.

So what this is saying is that, for our likelihood, we're assuming that our observation will be given according to a normal distribution centered about the model that we have of observations.

And the thing is, we're uncertain.

So the agent doesn't get to see what the real relationship is between food size and light intensity.

It has no idea.

It has a model about what it thinks the relationship is.

Now, we know that the relationship is linear.

We know that the relationship between light intensity and food size is you take the food size, you multiply it by a number, and you add another number, and that gives you the light intensity.

But in the real world, we have no idea what the relationship is.

It turns out that in this example, we've specified exactly the same relationship.

So that's quite a nice scenario to be in.

You might imagine a different model that the agent has, where it says, you know what, I think the relationship between light intensity and the food size is beta 1 times the food size.

Now that's wrong, but it's OK, maybe, for some settings.

That would be an example of a likelihood mapping that would be incorrect with respect to its generating function.

So the uncertainty about the mapping between observations and hidden states is encoded by the fact that we are reasoning about a probability distribution, which is this normal thing spread out by some amount.

And it's centered about the relationship we think is the case between the hidden states and the observations.

So the reason why we have this probability distribution is because we don't know.

We do not actually ever get to know what the real relationship is between hidden states and observations.

So does that answer your question, Mark, about why

why probability distributions, maybe why normal distributions, or did that help at all?


Marc Broberg:
Yeah, that helped a lot.

Thank you.

Yeah, it's just recognizing, okay, there's a linear process, and then we have beliefs about said linear process, which are going to be probabilistic, right?

And so it's linear in a sense, because what we're assuming about the generating process is that it's deterministic, is that right?


Fraser Paterson:
uh well we're assuming that yeah like if we go back let's go back to the actual equation so our assumption about the relationship between hidden states and observations is that the hidden states the the the observation is a function of the hidden state and what is the function it's this thing and that just happens to be the equation for a line and so it's linear um we could plug anything in there at all

We could plug, we could say, okay, the relationship is just equal to the hidden state.

I think that the observation is exactly the hidden state, right?

That's an assumption.

Or we can have this assumption where we say, all right, we think the observations are given by some number plus some other number times the hidden state.

Or we can have a quadratic relationship.

We can have anything we want in there at all, actually.

And it's up to us as modelers to plug in what we think the relationship is between hidden states and observations.

Yeah.


Fraser Paterson:
very good, thank you so much, no problem, yeah so, that's not going to happen, beta one, let's have an A, let's have AX plus B,


Fraser Paterson:
Michael Morehead , Second time yeah so if I have a X plus B, and I can change these numbers around here so a right the the thing that I get is a line, so this relationship is literally a line it's linear so yeah that's that's where that comes from.

Michael Morehead , Other questions other questions Magdalena.


Magdalena Hurtado:
Okay, my question is this.

So could we do a thought experiment for a minute?

Because I think if I set it up as a thought experiment, I'll get the answer.

Okay.

Oh, so I'm inside.

Okay, so let's imagine the following.

In present-day societies, we have this societal

back and forth that's debated across nations, groups, populations, etc., where some people have the belief that God exists.

And there's a tension in societies to update that belief by some group to science.

Exists a science so God exists.

So science tells us that God may not exist or something to that effect or quantum physics explains reality.

Not God.

Okay.

So there's a process, right?

That's in in the environment.

that in the individual minds are listening to and have to decide am i going to update to which generative model okay having said that in human societies what happens is that you have the per you have the individual mind right so that's markov blanketed

And then you have one plus minds, which can be, you know, if you look at the anthropological literature, it appears that if there's like a 30 individuals in a hunter-gatherer band across most of our evolution, it's like 30 individuals are kind of like a distributed system where minds are interacting with each other and it has implications.

for that's kind of like the done by number in terms of what we're efficacious yeah so we yeah we can play with it and say okay there's some some number of a small group coordinating and being able to persist and then um they then then we get to the level of 30 plus mines which which is like a public level right so where you have a lot more mines right so my question is

Are these are the active inference models that we have looked at so far in the first few chapters agnostic with respect to the information processing unit of analysis?

are they agnostic with respect to the information processing unit of analysis well first of all so so let me so fraser let me just say this just for my clarity so one mind is one unit of analysis of 30 individuals can be in human history another important unit of analysis in our social cultural systems and then 30 plus minds

Okay, as a third level of information processing.

And so my question is like, as someone who doesn't know the math, right, who's trying to struggle with it, where would I see in this entire book an appreciation or discussion of what is the informational process unit of analysis?


Fraser Paterson:
Yeah, no, excellent, excellent question, Magdalena.

This is actually, if I understand you correctly, this is actually the subject of my PhD, which is, yeah, so, and this, first of all, I pull up a paper here by one of my good friends, Peter, Peter Wade, as one and many relating individual and emergent group level generative models and active inference, which, and this whole paper is about, all right, let's say I have a bunch of active inference agents.

Under what conditions do they interact so as to form a larger composite active inference agent?

So it's kind of a question like, how many active inference agents are there really in any given picture?

So your question, I think, insofar as I understand it, is, look, we have some notion about agency.

inactive inference.

We have some notion about something interacting with its environment, whatever the environment is, right?

So on the right hand side, we've got an agent, and on the left hand side, we have an environment.

But and thus far, that's the story that we have, we don't have any notion about the relationship between agents, and whether or not that relationship can constitute an overall agent.

Okay, we haven't been able to tell that story yet.

Except for the very, very end of chapter five, where we began to look at hierarchical predictive coding and hierarchical active inference, you might, and indeed some people have interpreted various layers.

Let me see if I can find that figure.

Various layers within the predictive coding hierarchy.

Which one is it here?

This one?

No, this one.

You might interpret the various layers here as individual active implementations that are just doing local free energy minimization.

So maybe this guy is an active implementation in some sense.

And then he's passing messages, blah, blah, blah.

And then the overall thing can be regarded as an active implementation.

That's the only inkling that we've seen thus far of this idea yet.

We're also not really going to see a lot of it in the rest of the book.

because it is a very open question.

It's a very difficult question.

And it gets at the heart of what agency even is at all, which is a question over and above active inference per se.

However, my personal interpretation or my personal thoughts about this issue

is that the thing that is currently missing from active inference is exactly this idea of compositionality.

So I've got agent here, agent here.

They interact.

Under what conditions is that whole thing one active inference agent?

That story has not really been told yet in Active Inference, and I'm actually hoping to tell it as far as I can in my own research.

So I hope that answers your question in some respect.

Very, very important question.

But yeah, as far as we've seen at all, it's at the very end of chapter five, really, with this idea of hierarchical predictive coding.


Magdalena Hurtado:
OK.

really like your answer and I would like I would like to see your dissertation and I would also like if you can share in the chat your email or something because I would like to talk to you more about this this is absolutely crucial to me because they generate because looked at from a cultural anthropological perspective when you look at human groups

What I see and I'm going to use this language, I'm not a mathematician.

OK, so forgive me, but but I kind of I kind of get some things in math.

OK, so topologically generative models really work as huge attractors.

in informational systems in humans.

So if you shift your folk, so when you ask in a human group, what's really interesting about Homo sapiens, it's fascinating, is that you can take a generative model that is spoken, right?

So your language is a technology in human systems.

so take a generative model you present it to to in in some context social context and the generative model determines the the importance of the generative model determines whether or not you're going to have one mind or 20 minds or 100 000 minds um marco blanketed around the process of updating a generative model

And so you're saying that that math doesn't is is being debated, navigated in active inference and I would really like to be able to to see what's being done there as I'm learning the math.


Andrew Pashea:
If I just kind of sorry, is that okay?

All right.

Thanks.

Just ask someone who has a.

More immediate background in this social sciences.

Yeah.

So, so.

And I like how the question that Mark had prior to this had to do with, like.

You know, what is it to make linear assumptions?

So, in the context of the textbook, what we've seen thus far, like.

This linear model is essentially 1 of the simplest kinds of models that we would ever find in statistics machine learning or otherwise.

And it's just to show how a model can be composed.

Like, how can.

In the context we're talking about now, like an agent such as a person, how can it receive sensory information, update its beliefs, right?

It's not until part two that we'll also see not only is it going to update its beliefs, but then also choose to do things, right?

So that's the action part.

We haven't reached that yet.

But that said, the general idea here is that we're just building up sort of from scratch from simpler examples, how does an agent sort of function?

So the trick with social science and any kind of science that tries to do things like computational modeling is that you're going to have to determine whenever you model something, like what are the variables or the factors that are involved, right?

So that linear model we were looking at

we have a beta zero and a beta one and together with the hidden state we end up with this like line and that's what the model looks like so those are two variables that we include in our model it's beta one and beta zero and we're thinking about a person and we want to use a little bit more colloquial or everyday terms we could say like well if i'm interacting with my environment including a whole community of people

what are the kinds of sensory information that I receive?

And what are the kinds of actions that I can do?

And what do I have beliefs about?

Or what variables do I think explains everything, right?

So those are really important questions because you could imagine very quickly how much the number of variables you include in a model, especially whenever we look at this sort of like MESO or macro level of entire human

uh societies or cultures you started with this question about you know some more fundamental questions about um um you know beliefs about the the universe and what defines it and things like that spirituality or otherwise um yeah like

There's, there's a lot to track.

So there are some people who have tried to model this sort of thing.

And so I've shared this paper.

It's a few years old now, but it was probably 1 of the best called epistemic communities after, excuse me, under active inference.

And this kind of has to do with.

Because they actually ran a simulation, like they didn't just do a theoretical thing where they not disparaged purely theoretical papers, but like they actually did a simulation and designed agents they thought matched a lot of literature that we find in psychology and anthropology and elsewhere.

And so what happens is that the agents all can have contradicting beliefs from each other, whether you phrased it as something about a particular presumably monotheistic God versus some kind of science that says there is no such thing.

And that's one way of trying to look at a problem.

like that so it's like idea one and idea two and the assumptions that idea one and idea two conflict with epistemic communities the main takeaway is that we do end up seeing through the simulation they run this kind of polarization of communities where you have a lot of agents who rally around one idea one

And a lot of agents who rally around idea two.

And as they do that, the two groups start to communicate directly with each other less and less.

The agent's actual actions that are simulated has to do with them communicating with one another and sharing their

They're kind of more verbal beliefs with one another.

And so it's interesting because, you know, as opposed to saying like, oh, humans, of course, they will do the Bayesian optimal rational thing.

And somehow that gets all blended in with our assumptions of how science works and things like that.

It's much more complex.

And so one of active inference's answers to like, why do we see these kinds of dynamics is that we're trying to minimize free energy

But remember that free energy, based on how we've discussed it so far,

It's not some magical quantity of energy or something like that.

It's really just a proxy.

It's a word that is a proxy for something called surprisal, which is more or less uncertainty.

So we want to minimize our uncertainty.

So if you imagine a group, that unit, that more macro unit of 30 plus agents communicating with one another, we could say that, well, if they all repeatedly agree with one another,

about is it idea one or is it idea two?

Is it science or is it something else?

One way to minimize uncertainty is to repeatedly tell each other

what the truth is and you all converge on what you all think the truth is.

Right.

And then if your truth diverges from another community's truth, then you very well might start to like stop interacting with each other as much.

Because the other group is adding to your uncertainty.

Well, I thought it was science, but the people over here say it's not, and I don't know what to believe, but my community believes in science and that's what I believe.

So, so you see that there, there is a kind of like logic where the free energy principle is involved.

where we do have this kind of rallying and polarization around particular opinions or beliefs or otherwise.

And that has nothing to do with the true validity of science, right?

Like I'm attempting to be a scientist explaining all this stuff,

But the people who, you see what I'm saying?

Like to take in sensory information is what we do.

It's not about like following proper logic and stuff.

It's people learn to do that, right?


Magdalena Hurtado:
Can I interject something real quick?

I know we don't have a lot of time, but can I just because I think this is a subtle but important nuance point, which is that what you're

Every individual in a group is not going through the active inferencing process of trying to attempt to validate whether or not they have enough evidence to update their prior about whether it's God or quantum physics that explains reality.

So what happens in humans groups is that the active inferencing that's happening in a lot of individuals,

is to analyze and update whether or not they believe the person who's giving the message.

It's not about evaluating the validity of the premises.

It's not about the... That gets at a very...


Fraser Paterson:
That gets at this notion of precision, one might think, in terms of there's an issue about, okay, there's the literal content of the proposition that's on offer.

We might imagine an active inference agent doing inference about this.

But above that is a question, how reliable is this thing that I'm hearing at all?

and we kind of see we saw the first glimpses of that with respect to this notion of precision in um in predictive coding so that is another problem which is you know there's all kinds of explanations out there there's all kinds of um things you could pay attention to propositional theories or whatever that you can do inference on but there's the further issue of okay well which one of them is relevant which one should i wait as more or less relevant

uh that's a that's a thorny problem and it gets at this issue of attention and precision um i think at least so very very thorny problem however um in general so yeah what we're not going to see because that is such a difficult problem we're not going to see a lot of talk and discussion about multi-agent active inference really um the book is meant to be the fundamentals of active inference so we're going to get a really solid appreciation

for what it means for one entity to be an active inference agent.

Having then understood that, you can then take that and push that entire picture inside the active inference agent or look at relationships between active inference agents.

But that's not going to be the focus of the book.

A lot of that is at the cutting edge of active inference research now.


Andrew Pashea:
Thanks for keeping it closer to the textbook by bringing up precision.

I very much agree with that.

And it just highlights the, I just want to briefly correct something since this is the not something you said pressure, but.

This.

Taking active inference and turning it into a verb and calling it active inferencing and then saying that people are doing it differently is not quite the right way to think about active inference.

So active inferences is generally setting up these principles.

It.

definitely agrees with a lot of modern science you know it's drawing from neuroscience in the fields um and so it would say active inference would say and the free energy principle would say that we're all doing this there's no like i'm doing this and but but you're doing something that isn't um it's rather that our models are different

Right?

Like, our variables that we're including in our respective models are different.

The precisions can definitely differ.

If I get information from someone in my group, I might have a higher precision and trust what they say more.

I might hear from another group, you know, other people who I know I already disagree with, so I'm going to just view them as whatever they say is a bunch of noise, right?

So a lot of the, you know, a lot of the

political bickering or, you know, the way that people argue with one another where it turns into this kind of messy thing where they just treat, you can think of it as they're treating each other and what they're saying is as noise, right?

It's like, oh, I just lump them all in with political group

be and uh all they ever say is noise so and i i already have my own prior beliefs about what that noise is all about and i disagree with it i think it's wrong and i think the premises are wrong and they can think the premises about what you say are wrong too right so it's it's i mean if you learn to do argumentation where you have the word premises available

then cool but i just i'm just trying to make the point if you want to talk about hunter gatherer societies or otherwise you also have to recognize the very language we use something that gets learned and the way that we get taught to think about different things like oh well you need to evaluate the premises not everyone

ask that so it's it's very yeah it's uh there's a lot there's a lot to be taken consider of i think the social sciences are a very interesting field right now though to be applying active inference so kudos on kind of thinking through those kinds of questions thank you thank you appreciate it


Fraser Paterson:
Do make sure, I've been absent for a little bit.

I'm gonna be much more active on the questions side of things on the CODA.

So do make sure if you've got questions, please do put them down in the questions tab here.

I've gone through and I've already answered quite a few of them for chapter five.

uh so coming down here chapter three i think i think they're all answered for chapter five now i'm gonna go back and answer everything that hasn't been answered so if you do have a burning question the best place to put it is um is on the coda i think i'm sharing now you guys can see

Are there any more live questions?

That would be nice.

We can stay around for maybe five or so minutes after the deadline if people so choose.

But we are coming up to the top of the hour.

So yeah, all of the questions in chapter five now are answered, or I've given my attempt.

As I say, I'll go through and attempt to answer all the previous ones as well.

think i'm gonna have to not do this for part one but going forward chapter six and such like i'm gonna try and create more of these sort of animations uh as to you know what's going on uh hopefully for a bit more um intuitive effect i have a little bit more time to do that now so i did that for chapter four but um yes okay coming back sun sun sun's in i'm not sure how to say your name sorry


Sun Xin:
okay uh can you hear me clearly yes yes okay i want to check if my understanding of the active inference process is correct my understanding is the generative model starts with prior beliefs receive observations and then reduces prediction errors through using bayesian

inference to engage in parameter learning so that it can update beliefs about the current state.

If prediction errors persist, the generative model engages in model selection, that is, to updating the generative model itself.

And I think this is what we call plasticity.

The ultimate goal of all this is to minimize expected free energy.

Is that right?


Fraser Paterson:
Wow, okay.

I mean, basically, yeah, that's substantively correct.

I will note, however, we haven't yet talked about expected free energy.

and planning and action selection.

So that is going to come later.

But yeah, you're right.

In terms of the general flavor of things, we have beliefs about hidden states in the world.

And we're going to update those beliefs by means of inference, specifically Bayesian inference, and more specifically, approximate Bayesian inference, where we're doing variational free energy minimization.

Or we've seen that we can also recast this in terms of predictive processing.

minimizing the precision way to prediction errors.

It's the same kind of story.

And what we need is we need a generative model, probability distribution of the hidden states and observations, which is to say a likelihood about observations and a prior belief about states.

Yes.

The other thing, you mentioned parameter learning.

So yes, exactly.

There's these two problems.

We have the problem of inferring the hidden states.

What should the hidden states be?

But in order to do that, we have a model which has knobs and dials called parameters, and we need to set those parameters before we do inference.

So we have kind of two problems, you know, approximate Bayesian inference, variation of free energy, precision weight prediction error, whatever you like.

But then above that, we need to deal with the problem of what should the setting of the parameters be?

And we've only really just begun to look at this in terms of prediction errors and hierarchical models.

But we saw

how to deal with that in terms of expectation maximization and earlier chapters.

We're going to be continuing to think about that problem of model learning, sorry, parameter learning and hidden state inference in terms of a hierarchical picture.

Because we generally can't do expectation maximization for the reason that we don't know the exact posterior.

So hopefully that didn't make you more confused, but yes, your understanding is substantively correct for sure, yeah.


Sun Xin:
Thank you.


Fraser Paterson:
No problem.

Do we have more questions?

More questions?

Maybe one more question, if there is one more.

And then I'll stop the recording.

All right.

I might stop the recording here.

Well, Mark.

Hello, everyone, and welcome.

I've got my esteemed friend.

Oh, hang on.


Marc Broberg:
That was interesting audio feedback.

I thought I would jump in since nobody else asked us.

But earlier you mentioned using gradient descent to learn parameters, right?

Is that also used in perception?

Is it the same approach?


Fraser Paterson:
Yeah, I mean, gradient descent is used absolutely everywhere for a lot of things.

So it's a very, very general

optimization techniques.

So yes, it certainly can be used for learning, well, for perception.

I'm trying to find a nice picture here.

Typically, I guess going forward into like chapter six and so on, we're not going to spend a lot of time immediately on gradient descent.

Let me just make sure of that.

Yes, in other words, is the answer.

It's used for a lot of things.

Very, very general technique.

Um, although in, in, in a lot of the problems that we're gonna see later on, um, the kinds of, uh, yeah, no, we are gonna see in chapter six.

Absolutely.

Yeah.

We're gonna talk about phase planes and so on.

Yeah.

There are problems with it, but yes, we're gonna see it going forward.

It's a very, it's a very foundational technique.

Yeah.

All right.

Any, any last minute questions for the YouTube recording before we, uh,

If not, I think I'm sorry.


Dorsa:
Can I ask a quick question?


Fraser Paterson:
Yeah, sure.


Dorsa:
I do apologize.

I have joined the group very late.

So maybe this was addressed in like the past weeks.

But are there any known like general equivalence or say convergence results between active inference and say just reinforcement learning?


Fraser Paterson:
well uh there are known relationships if you go to appendix a um with the very first session was appendix a there's lots of very helpful uh discussion there about the relationship between active inference and reinforcement learning so yes there is there's quite a bit in terms of what you can do is you can look at the variational free energy or the expected free energy and active inference and you can see okay with all these terms

If I get rid of one of these terms or another one of these terms, I end up with KL control, or I end up with reinforcement learning, or I end up with risk-sensitive control.

There's kind of the idea that is forming that active inference is a very general way of talking about all of these things, and that things like reinforcement learning, things like KL control, like risk-sensitive control, these are kind of special cases of active inference.

So the answer is yes, there is a profound relationship.

We probably don't have time to get into it here.

One of the probably most pertinent differences between reinforcement learning and active inference is this idea of information gain.

Because we've seen with, well, we haven't yet seen with expected free energy how that works.

But very broadly, the idea with active inference is that we're modeling uncertainties from the beginning.

And we don't just have this scale of reward, this signal in reinforcement learning.

we're explicitly reasoning about uncertainties all the time and where we're able to account for information gain so it's probably not helped you too much but yeah there is a lot a lot there maybe as part of uh chapter five or in some cemetery summative section i'll put some stuff because there's a lot of existing stuff on the relationship between active infants and reinforcement learning yeah yeah thank you so much thank you no problem yeah just sort of like a like a um


Andrew Pashea:
a tale to what Frasier had said, just because I've also given some talks on the relationship with reinforcement learning.

Yeah, the information gain part is very important, because for those who are used to thinking about reinforcement learning,

Of course, there are many ways to do reinforcement learning, but one common one is that whenever agents do actions, which again, like Fraser said, we're going to look more at action-based agents, agents who can act in part two.

But the big thing is that reinforcement learning, whenever the agents like infer, whenever they do those sorts of things, they're typically like reward driven.

So there can be like a KL control agent or there can be a variety.

other kinds of agents um so usually they they tend to be a little bit more um i don't want to use the word greedy but something like that like more reward focused um they look a lot more like the kind of like proverbial agent we would find in like economics or something um meanwhile in active inference um it would say like oh the way that

that things like curiosity exist.

Why does curiosity exist if we're actually always just driven towards a reward?

Once you know what the reward is, you should just go for that, right?

And you would have no reason to find some other strategy for going for it.

You would have no reason to go out of your way.

From what you already know, you just keep going for the reward as much as possible.

Perhaps you learn other things through happenstance along the way.


Fraser Paterson:
That's a big difference.

In reinforcement, you can just sort of start maximizing a reward signal.

But in active inference and in the, dare I say, in the real world, oftentimes you don't know how to just start maximizing rewards.

You need to resolve your uncertainty about how to start maximizing reward and then maximize rewards.


Andrew Pashea:
yeah exactly exactly and so what one common thing in reinforcement learning to try and like allow the agent to do something different rather than be so purely reward driven and of course there have been a lot of advances past this but usually it boils down to some kind of ad hoc rule like epsilon greedy framework which says okay go for the reward 90 of the time but 10 of the time do something random um not quite

how we work as far as I'm aware, what's found in the empirical literature, but it's been one way of resolving that kind of fixity on reward issue and reinforcement learning.

Meanwhile, active inference has a much more principled way that relates to this notion of

free energy and specifically expected free energy such that the agent will take it will find value in learning new things and exploring new things it will still maintain reference to what is rewarding to itself so it's not a random uh information gain it's like oh you know I usually

Um, when I play a sport, I throw the ball this way.

Uh, but what happens if I still try to throw the ball as I would so that I can still like accomplish the goal of like, uh, you know, whatever, throwing it to the other person.

but maybe I will kind of curve it or change it, right?

You're not randomly throwing it in the sky or in the opposite direction.

You're still trying to throw it to where you want to, but maybe you'll change your technique a bit, right?

There's a more kind of, you know, there's a sort of knowingness with respect to one's own model and how to make that model better.

based on things that you haven't explored yet or things that you can so so it's just much more involved it's much more principled and it's the kind of thing that if you produce this model in a concrete fashion you could even look at the time series of like how things change over time and figure out where it learned such and such and why and what was going on it's in its beliefs at that time as opposed to just being a black box model you know it's not all about

How do I perform the best whenever it comes to active inference?

It's not just about like, otherwise we could just make another deep neural network and, you know, 8 billion parameters and not know how to interpret any of them.

But active inference very much has to do with actually being able to interpret and understand the components of the model as beliefs that the agent has, and then they need to be exposed and clear.


Fraser Paterson:
Yeah.

I think we have time for Giancuomo and then Mark, and then we're probably going to have to call it there, guys.

So Giancuomo, fire away.


SPEAKER_00:
Very quickly, I think it ties in with what was just spoken and talked about now.

Is there any sense in which in active interest an agent has a sense of how short-sighted it is or they are or whatever the pronoun of the agent is?

Okay, can the agent quantify, and they seem to get a sense that they can through, there's an entropy term that maybe gives me an idea that somehow he could have like a confidence interval and say, I will say this, because if I look at the reward, the reinforcement learning machine that has been calibrated for learning, they tend to give you absolute certainty.

They say, this is the answer.

And you're like, no, no, no, it's not.

And is there a sense in which it is a bit more nuanced, that it takes care that in a way that the path that he chooses through this very complex, high dimensional space of possibilities is actually more economical in the end, maybe slower, but more self-aware.

Sorry if I'm using all the wrong words, but is there some kind of intuition like that going behind?


Fraser Paterson:
well if i understand your question correctly uh it's is the agent itself able to offer a quantity to quantify its uncertainty in its predictions yes i mean the mere fact that we're uh so if i come here the mere fact that what we're doing from the beginning from the very beginning is we're reasoning about probability distributions

This is built in from the start.

So from the very beginning, we are reasoning about uncertainty because everything that we do is guided by the north star of Bayes' rule, right?

And okay, we can't do Bayes' rule exactly.

We have to do it approximately.

We do variational inference.

We do prediction error and minimization, that kind of thing.

But we're always, always, always reasoning about probability distribution.

So yes, every single active implementation ever is always

predictions because that's literally what it is to do active inference so that's the easy answer the more tricky answer is that when it comes to doing planning and action selection there's issues about okay in the future i need to plan stuff i need to think about what i'm going to do you know 10 time steps from now that have not happened um i need some way to reason about my uncertainty about things that haven't even happened yet

And there's issues around that and how to do that.

But we haven't seen that just yet.

So, yes, absolutely.

It's part and parcel of what it is to be an active infatuation.

It's the reason about uncertainty now.

Okay, thank you.

No problem.

And then, Mark, and then I think we can do... Oh, hang on.

Maybe just really quickly, did you have a comment, Andrew?


Andrew Pashea:
I also really have to go, but yeah, just briefly, you basically answered it.

Sorry, I was looking at the chat.

It's just, yeah, it depends on how the question is being asked.

Like if you want to go the full nine yards of like, oh, I'm imagining a person and can the person say like how uncertain they are?

Like that's going to take a little bit more than just like only looking at the simplified models.

We're looking at the textbook here.

um you know but as far as like um yeah as far as the models we've been looking at it's like they necessarily whenever we're looking at a probabilistic framework you can say oh it's you know in a categorical distribution uh for a for a fair coin it's like well it's 50 50 you know heads versus tails that it will land on right so that necessarily is a kind of uncertainty about what the real realization

of that kind of hidden state of the world is like, will it end up being heads or tails and, you know, 50 50 and so you can look at sort of like an entropy term on that categorical distribution is like, well, that's maximum entropy of 2 slots.

There are 2 possible things.

It could be is completely 50 50 is fully uncertain.

Uh, right so we necessarily have that and then the notions of uncertainty are also sort of baked into, uh, the, the, the, like, updating of prediction errors and precision.

Right?

Because whenever you have precision, that's kind of like a gain, you know, kind of a, a, a, almost like a volume knob.

Right?

The more you turn up precision, the more you're.

you're going to take into account the prediction errors you're receiving and vice versa.

So that has to do with sort of the degree of trust or uncertainty around trusting, you know, some particular belief that you have or some particular sensory observation that you're receiving.

Right.

So so uncertainty is very much like throughout.

I mean, it's a very ubiquitous term through many parts of active inference.

Yeah.

So it's essential.


Jim DeLong:
So all right.

so with precision with precision then could i uh turn it way up and watch the model uh uh believe it's watch the agent believe its model more than it believes its size yeah absolutely yeah and then vice versa i know my model's messed up just believe what you see


Andrew Pashea:
right yeah it's a great thing and so that part of the it highlights the role of like why do we care about priors or something right like why you know there are many other models uh both you know theoretical models in neuroscience as well as machine learning and elsewhere where it's like we could just have a likelihood right we could just take in sensory information and update a belief and uh

who cares about priors.

And that's what we see with maximum likelihood estimation in chapter two there.

But the thing is like, you know, someone who fully believes their eyes and doesn't believe they're up, doesn't have any confidence in their own beliefs about priors or something.

It's like, if, you know, if I, you know, wake up in the middle of the night and it's dark and I swear, I saw a person in my room or something when in fact, maybe I was just waking up from a dream and just kind of like,

thought i saw something right like you'd be hyper reactive to the sensory information you receive you would not there would be no kind of stability from a prior belief that keeps you a little bit more grounded where that prior can be updated right it's not that you are born with a prior and it stays with you the whole life it's like that's why we have chapter three on learning where the prior itself can be learned just as the likelihood meaning how uh observations and hidden states um um

you know, how those connect up with each other.

So, so that's the significance of like, well, if I, on the other hand, if I overly believe my prior, then, then I'm just kind of stuck there.

And any information I receive, uh, will always be, you know, either it's contradictory to what I believe and therefore I don't trust it or it fully confirms what I already believe.

And so I fully trust it without question.

Right.

So I say all these things because, uh,

Part of what brought me to active inference was this stuff about, you know, how people communicate with one another and how they believe what they believe.

And then furthermore, how does this actually show in like psychiatry and psychology whenever it comes to people who believe a hallucination that they're having or people who like are kind of biased towards others in a particular way and all those sorts of things.

Yeah, it's very interesting to think about.


Fraser Paterson:
Yeah, do take a look at, I think I'm sharing, but figure 2.11.

This literally shows the effects of updating, well, the effect that prior precision has on the updating of belief.

So if the precision is really tight around the prior,

the belief hasn't really changed much, but if I have a kind of lax prior, not very precise, you can see that the update is dominated by the evidence coming in from my likelihood model.

So yeah, do take a look at that.

That's probably a very helpful motivating thing when it comes to the effect that the prior precision can have.


Jim DeLong:
Yeah.

Excellent.

Thank you.


Fraser Paterson:
Cool.

All right, guys, we're going to have to call it there.

Do put questions in the chats on the page, the code page.

I'll be a bit more attentive going forward.

I look forward to next week.

I'll be doing another session of this kind on Friday for the people who usually attend that session.

So thank you very much.

Stop sharing and stop the recording.

Have we got a recording here?

Okay, stop the recording.

Goodbye, YouTube people.

Until next time.
