## i13aBAWuJxk

SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference live stream.

And this is the Active Inference Lab.

I'm Daniel Friedman, and I'm really excited to be having this conversation with my friend, Blue.

Hi, Blue.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to active inference.

You can find us on our website, Twitter, email, Discord, YouTube, whatever it may be in the future.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we will look forward to using good dialogue video etiquette.

Today in 16.0, we're going to be setting the stage for February 16th and February 23rd, 2021's events, which are both going to be discussions on this same paper we're talking about today.

And for the 16th, we're going to have the author, Wanda Weiss, join us for the discussion.

today in 16.0 the goal is really to set the context for 16.1 and 16.2 which are participatory group discussions the paper we're discussing is the neural correlates of consciousness under the free energy principle from computational correlates to computational explanation by weiss and carl friston november 18 2020 and there's a link given

The video is an introduction to the context.

It's not a review or a final word.

Blue and I just gave it a read.

We're still working through these issues.

We hope to kind of surface what we're thinking about on those topics.

And one of the punchlines is that FEP, it's not a singular theory or a definition of consciousness itself, but it lends itself to some pretty powerful thinking and theory development in this area.

And in the video of 16, we're gonna go with an introduction section and thanks Blue for the structural tip.

We're gonna talk about the author's perspective on their introduction, really like aims and claims, abstract and roadmap.

Then we'll consider the keywords kind of just where we were at with those topics and where we think there might be a nice bi-directional road kind of on and off ramp from active inference.

And then we'll actually go through a fair amount of the details of the paper, including some of the formalisms.

close with a couple questions and thoughts and in 16.1 and 16.2 we'll be discussing this paper so that is all for the introduction let's go to the aims and claims of the paper um the paper was as stated blue do you want to um be the aims and claims so


SPEAKER_01:
The first theme is how can research on neural correlates of consciousness lead to an explanation of consciousness and what role could the free energy principle, the FEP, play in this endeavor?

We have suggested that research on neural correlates should be complemented by research on computational correlates of consciousness, CCCs, in order to yield a computational explanation of consciousness.

Moreover, according to the free energy principle, neural correlates of consciousness must be defined in terms of neural dynamics, not neural states, and compilational correlates of consciousness should be defined in terms of probabilities encoded by neural states.

All we hope to have shown is that a computational explanation of consciousness is possible and that the free energy principle can make a significant contribution to this project.


SPEAKER_00:
big aims and claims and a lot of interesting things that are already being mentioned a lot of these words we're going to dive into so if it's your first time hearing some of these terms and acronyms or whether these are things where you're already bringing a lot of priors to the table hopefully you'll be able to look at it in a new light and these are big topics so there's just going to be a lot underlying these aims and claims anything else you'd add on those

cool let's talk about the abstract which is how the authors have distilled and summarized their work for broad uh reading so this is the section that most people read it's kind of like a power law where a few people see the title then the smaller subset see the abstract and it goes down so we always look at how the authors reflect their um work in the abstract so i'll read the first half the abstract and then you can give a thought on something in there

How can the free energy principle contribute to research on neural correlates of consciousness and to the scientific study of consciousness more generally?

Under the free energy principle, neural correlates should be defined in terms of neural dynamics, not neural states, and should be complemented by the research on computational correlates of consciousness, defined in terms of probabilities encoded by neural states.

We argue that these restrictions brighten the prospects of a computational explanation by addressing two central problems.


SPEAKER_01:
So just a thought there.

I think that the FEP is really well suited to providing a computational explanation of consciousness or a computational correlate of consciousness.

If we can kind of

Maybe talk about the easy problem of consciousness, right, which which will get into the hard, easy and medium problems of consciousness.

But but really, the easy problem of consciousness is well described by the FEP.

And I don't know that we can really even in like nail down what exactly consciousness is, except from that computational standpoint.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And this question of defining consciousness, it's going to rear its head a million different ways, not the least of which when deciding what to measure or which analogy to use, having a computational versus some other type of adjective that you could put there.

So how about you go for recapitulating that last point, which is there's two central problems that are going to be addressed and then continue.


SPEAKER_01:
So we argue that these restrictions brighten the prospect of a computational explanation of consciousness by addressing two central problems.

The first is to account for consciousness in the absence of sensory stimulation and behavior.

The second is to allow for the possibility of systems that implement computations associated with consciousness without being conscious, which requires differentiating between computational systems that merely simulate conscious beings and computational systems that are conscious in and of themselves.

Given the notion of computation entailed by the free energy principle, we will derive constraints on the inscription of consciousness in controversial cases, for example, in the absence of sensory stimulation and behavior.

We show that this also has implications for what it means to be as opposed to merely simulate a conscious system.


SPEAKER_00:
So the two key problems, the central problems, one is what happens in the absence of stimuli.

And then the second big block of text is the difference between actually being conscious versus simulating it.

And then by thinking about these two central problems and using the FEP as our guide, remember we're under, according to the title, under the FEP, not because of the FEP or some other way of talking about it.

under the fep we're going to think about how this notion of computation is actually going to lead to some unique predictions and explanations and hypotheses that then we can talk about in a really scientific way that will take it out of the land of abstraction and well what about this thought experiment and what about this uncertainty here and towards the realm of well this model predicts that this kind of a brain or this kind of an agent will have this type of a measurement or response in this context

We want to have that consciousness-o-meter, the measuring device.

But without the definition, it's hard to have the measuring device and vice versa.

And so FEP looks like a promising way to sort of navigate that paradox.

Let's go to the roadmap.

so this is a paper structure with six sections an introduction and a conclusion and with four internal sections the first internal section and we're going to go through a lot of these keywords in just a second starts from neural correlates of consciousness and moves the discussion from thinking neurally to thinking computationally so that's the movement from neural correlates to computational correlates of consciousness

Then the third section moves from the computational correlates of consciousness into the free energy principle.

Surprise, surprise.

The fourth section goes back to computational correlates and moves the focus, the regime of attention from computational correlates alone, which have already been linked to the FEP to computational explanations of consciousness.

And then the fifth section brings together the computational explanations of consciousness with some of the first author's previous research on minimal unifying models of consciousness.

And all of this is implicitly interwoven with FEP, which is kind of what is being tied together with this paper.

So any thoughts on the structure or the roadmap, Lou?


SPEAKER_01:
No, it's good.

It was a good flow, I thought.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, a dense paper.

So...

Definitely okay to take it in many sections and skip around and skim it through it first.

There's a lot of ways that each person will read different genres of paper.

Okay, the keywords, the part we've been excited to talk about, I guess, all of it though.

And we just took the keywords from the paper and laid them out in an order and tried to present each keyword in a way that was standalone on just one or two slides.

Again, thinking about the on and the off ramp for active inference.

So if you read this because Fristin's one of the authors or because it came up in a keyword search for free energy principle, but maybe you haven't thought about some of these other topics, that's one mode of listening.

And then the other mode of listening is like maybe with more experience or having thought more about these topics, where's free energy principle and active inference playing into all that.

And then beginner's mind and learning by doing plays on both directions of the road.

So our first

keyword uh well let's just actually read through the keywords free energy principle and active inference consciousness minimal unifying model neural correlates of consciousness computational correlates of consciousness computational explanation and islands of awareness okay so first free energy principle so how about you read it and i'll give a comment on the first half and then we'll flip


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

So the free energy principle provides an information theoretic analysis of the concept of existence of self-organizing systems.

It entails that self-organizing systems at non-equilibrium steady state bound the entropy of their sensory signals by minimizing, on average, a quantity known as variational free energy.

As such, FEP is not a theory of consciousness.

Do you want me to read the second part or do you want to switch now?


SPEAKER_00:
I'll give a thought and then we can switch if there's two, I guess.

But just that in the first paragraph, if you only dipped a toe in, you'd already find that FEP is not itself a theory of consciousness.

So the debate's not done.

We're looking at what the FEP is.

That's the first part of the paragraph.

It's a certain information theoretic analysis for thinking about self-organizing systems for complex adaptive systems.

And it's not itself a theory of consciousness.

So I think that that's just a really nice way to open the tone of the paper and the discussion.

So the second part here, referring to what is the free energy principle and how is this going to relate to the paper?

A fundamental constraint provided by FEP is that it only applies to active systems that engage with their environment.

Hence, a computer simulation of a system that minimizes variational free energy may perform computations that are also instantiated by a conscious agent that interacts with its environment.

But if these computations are realized by a piece of hardware that cannot be regarded as an agent, e.g., they cannot move or change external states, then they can at most lead to a simulation of consciousness.


SPEAKER_01:
I think that this is interesting because it's like, it doesn't really...

just like delineate what exactly is an active system and what what is engaging with the environment like for example if you have like an unborn baby inside of the mother is that like an active system engaging with its environment like can it doesn't have any control over like the environment of the environment is delivered to it like all non-stationary like self-organizing systems that are maybe more passive like i think about like ocean you know

creatures that just sit there like... I know that the FEP does apply, but it just doesn't really delineate exactly what those systems are.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Agreed.

And so if this is your first time hearing about it, it's obviously a big topic.

There's a lot of ways to go about it.

Also, I had a question like whether other physical systems like a proton, are we going to include that as an active system?

But there's a lot of... Is that an active... It's engaging with the environment, yes, but is it active?

So...

that's where we're going what is simulation versus actual consciousness where's the fep let's in this keyword section think about just what is the fep before we go that far out with the paper because we wanted to draw on the quotes from the paper to see where they were going with the fep and now let's pull back to just thinking about what is the free energy principle and this is a slide that had been used actually a couple uh

active streams ago, but it actually, a lot of the terms got reused.

Fokker-Planck, Helmholtz, non-equilibrium steady state, Markov blankets, active inference, everything here, except for some of these more specific like sub process theories on the neural side, almost everything here was discussed in this paper.

So this is why it's so interesting to think about convergences between the papers, because there's a lot of overlap.

We're on the right track and we can hopefully start to reduce our uncertainty.

Just to run through these, the Fokker-Planck, and this is from Mel Andrews' paper and the history of thermodynamics of the FEP.

So active 14, if you want to listen more, but the Fokker-Planck is bringing in a...

uh vector way and the helm holds as well of dealing with vectors and mathematics for certain kinds of systems namely these non-equilibrium steady state densities which we're going to go into in more detail so we're not going to go into it here and the free energy principle is a

just as was said on the previous slide, it's an information theoretic analysis approach for these kinds of systems.

Doing interesting stuff, non-equilibrium, steady state, cybernetic systems, and using that type of vector maths on it, and then it leads to all of these consequence, falsifiable, testable hypotheses, the process theories up at the top, and there could be other things as well.

Anything else to add on that, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Not at all.


SPEAKER_00:
To go into one of the process theories that we like, active inference, and this is from another paper we've discussed a while ago, Vassal et al., A World Unto Itself, and this was thinking about communication.

On 11, we said, okay, it's about active systems engaging with their world.

Slide 12, we're going to think about that in this kind of thermo, info, statistical way.

And then 13, okay, let's bring in almost the real processes and almost a systems engineering or just a systems modeling perspective to what kinds of systems are engaging with the world, active with a generative model of their niche, and how are we gonna think about that under the free energy principle?

That's where active inference comes into play.

And this is a diagram we see in many guises where you have internal states and external states, which are separated by

an interface that can be modeled as a Markov blanket, but we'll also go into more detail on that later, where what goes inside or from one side of the interface to the other is sensation coming in.

That changes internal states.

Internal states such as

different policy estimates for the world or different policy estimates for what one's self will engage in result in different action patterns, which influence external states, which also have their endogenous dynamics.

So that's active inference.

That's what active inference lab is like thinking about and coming at from many angles.

So that's one little just snapshot of active inference.

What is active inference for you today, Blue?

Or what does this make you think about?


SPEAKER_01:
so i'm always interested in reflecting on the internal states like hunger right how that results in an external action like a behavior like i'm gonna go find some food so i'm always interested in reflecting on on this and whether it's um it can be reduced to computation right like we know if we have a good estimate of what our predictive model is

or our generative model is, if we have that estimate, then we know what's coming at us, what is the input.

Can we always predict output?

Are we just the sum of... Are we just a computation?

I always think about that, so it brings that up for me.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, this is a skeleton, but then if it's skeletons all the way down, where's the...

meet where is the actual self or is it something other than that maybe it's that that is the self or some other thing like that so active inference active inference eight we talked about it from a reinforcement learning and a control theory perspective we've talked about it from a historical angle with mel and from a philosophical angle um in 15

We're reintroducing consciousness, which we also talked about in nine with a projective consciousness model.

So that consciousness free energy principle active inference discussion was about geometry and the projections and then the way that agents did active inference on this projective geometry.

We're actually not going to talk about that projective, almost peripersonal space.

relationship with the fep and this paper is going to take the same topics go in a little different way with more of a focus on the information theory and on the generative model and on the divergence of a few different kinds of surprise and measurements of the world so it's another facet

let's talk about the main piece of the paper which is consciousness so how many ways to start or cover it um just when we were planning this as a lab and talking about it people were just bringing up good stuff in live discussion so someone said a felt sense of isness people were asking like where do we look for consciousness what do we measure and where what spatial temporal scales what kinds of systems and many people just pointed out there's so many

understandings here and uh areas to study i mean if one is curious there's a great wealth of resources um before we dive into each facet of this hexaflower blue what does consciousness what like what interested you in this paper what makes you curious to study these things so i don't know consciousness is one of those things it's like love like we don't really have a good like definition for it we all kind of like


SPEAKER_01:
I think we know what it is, right?

Like we think we know what it is and what it isn't, but it's like a very, you know, ethereal concept.

So I don't know, it's always interesting to try to tackle these like things that can't really be pinpointed or like nailed to a certain like

bored right like you can't really exactly define consciousness it's always fun to kind of take a scientific approach to evaluate these things right like reduce love to you know oxytocin or whatever but it's more than that like it's it's I mean clearly consciousness is more than what any one thing that where it's more than the FEP it's more than what we're able to you know

attached to it project onto it but it's it's always interesting to try to tackle these hard problems and i love the hexaflower so i've got to say like daniel put this together it's like a um a super cool design that takes consciousness as the center point and then integrates all of these keywords that we're going to be discussing the minimum unifying model islands of awareness neural correlates of consciousness computational correlates of consciousness

computational explanation, and then the easy, medium, and hard problems of consciousness, right?

So all these are surrounding the consciousness as the center point.

I love it.


SPEAKER_00:
What was kind of fun about that and almost meta is like, I was trying to arrange the list.

It's like, okay, we got active inference, free energy principle, keywords.

Get them out of the way.

Then we have consciousness-related keywords and consciousness itself.

And so how can they be arranged linearly?

And it was like there's no single linear arrangement.

Everyone could have a different way of seeing that.

So then it's just something that from studying the bees, we see the hexagon and then I see it more like when we want to reflect tiling, but a coherent tiling like Settlers of Catan, you can play on a bigger board, smaller board, but instead of just something that's blocky, it's like a it's yeah.

okay so let's go to the first little sub pedal because thinking about the problems that steer us or that motivate us in consciousness research so this is like not you know moral proclamations on consciousness this is about scientific study of consciousness and about investigations um about people who are coming together from different perspectives not just living from within um

one specific definition.

So people are going to be kind of playing fast and loose and having different takes.

That's kind of the wildness of the field.

So there was famous framing of the hard problem of consciousness by Chalmers in the 90s and subsequent research.

That's a pretty famous singular moment, but

just thought of you know easy medium and hard problems but different people are going to perceive different difficulties for some people they're really hung up on mind and body other people it's like a speed bump they just say yeah i mean it's this other way so that's just something that studying the field of consciousness studies is so interesting to me is some people a word they just they spend their whole life investigating it other people they just blow right by it or it seems like a question that totally it

even if they're aware of it isn't something super relevant so which problems are easy medium and hard it fits in that category there are hard problems like how could a physical thing or can a physical things generate conscious awareness and how would we know there's a lot of hard problems um but it's an interesting topic what did this make you think about


SPEAKER_01:
I think I already divulged what I was thinking about in the easy, medium, and hard problems of consciousness and how the FEP really lends itself to the easy problem.

Really, are we so reducible to the easy problem of consciousness?

We all know that there's something more than that, and when we get into that more than that

thing do we become then like less scientific and more like spiritual right like like do we take some leap of faith going into the hard problem of consciousness or are we just like ascribing some

property like if we're going to really be scientific about it like consciousness is one of those things that if you're going to buy into it like it has to kind of be everywhere like i mean we make this like hard cut off like if you look at research like only higher vertebrates that have a central nervous system those are the only like things that are conscious in the world right like and some people have like lines within that like only humans right so

Really, can we draw these like hard boundaries?

Like, I don't know.

I kind of feel like if consciousness exists, it's pervasive, but maybe pervasive only among living systems, but then as a tree conscious.

So it's one of these, it's hard.

It's a hard problem.


SPEAKER_00:
yes um agreed and the easy one is almost the part that explains it's like when people make fun of daniel dennett's book consciousness explained consciousness explained away it's like yeah we know how a robot would respond to a sensory um you know cue to engage in action but that's not the hard part that's not really the heart of the matter


SPEAKER_01:
next topic so minimum unifying model of consciousness what what did you find interesting about this or what did you like about what you read um i liked this quote that um i pulled out from from the end of the uh paper like i think it was right before the conclusion maybe the end of section four

that says, you know, minimizing variational free energy could count as a minimum unifying model.

Variational free energy must be minimized by every self-organizing system that persists and hence also by any conscious system.

I liked that and I thought that it was applicable and kind of really right on target.


SPEAKER_00:
The challenge is decompiling.

So every self-organizing system that persists

Are those the conscious systems?

Are those two sets the same?

So self-organizing storm cloud, what is it like to be a storm cloud?

What is it like to be a volcano?

That's the question of what is it like to be a bat?

And then another thread is like the cultural.

Like maybe if there's a prior or something that's implicit or sub-personal that leads us to certain kinds of explanations being just absurd versus real.

intuitive like panpsychism versus only vertebrates or only subclasses or or nothing it's like what do you mean nothing it's like well just nothing it's not something i wonder about why not but not not an issue if not so that's the minimum unifying model it's going to come up in the terms of this paper just because that's kind of um both of the authors are interested in that i would say

And just to go into one of the prior papers, a solo author paper by the first author, Wanja.

So this is the science of consciousness does not need another theory.

It needs a minimum unifying model, unifying words on 7-11-2020, great date for a paper.

And here are on the right side are referring to two kind of hypotheses for how we could think about different

fields of meaning one way of uh arranging different fields would be like information generation is all these tan things in a so this is like computers and random number generators and die or something like that and then consciousness is a subset where maybe there's some conscious systems that don't generate information maybe there's some that do

Maybe you have a different feeling about how these are overlapped, like in B, where there's information generating systems, that's a big super class.

And then within that, there are systems like the blue, the non-reflexive behavior that are cybernetic to some extent.

Like it's predictive, it's acting in a way that might have some game theory like, or some sort of adaptive seeming dynamics, but consciousness is a subset of that.

And so I just really appreciated the research direction of the author, because the difference between A and B is night and day.

And there's many other options.

It wasn't an attempt to be exhaustive.

It's like, if we could talk about this, we could have a better way of framing, oh, our computer's conscious, our human and the computer, what's conscious?

Let's take a step back.

What are we overlapping with what and what's on the table here and what kinds of words do we care about and where's the territory?

It's okay if territories are nested within each other or overlapping or they're intercalated or they're complementary or something, but we have to pull back to kind of a level where we can at least sort through all these theories of the science of consciousness.

because otherwise it's just a total mess and the information overload aside, it doesn't even make sense.

Just if everyone's working in their own wavelength, it doesn't even make sense.

So really nice direction.

Any thoughts on that, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
so i wonder if like information generation and consciousness like aren't a full overlap like if those can just like be all lumped into one of one another and then non-reflexive behavior is like some subset of that um just just even going to like the spin of a of an electron like a coupled electron like if you're looking at at qubits right like so it it's always got to be there's a paired system and is that conscious like just getting down to the very basic like atomic particles


SPEAKER_00:
Especially what we talked about earlier, like if the free energy principle is for so-called passive and active systems that are engaging with their niche, like systems that aren't usually thought of as very reactive, like a proton or like a rock at a larger scale.

are they on this consciousness continuum or are they disjoint from it or so those are the kinds of things where reading the paper helps bring us to the edge of the ideas and of research and also to the edges socially thinking about it and talking about it hearing people who have different perspectives so on the perspectives issue also computational explanations so just in the word

What is computation?

You're going to have a lot of takes.

Some people will say, I mean, of course, you know, my Linux computer right here is a computer, but then they'll say that the hydrogen is also a computer and the football, when it gets kicked, it's also computing a parabola.

So it's computing everything.

And then what is explanation?

philosophy of science rabbit hole to go down, but is it about being emotionally satisfied with what we know?

Or is it about being able to usefully act?

Like, do we have an explanation for traffic?

I don't know.

Maybe some people would say yes, no, in this situation, yes, but do we have best practices?

Do we have approaches?

So explanation versus approaches,

And then the last point here is just thinking, especially in the biological case, about unconventional computation.

So let's just call the Turing von Neumann genre, the binary state machine idea conventional computation.

There's a whole world, quite literally, of unconventional computation.

So reservoir computing, things that we're going to talk about right at the very end.

Within the binary computers and then outside of the binary computers, physical computing, wetware by Bray is kind of about moving beyond software hardware distinctions, which don't exist in cells.

DNA is DNA.

It's not hardware.

It's not software.

It's not source code.

It's DNA.

And then Leviathan cover of that famous work with a larger source.

the group made up of the individuals so that kind of multi-level systems perspective on computation multi-level cognition all of these things come into play when we're talking about computational explanation so can i just like yeah maybe add a little bit oh yeah i know i know that this is one of your chillest areas so i just think about explanation like what is the um


SPEAKER_01:
Like explanation is like the death of curiosity.

It's like the ultimate like pacification.

Like I just explained it to you, therefore shut up.

Like that's why, that's your answer.

So I think like explanation, like we should never be satisfied with any explanation.

Like we should not...

presume that we understand fully like anything because it just ceases investigation at that point.

And so I think like, you know, computational approximation might be more fun and lend itself more to deeper scientific explanation.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah one thing that we were talking about just like um an hour ago with some other people in the lab was like if the heart of the issue is how things are realism once you get the lossless you know mp3 file the quest for what is is done but then if the song is not just the mp3 file but it's actually the relationship how could you say that that ever ends so it's kind of like yeah are we looking to engage

and to do things in the world and act?

Or are we looking to come to a satisfying emotional explanation in some

uh topic all right so 19. so here we are getting to some of the details like the computational versus the neural correlates of consciousness so there's two double c's this is the ccc and then the next one's going to be the ncc so what are the computational correlates of consciousness what would be your definition for a ccc


SPEAKER_01:
So, like I said, I think that the computational correlates of consciousness, you know, it goes back to, like, is a football conscious, right?

Like, it's input-output.

So, like, you know, you have – what goes into the system and what comes out of the system and, you know, is – like, can we call that consciousness?

I don't really know.

But for me, like, my interpretation is it's a decision, right?

Like, so you have the input.

You know what you're supposed to do or what you think you're supposed to do.

You have some approximation about what you're supposed to do, how you're supposed to engage with your environment based on the input that comes in.

And then you act in accordance with what you think you're supposed to do or what you predict will lead to the best outcome.


SPEAKER_00:
I don't know.

Something like that.

Yep.

Well, the correlate word is suggesting that this is not an explanation that's causal.

Correlation is not causation, as they say.

So it's like, we're talking about correlations.

We're talking about observables, kind of like a correlation, like a regression coefficient, but a little bit probably deeper than that.

And then I guess my question for the authors would be, how is this related to the cybernetic correlates of consciousness or the cybernetic correlates

attributes um in the paper nine with rudroff and um and other authors it was like there was the five functional invariance or something like that like the perceptual invariance so what are these computational correlates um and how are they related to algorithmic or cybernetic

Because maybe the word computer has a lot of baggage.

We're live streaming on a computer.

It's just used in a really specific way.

It's a specific word.

And then maybe there's another way to think about like processual correlates or like the informational correlates of consciousness that might be a little bit...

different aspect of what they're showing but the details of what they're showing we'll get to all right ncc so the neural correlates of consciousness it's another correlate um question so we're looking for neural things that correlate with consciousness so first off correlation causation again and the correlation can be like evolutionary like we think that this brain region over the breadth of species diversity is correlated with consciousness or it's correlated with this behavior

or the correlation can be like a molecular thing, or it can be a dynamical pattern.

It could be this fMRI pattern or this EEG pattern is a correlative consciousness.

We set them up so that it was an experiment where in this task, they did have consciousness and this one they didn't.

So it gets into defining consciousness, but they say the difference between these two conditions is the neural correlative consciousness, or the difference between patients in this category versus patients in this category is this.

And for two takes on the issue, in 2016,

Christoph Koch at all, talked about like from their pro neural correlate of consciousness agenda direction, what were the problems and progress in their fields?

And then here's a paper from 2019 with me and a colleague where we kind of took a step back from just thinking about the neural correlates and thought, okay, what about for the ant colony or for other systems that aren't just like set up like the mammalian brain?

how would we think about consciousness because if you study only the neural correlates consciousness you're studying how would you know that that's actually the subset of systems it's like you're shining a spotlight maybe a good one maybe a distorted one on the neural system but what if it's not just neural it's glial oh well of course i meant that okay well what if it's neural and the body oh yeah i meant that too so all of a sudden okay now you're talking about neural in the niche and that's why we're talking about multi-scale systems

so that's what there's a lot of interesting stuff happening here and about how the fep and multi-scale approaches fit together with the more neural focus and the more certain time scales and certain neural signatures that avenue of research in neuroscience humans sensu strictu now connecting it to a clearly very vast area what do you think about that blue um


SPEAKER_01:
So I think that the neural correlates of consciousness is cool.

I think that like they do the fMRI study, like when you're asleep versus when you're awake and then they take like the difference.

That's like a common way that they like estimate the neural correlates of consciousness.

There's also like the hyper consciousness, like I can't remember the author.

um but he did like the information theory like aspects of like psychedelics so like expanded consciousness like what does expanded consciousness look like and how like there's more connections between uh neurons i'll have to remember the name of that paper for next time um but but it's it's just uh the neural correlation of of consciousness was really done by differentials um that's a common thing i think


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, exactly.

It's an experimental way to get at using measurements, real data, real experimental setups, the kinds of things that exist in neuroscience labs, getting at questions of consciousness.

And the question is, are we on the right track or might we be misled by the tools that we have available and the approaches we have?

So 21, islands of awareness.

Okay, so this is kind of a topic that I'd never heard about.

It's from a recent paper by Bain et al, 2020.

And so we're thinking about kind of the fringe cases or the areas where we might be able to have a unique prediction or an explanation that is going to be a value add for the FEP in thinking about neuroscience and consciousness or which systems are going to be useful to think about, even if other systems also agree.

And there's going to be this case proposed, like a thought experiment called the Island of Awareness, which is a conscious stream.

So I don't know, is the rabbit already in the hat?

It's a conscious stream or system whose contents are not shaped by sensory input from either the external world or the body and which cannot be expressed via motor output.

Now, one could just say, well, but what if the body's part of the whole conscious system?

So it's a kind of non sequitur to say, well, it's happening in the brain.

Ergo, you can cut that out.

maybe you can, maybe you can't.

But by looking at the paper and by believing that the authors have thought through what they wrote, it's always a useful starting point for discussion.

So the fringe and the edge cases can be where we start to see theory differentiation.

So if this thought experiment isn't very interesting to you, you'll probably find another one that might be.

But these are like we're looking for the exceptions to prove the rule or the sort of higher level game that is revealed by us oversampling just one area of state space.

The issue with thought experiments, though, is, well, kind of like science fiction, they can provide inspiration if they're...

at the right place at the right time, you're never going to reach these ideal situations.

And they often have a huge amount of assumptions built in.

And then even for, there's this dream of empirical application.

Oh, we'll study the island of awareness then because it's such a great thought system.

And there's a hundred papers on published on it.

But then it, even for a close case,

like, oh, maybe in this medical condition, they're locked in syndrome.

It ends up that it's not exactly what people want.

And so then it goes into a really protracted multi-year thing with just is the system the right one to test this thought experiment?

Short answer, no.

And it's hard to know what to do with real systems to really make a dent in the consciousness problem.

Any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_01:
Just that the islands of awareness, I think,

are always, there's always going to be those exceptions to the rule or those hard cases.

Like we don't even really know how to get at consciousness in a system like that.

Like a brain in a dish model, is there consciousness in that?

Like I remember working in the lab and growing cells in my like petri dish or whatever they were growing in.

And like, you know,

I was like, I wonder what my culture is thinking or if they're thinking, like I would be like doing neuronal differentiation and be like, you know, I just wonder like what they're thinking about today.

So, so, I mean, it's just, it's always like a, this mystery.

So we don't really know if there's, if we can approximate consciousness in a system like that.

Also the author of the information theory and psychedelic paper is Andrew Gallimore is his name.

Sorry, I forgot.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yeah.

And again, like how does philosophical uncertainty or debate propagate through basic research and application?

What about with organoid research on neural cultures?

And so is there a certain size of brain or what about there's a brain and a body or you recapitulated something from a stem cell, from a neuron and from a skin cell or you made some new cell type.

It's like, is it different or worse or better to throw a gallon of skin cells versus a gallon of this type of cell?

those are big questions and that's why the consciousness discussion is really important to not just resolve but to sort of like clarify and to engage with so the big picture of this paper now to get into um the

quotes and some of the key topics.

We're not going to go through every quote.

We're not going to read every quote because there's a bunch of quotes, but this section is going to just describe the main three observations that link three of the big TLAs, three letter acronyms together.

So FEP is the big one, but then we have the neural and the computational correlates of consciousness.

So they're all kind of going to be joined together.

And just to read the first point of each one,

If we're going to go FEP, neural correlates should be in terms of neural dynamics, not neural states.

So in other words, patterns of neural systems through space and time, not just like, oh, the Jennifer Aniston neuron fired.

So they were conscious of Jennifer Aniston.

It's going to have to move a little bit beyond that into something that's about dynamics through state spaces.

This second point is that there are relevant distinctions to be made between the probabilities of movements through this neural state space and the probabilities encoded by neural states.

That's going into a whole encoding representation question and a lot of statistical details.

If that sounds interesting, read it.

And then the third point is that some of the computational correlates literature

able to be recast within the FEP.

And so the FEP is going to be like a bridge or like a nexus between people have identified 10 computational correlates and 10 neural correlates.

Well, you got this blood signal in this brain region when they see this thing and this auditory region when they hear this thing and this when they remember themselves.

And then on the computational side, you have this feature ABCD, all this stuff, information theory.

How are we going to bring them together?

FEP.

Any thoughts, Blue?

nope so let's go through kind of with a little i don't think we kept the exact order of the paper but early in the paper we start from the neural correlates of consciousness which is something that people have at least probably thought of like there's something different when there's blood loss to the brain than the hand so people have kind of thought that there's a neural correlate of consciousness

We're going to move the discussion from just thinking about neural correlates to computational correlates.

So this is the narrative trajectory from being like neuro reductionist or centric to more computational perspective.

They say CCC computational correlates are more general and promised to be more explanatory than neural correlates.

correlates but there's also challenges so big benefits that you get you can consider ant colonies and ecosystems all kinds of cool stuff and perhaps have access to a whole new set of computational tools downside are um what computational correlates are not defined in terms of neural structures but are neutral with respect to the question of whether the conscious experience correlate with global neural activity or not so the issue is that the brain is changing state all at once

And so you don't know whether that one feature you isolated is really the difference that makes a difference, so to speak.

It's like you could run two different computers and you wouldn't really know what about their outcomes from a correlated perspective was the actual explanation.

So one part is it's hard to get an explanation, even though they say it's more explanatory.

And then basically the second challenge for the computational correlates is the mapping from any correlate to consciousness, especially in controversial cases.

And the third challenge for any correlate of consciousness is basically fringe cases and cases we don't know or don't, but even those who knows what we do and don't know.

So-

there's these are three of the major dimensions of the challenge for any correlate of consciousness global versus local structure mapping between um consciousness and any correlate arbitrarily or not and then cases we don't know or understand so there's big territory that's pretty open and there's a lot there what do you think about that


SPEAKER_01:
There's a lot, there's a lot remains to be, you know, elucidated in all of those areas.

So.

Yep.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.


SPEAKER_01:
So 24.


SPEAKER_00:
So yeah, we'll kind of,

Taking computational, just at the author's word, that's the thread they tie.

So it's a broader understanding than just, I think, a computer processor.

I hope that we'll find that out, especially when we talk to the authors.

So there's a generality of these computational principles, but they also have a disadvantage.

The properties described by them may not be necessary for many types of conscious experience, but probably not sufficient.

So probably, it's a probabilistic statement, but do we know what is sufficient?

And so in other words, what is required for consciousness?

That's sort of the issue with this computational approach is you get this general toolkit that can cross scales really easily.

You say, oh wait, if I can make a measurement of a millimeter and a measurement of kilometers, and then I can use my tools on numbers, then it's a multi-scale model, right?

And so the challenge is, have you underspecified aspects of the system leading to a really potentially

like bad false positive or false negative rate of course the question is what is the ground truth whose ground truth and how are we going to get to these edge cases and resolve them in a real finite world and then the authors say in order to address this question of what is necessary and sufficient we show that um we show to what extent and from what assumptions some computational principles can be derived from first principles

so they're going to say all right this even the computational correlates of consciousness people yes there's some issues with going computationalist but we have studied those this is good phrasing then we're going to ask how even the computational correlates could be themselves generated from an underlying something first first principles which are going to be information and physical principles as we are seeing what do you think about that


SPEAKER_01:
So, I mean, I think in order to delineate what's required for consciousness, you need to kind of get at the point of what is consciousness.

Like, and I think that, you know, they artfully skate past that in the paper.

And I mean, I don't blame them, right?

Like it's a, it's a touchy and difficult and many gray areas, you know, exist within trying to define consciousness.

But if you can't define what is consciousness, how can you define the requirements for consciousness?


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

agreed and so let's uh see what any of the authors have to say on that but this is the question how is computational principles or physical principles going to come into play all right here we go into the formalism section there's a bunch of formalisms in the paper

And here is just one from the paper starting on the top left that sites out to a Friston paper, this Friston 2019 long monograph that is having many active improvements and revisions and discussions on it.

And then here's two sections from this Friston 2019 paper from 12 and 13, I think, but really you could take it even back further, just like any other literature.

You kind of take it back as far as you want to learn.

But for the purposes of the top left, the paper that we're reading today, the key formalism is here, or one of the key formalisms, just the one on this slide.

We're going to express the flow of F in terms of surprisal, and hence in terms of a non-equilibrium steady state density.

Expressing the flow F in terms of surprisal is almost like thinking about surprisal like it were a flow.

So just like you could have a flow of water, we're thinking about kind of surprisal flows, which is to say using flow like dynamics to study surprisal, because that's all sort of a few different facets of the same thing.

And so there's going to be some flow that's going to reflect

some terms that can be rewritten a few different ways we're not going to go down all the details i think of every letter anything that we should add on this slide blue but this is just about the idea of expressing information as a flow which is going to set us up for some of these later discussions and formalisms yeah no i'm good

yep and we just throw these slides uh in the order just that we snap them so there's other orders and other ways of going through it we had to look up a ton of stuff we learned that the uh i'm going to bring this on the dell or the nabla it's the operator used in mathematics particularly vector calculus uh that is a vector differential

so it's like div grad curl but it's it's an upside down triangle but it does have to do with change just like a regular delta but it's a whole area of math and so this is just to say some people maybe they didn't expect an equation in a consciousness paper other people maybe they're very familiar with this math and applying it to consciousness seems like an outrageous overstep so that's the conversation yeah


SPEAKER_01:
If you're somewhere in the middle, I'm somewhere in the middle of that.

But if you're somewhere in the middle, just knowing that it's like about information geometries, like how Daniel was mentioning, it's about a flow.

And so when you have like, it's a geometry, like the probabilities are thought about in these shaped spaces and kind of knowing that helps to contextualize the way that it moves, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
You know, thinking of float, it all makes me think of like a program, it's all set up and loaded, which files to read in, what to analyze.

You hit enter, it's like a bunch of grain in a silo and you pull out,

the stopper, and then it flows because there are forces.

So the computer's having energy course through it, and there's certain irreversible processes that increment a flow of information.

And so that's kind of, I wonder what kinds of metaphors, like this could be something for the author, like how do we think about this flow

And where, how do we, how can we describe it and learn about it?

So this is another, this is, so yeah, maybe this one could have gone before the other one, but this is a pretty general framing of random dynamical systems that are using this Langvane formalism that was developed in the direction of Free Energy Principle by Ao, AO, 2008, and other authors.

And

Basically, we can read this bottom part and go back to the equation.

So the state of the system x of t at time t, tau, is constituted by slowly changing macroscopic variables, which are grounded in microscopic variables with faster dynamics.

So it's almost like saying little things are composed of littler things.

Little things compose bigger things.

So it's kind of allowing us to go multi-scale by saying that there's gonna be a sort of big wave and a ripple.

And a bunch of the ripples summating makes the big wave informationally just kind of like a bunch of physical things spatially compose a bigger thing, but this is happening

through time as a random dynamical system not with a spatial metaphor so think about little things assembling into bigger things and then port it out of the physical into the dynamical systems and it's what kind of a dynamical system it could be related to information this is why the result is a stochastic differential equation comprising not only the state dependent flow f

but also a stochastic term omega with a mean equal to zero.

So another way of thinking about this is like signal and noise.

And so it's all like the vibration, but you can partition it with a model into change through time of a signal and a noise that's like much higher frequency.

So that noise, it's not like you're saying it's like bad.

It's just that with the signal that you're pulling out, it's the residual.

And the signals that are hard to find are the ones that are shorter, like they're hiding in the noise, but those can be pulled out.

If you have a really long time series, you can totally pull it out.

And there's other signals where the signal is so strong and then the noise is so tiny, like the vibration an inch off of the orbit of a planet.

It's like really easy to pull out the signal because the noise term is so small.

So any thoughts on that, Blue, or we can continue?

All right.

So now we want to talk about what exists, which is related to Fristian's theory of every quote thing or of particular physics, which is a specific way of doing physics, and it's a physics of particles.

Anything that exists will have characteristic features that do not change over time.

This is like measure theory.

It's like, if it's not there through time, it doesn't exist.

Like the reason why there isn't, it's kind of like material costs.

Like if there isn't a cow in my room, it's just not there.

If something doesn't persist, it's not there.

Formally, we express this by assuming that the system is a random dynamical system in non-equilibrium steady state.

So the equilibrium, the total heat death equilibrium steady state of air molecules in the room would be dispersed

to homogeneity with some summary statistic, like the well-mixedness.

But if it's not at equilibrium to the well-mixedness, physically or kind of informationally, then it's in a non-equilibrium steady state.

The steady state part is because it's existing through time, like the length of your arm, but then the non-equilibrium part is reflecting that the arm is an organization beyond just dissipating air molecules.

So when you have a non-equilibrium steady state like an arm that's persisting despite being disordered surrounding, this means that the system is exchanging with its environment and its dynamics can be described in terms of its Ness probability density, i.e.

a probability density that does not change during the time over which the system is said to exist.

So over the second to the second timescale, there's a constant measurement on the length of the arm and through time, it could be modeled as something changing.

But in all those cases, it's like definitely not just something that's, there's something different about what that system is doing informationally relative to other systems.

Okay, and then the third kind of quote section here is,

Such a system has a random attractor, which can be thought of in two ways, or another way to say that would be you can think about systems as having a random attractor, which then has multiple downstream consequences.

First, it can be considered as a trajectory of systemic states that evolve through time.

So then, in this sense, the system will, after sufficient time, revisit particular regions of a state space, the attracting set.

So we've talked on the Actim stream before about returning to a desired body temperature.

So it's not that your body returns to the state that it was as a body a week ago, a year ago, 10 years ago.

It's that on that one dimension, with respect to the modeling of the signal and noise of body temperature through time, because you're staying warmer than the background for a persistent amount of time in a way that defies the otherwise dissolving forces of thermodynamics, you can model that like it's doing some sort of strange attractor.

That's what that part is saying.

And then the second part is that you can think about that as not just, you can take a trajectory view, like a single path through that state space, temperature going up in the morning or down in the morning.

But the other way is like when you have a million paths, an infinite number of paths, it's like a density.

And in fact, it's a flow density.

So it's like one traffic you're driving, that's like one car, but then there's the traffic flow.

And so when you switch from a particle modeling to a flow modeling, there's a lot of, it's kind of like discrete versus continuous time, but it's a spatial analog, whether you go particular, like an electron is a particle, electron is a wave.

How do you make that distinction?

And so these are all kind of related topics, but that's what is under the scope of the pulling back to thinking this way.

Anything else?

All right, 27.

The fact that internal states are conditionally independent of external states, given blanket states, allows us to disentangle systems dynamics.

So now we're going to talk about the interfaces between those active interesting systems and their otherwise disordering environments, relatively speaking, or whatever the other side of the interface is.

other words we can write down separate equations of motions for the internal states and active states that only depend on the blanket states so there's a couple things happening here we're going from this active agent model through pearl's work building on bayesian statistics and markov blankets talked about other places other people can have a lot more to say on that

adding as per Mel Andrews's paper, the innovation of Friston, which is the partitioning of blanket states into sensory and action.

So sensory as being defined as inbound and active as being defined as outbound.

And then we're gonna take this sort of like equations of motion, trajectory flow remix,

and think about that kind of a physical depiction of a system with the partitioning between now two flows, like a highway with two directions.

So here was just like landscape flow.

Like the elevation is a flow in one way.

It's kind of just its own flow, the water flow.

But then here we're gonna have two directions in a way.

It's not just up and downhill, but it's like there's a sense flow and an action flow.

So there's information coming in that might have an asymmetry.

And then there might be like a totally disjoint kind of asymmetry with respect to action going out.

So if a robot has a photon sensor,

And then it has a physical actuator.

This is going to allow a total obvious, really simple partitioning.

Yeah, photon come in, actuator go out, generative model, internal.

Maybe I know that fully like a state machine.

Maybe I'm modeling it like the intentional stance.

But by partitioning into sensory input and then the motor, the behavioral, the experimental output,

we're going to be able to kind of like tidy our thought around interfacing with active systems and even inactive systems and then formally that's defined as um being a flow so that's this f is going to be a function of policy which is like the agents you know it is the policy of your arm to be the length it is just like it's the policy of someone to wear the clothes that they wear and then it's going to be over um

there's going to be this is not from the same paper but formally there are ways to define these different states and partition them and it's an area of active research and discussion which formalisms apply over which scope and how well all of these innovations of first ones line up with all the other thoughts in the area anything on markov blankets or this kind of partitioning


SPEAKER_01:
So something I've been thinking about like while you've been talking and just a metaphor that keeps popping up for me is like a ski resort, right?

Like we have the input information coming in and like, depending on your policy, you might select like a black diamond or a blue diamond or a bunny hill, like slope and the flow of people going out.

And then there's like the people that like a high level of surprisal that like want to ski back country and like possibly hit a tree or like there's all of this, like, you know, all of these options.

That's kind of how it's been coming together in my brain.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

The ski slope, people have different affordances, different preferences, different risk tolerances, different inclination for nostalgia of a simple one versus the thrill of a new one.

It's like, these are all, it's kind of like what Ryan Smith has been talked about.

Like these are above level of just one repeated task that two people could perform and up.

There's a difference in how they performed.

We're looking at something that's actually internal about those higher order properties.

All right.

Here is where we go from the flow state across an interface.

So we have this bi-directional freeway with the flow that's partitioned.

So we got like signal processing dynamics on the inbound and all the Bayesian statistics that kind of interfaces with all the cybernetics and the policy selection, and then output is behavior.

So that's the bi-directional flow across an interface.

We can...

Okay, let's read this quote and then unpack these equations and read them.

If the probability distribution Q of mu, Q sub mu, is sufficiently similar to the actual conditional distribution P of, I think it might be eta, but I don't know.

It looks like an N. We call it N. Curly N given pi policy.

So P of the actual, we'll just call it actual.

Yeah, actual distribution.

fancy one so if the probability distribution you know q of fancy n is sufficiently similar to the actual conditional distribution p of n given policy so states given policy how things will turn out given how i act over external states how will the external states be given my investing strategy what will stimuli will i see on my website in

under different policy assumptions um then we can approximate that flow so if you're treading water some motor pattern is being enacted that's resulting in treading water it's not accidental so that is self-organization in a dissipating environment and so it's as if a system that's treading water is able to approximate the flow of the actual states

informationally it can stay above water informationally so it has to be doing something like swimming equivalently we can say that the gradient flow of autonomous states can be considered as a gradient flow on variational free energy so now we move from the sort of general computational phrasing or physical computational phrasing of gradient flows into

gradient flows being related to this variational free energy estimate which it turns out is going to allow um very easy like tractable optimization based upon minimizing variational free energy so the phrasing of a gradient flow

was sort of neutral with respect to what you did with it now by porting the gradient flow into gradients of variational free energy it opens up a domain of optimization which is based upon variational base and variational free energy and just to skip to this bottom line um the variational free energy so this thing that it looks as if it's optimizing with respect to policy big f of pi um

uh is just equal and it throws out approximations coefficients it's just like you got to work through it and there's probably a lot of ways to do it but um this free energy value like on policy is related to this expectation of this fancy j which are we do we have that in a later slide

um of basically yeah it's the it is um the self-surprise i think we have in a later slide so um it's the expectation of how surprised you are given about your policies given the states so that's like how surprised are you about where you are that's why it's about yourself surprise about policy given state estimates that value plus

the divergence, which is like a KL divergence, between the state estimate versus the actual flow.

And there's probably a lot to say about these kinds of information theoretic divergences, but it turns out that that is gonna be greater than or equal to

how surprised you are on policy itself.

So almost reading it backwards, it's like how surprised you are to find yourself doing a policy, which is not just an instantaneous action.

A policy is the trajectory.

Like, I can't believe I'm the kind of person who's on the top of Mount Everest.

That is tied up.


SPEAKER_01:
If you've been like, you know, a 700 pound person down to your couch at one point in your life, like, I can't believe I'm on top of Mount Everest would be kind of like, I've taken a policy that I've ran every day and hiked all this stuff.

And now I'm on Mount Everest.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So, yeah.

So what we really want to know is given a optimistic self.

identity a persisting self-identity now some people get hung up on that they're like what if my self-identity is negative well it'd be equivalent to um the heart or lungs stopping existing it'd be then you wouldn't see that system treading water and that's why it's tragic when it does happen so we want to think about how surprised are individuals with respect to policy this doesn't tell you how to know what to expect or what policies are possible but this is how surprised one is about their own policy

is going to be approximated with an expectation so it's tractable of surprisal of policy given states which is much easier to calculate much easier to say how surprised am i about um how much i've been investing given how much i have rather than computing the total space of everything that could happen which is infinite plus just the details of how far off you are so if you're on the ball then this divergence term is low

and then your the variational free energy is like kind of closer to the idealized minimal surprise and this is something that one does want minimal surprise on because in a dissipating world you get the disorder for free and so this is something that's actually being like asymptotically converged towards


SPEAKER_01:
So something we should maybe clarify.

In the paper, I think that the authors use self-information or surprisal.

They don't really talk about self-surprisal.

And this is kind of like we're conflating now with last week's paper about who is creating the model of the self?

When you have a self-model, who is exactly constructing that self-model?

And I think in terms of this, it's like surprisal over policy

okay but like in relation to your model of yourself or i think your model of yourself is part of like your generative model overall yeah maybe yeah interesting


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, let's go to 29.

All right, so this was... So after thinking about this landscape of flows being operationalized as a variational free energy landscape that we're going to be able to do some kinds of operations on, now there can be sort of dimension play

with mapping states from this is something I would like to ask the authors about is like which connecting which manifolds to which manifolds matter what's the hookup we need which ones are the FEP providing us with because in this quote they connect it to the information geometry and geometry is just the shape of things so it's kind of like the shape of that information landscape

You can think about the physical landscape, or you can say the flow on that landscape of the water if the water fell on it.

And so it's kind of like, okay, information geometry is one thing.

And then this is partitioning with an information geometry angle

according to this Markov blanket active inference partitioning.

So the quote says at the end blue, you can give any thought on it.

Conversely, on this extrinsic manifold, so viewed from the outside,

The internal states minimize variational free energy when conditioned on the blanket states.

In other words, whenever the blanket states change, that could be sense or action, the expected internal state changes and there is movement on the extrinsic manifold that by construction, so is this how things are or how we're constructing them, can be cast as Bayesian belief updating.

This is because the expected internal state encodes probabilistic, i.e.

Bayesian beliefs about external states.

They act as if,

There's an internal state that's encoding and representing, or at least acting as if it encoded or represented actions about external states.

The blanket states here can be construed as the sensory impressions of the external states on the market blanket that contain the internal states.

In short, it may be more useful to consider the system from the point of view of the extrinsic information geometry, the probabilities encoded by internal states like neural firing patterns going out, rather than from the point of view of the intrinsic information geometry.

In other words, the statistical complexity of the neural dynamics considered alone might be misleading.

We might want to actually highlight the neural dynamics

projected onto a manifold of action or with respect to external states because we don't just want that raw time series like doing bitcoin analysis we want to know how that is associated with other patterns in a way that would suggest that it's acting purely responsibly or proactively or in some way that we're going to talk about how you could describe the complexity of it


SPEAKER_01:
I don't really have anything to add.

I thought, but I just was looking back through the paper.

I had thought that it was, you know, mapping from one, the manifold of the internal geometry or like there was a geometry created that was over the whole internal states versus the external states.

And it was that mapping that mattered, but

But yeah, I'm curious to revisit that now.


SPEAKER_00:
So we have a question in the chat, and someone asks, can you say a few words about the islands of awareness?

So that's like with the sensory input is disconnected.

Can you say a few words about islands of awareness and their relationship to the equations you're explaining?

So on this Markov blanket model on 27, if the sensory input were damped,

that would be the islands of awareness model so if nothing else active inference as a process theory that is consistent with the free energy principle is helping us functionally operationally however you want to think about it get at this island of awareness problem so instead of just saying imagine that there was very low or minimal input or no input of sensory state or imagine that somebody could get sensory state but couldn't act or imagine the only sense they could get was hearing and then the only action they could have is this

this is a way that we can think about totally separating the sort of north and southbound traffic with the active and the sensory states being partitioned.

That's the Friston innovation.

And so the island of awareness was from the non-FEP people.

It's probably from a different area.

And so to kind of latch onto that key topic that's being more broadly discussed,

this paper is saying, actually, like, here's the immediate value add of FEP and active inference.

We can actually subsume the debate around islands of awareness, which is something you all already agreed was an important question.

And then we actually have our own way of thinking about islands of awareness.

So maybe if that's a question you care about, maybe this is a good way that you would want to study it because it led us to these interesting conclusions about islands of awareness.

Okay, so...

Okay, so this is unpacking a little bit more about that big F of pi with expectation of the surprise of policy given states plus the divergence of the actual and the estimated states.

So we can look at the quotation.

Here, the divergence between the estimated and actual states describes the statistical complexity of the internal model.

How much do I have to change my mind to accommodate current changes in sensory signals?

So with respect to state estimates about how bright it is, it's like about whether you estimate it to be bright and it is or it isn't.

Whereas this other term, the negative expectation of how surprised one is on the policy given the states, describes the accuracy.

And then this is a parenthetical describing why it's negative.

So minimizing this entails minimizing the difference between these two.

So it's accuracy and accuracy.

model complexity and then it's just you depending on how you have the negatives and the positives you get good points for being accurate but it's a monotonic penalty to be more complex so always better to fit better always better to be simpler and those two lines always intersect

because you can always have a simpler model that does worse, and you can always have a more complex model that does better, if only because it explains some little random feature of the error signal.

So this is not about how the world is, this is about statistical partitionings.

Like a principal component analysis, the principal components are guaranteed to be orthogonal.

Well, there's certain assumptions that get built into here that we don't have to over-interpret with respect to how reality actually is.

note that the accuracy depends on the particular states so the states of the particle the pi the total states now actually confusingly i wonder if this is referring to blanket and internal states instead of policy as usually we use pi to mean


SPEAKER_01:
I had that same question.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yeah, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Written on my paper.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, because, yeah, that's our little icon with the policy pie.

But this one's cool too.

I like the blanket and internal states, but yeah, maybe it could be clarified.

And which one is in here?

Because...

Are we thinking about the minimization on policy alone or on the entire thing?

So let's make sure we're clear on that one.

During a period of partial disconnection from blanket states, such as dreaming, that's the islands of awareness, the variational free energy gradient in the following equation will mainly be driven by the complexity part, which does not depend on the blanket states.

So we have the bidirectional traffic and the flow, and then we're disconnecting sense.

so now it's like the system is just emitting so to speak flow but that is being driven by the um uh divergence term rather than this

including the internal state policy.

We'll figure it out, but this part drops away.

So then, because it's not conditioned on these blanket states, it's only conditioned on the internal model and the actual model.

So this D term is only conditioned on internal and actual states, and this one also includes blanket states.

So you can then do some...

good factorization or mathematics and then the conclusion of that at least um or the form of this equation entails that neural processes can perform the computations required to minimize free energy even when the coupling with the environment is suspended it's like you unplug the computer or something and then it's like it stops but then could you seize sensory input for the brain in a way that actually um

let the brain reveal a different stream of output that would reflect in complex internal dynamics now how will we measure it we'll get to in a second but the idea would be that we could use sleep and dreaming as a model i don't know and think about how the fep could be applied to these islands of awareness and we come to this same result isolated systems will minimize free energy by reducing the complexity of the generative model blue i knew i knew you thought that was interesting what did you like about that


SPEAKER_01:
So I specifically liked the fact that they said, like, when you're sleeping, there's no accuracy, right?

Or like in some island of awareness type of state, you don't have any accuracy because you don't have any sensory input.

And so when in these situations that then you minimize free energy by reducing the complexity of the generative model, I think that that's cool because sleep, just from a neuroscience perspective, background, is really thought to integrate and solidify your experiences.

shuffle things from short-term memory into long-term memory if like they're you know necessary like if it was like a peak emotional experience it'll be like cemented forever but all these things happen like during the sleep phase so it's literally like reducing complexity of the neural correlates of consciousness also which i think is interesting


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, very nicely said.

Like when you're getting sensory data in, there's an imperative to make it match, like to predict what the next word is so that your world doesn't seem like this like blur of just things that are uncertain.

But then when you disconnect the sense, the only imperative, the only reason that was getting complexity pushed up was the need to fit data.

when you don't need to fit the data there can be this radical scaling back in the complexity of the bottle so it's kind of like play or learning or higher dimensional existence or lower dimensional pretty interesting okay so 31. um this is going to be a connection now from that variational free energy landscape to computational research and optimization and machine learning

they're gonna reveal.

Variational free energy minimization in machine learning was predicated on minimizing algorithmic or computational complexity, which is the basis of universal computation.

People can read the citation and have their own thoughts on what it means to be universal or be a computer, but there's the citation.

Here's pretty interesting part.

Consciousness researchers assume

Maybe, unsighted, who does, maybe.

But one could assume complexity has to be large, computational complexity has to be large, yet the imperatives for universal computation in general and the free energy principle in particular say exactly the opposite.

So are we looking for at the simple rules end or at the complex outcomes end?

This apparent paradox can be resolved easily

by noting that free energy is a bound on marginal likelihood, AKA model evidence in the same way that the LZ, which we're gonna get to in a second, complexity is an upper bound on algorithmic complexity.

So they're like, it's not enough to just look at how surprised you are by individual neural states because the brain is never going to repeat an exact state.

So you're going to be infinitely surprised if you use parametric statistics.

You need to actually have a type of statistical inference based upon the dynamics of the trajectories and interpreting them on a flow landscape of information geometry rather than just being infinitely surprised by the specific measurements you get.

And then they basically write that to kind of speak to the islands of awareness idea, it's no surprise then to see that a good model of a complex world will show a high degree of algorithmic or statistical complexity even when observed in temporary isolation.

So this is saying, okay, you unplug the computer, it's gonna radically simplify.

If it was a Bitcoin node, it's disconnected from the internet, it's gonna simplify its processing.

but there might be another kind of system that has a high degree.

Take your empirical question, what high degree or shouldn't they be simpler or wouldn't it simplify it once it's isolated?

But that's the kind of interesting behavior we would expect or be predicting to see from an isolated system.

And just my question for the author was, what does it mean that the free energy is bounding the model evidence in the same way that this information measure, which we're going to get to, of complexity is an upper bound on algorithmic complexity?

I was just very curious.

It's a lot of things I've only heard a little bit about.

So it's just very interesting to think about.

What did this make you think about?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, so I think I put what I thought about this in a few slides away from now.

We'll loop back into that, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So then we're like, okay, what is this LZ complexity?

Because Blue and I both love complexity and met while we were studying complexity a few years ago.

So we were both excited with that.

And this Lempel-Ziv complexity measure was our statistic, however you want to think about it.

was first presented in the article on the complexity of finite sequences in 1976 by two Israeli computer scientists, Lemple and Zipf.

This complexity measure is related to the Kolmogorov complexity, but the only, and that's, so then another one would be the Shannon.

So Shannon is like the surprise with the coin flip.

Kolmogorov is like the algorithmic complexity, usually described as that way.

But the only function that the LZ is going to use is the recursive copy, i.e.

the shallow copy.

The LZ complexity can be used to measure the repetitiveness of binary sequences in text like song, lyrics, or prose.

Fractal dimension estimates of real-world data have also been shown to correlate with LZ complexity.

So it's interesting because learning about it on the wiki page, this is apparently the whole algorithm.

It's kind of just like looking for repeating blocks, blocks with prefixes.

and pointers it's a compression technique so if it was something where if your file was one two three four five you'd imagine that it would take a i i don't even want to say too much because i don't even know what would have a higher low lz complexity i'd like to ask but just like something could be easily zipped or not some things are going to be amenable amenable to lz complexity measures being high or low so that was just my main question is how do we go from this algorithm to like

conscious systems or to measuring real comparing real systems just pretty interesting not sure what to think about that but also really looking forward to the um everyone's perspective in like 16.1 and 2 because it was out of i didn't expect this to come into play as it cool to learn about what do you think about it


SPEAKER_01:
So I looked up like the LZ complexity versus like the Kolmogorov complexity where the Kolmogorov complexity is like total randomness, right?

Like 3.14159, like that's like a totally like Kolmogorov complexity to the max.

But this LZ complexity I think is related to like repetitiveness and sequences and how much they're repeated.

So it's different than the just totally randomness.

I guess that was like my guess.

glint of what I read from that.


SPEAKER_00:
So yeah, if something was just 10 of the same version, you know, transpose on or something concatenated 10 times, you could define it by defining the unit and then 10 pointers, you wouldn't need 100 data points, you need 10 plus 10 pointers.

So like, for example, that would be something compressible related to LZ.

But let's take a step back and ask, okay, even beyond the measure of the

complexity or the entropy measure.

I mean, let's learn and find out what all those are, but what is dynamical complexity?

And this is really related to complex adaptive systems and a lot of the more like non-free energy principle complexity research that we've been learning about blue.

So what is it rather than how it can be measured?

Now, we're not going to fall into a realist trap.

We're not going to say systems are this way, but we're thinking about the kinds of complexity that could be dynamically instantiated and measured.

And this is a paper from...

first in 2019, A, not B, which was the particular physics one.

And in dynamical systems theory, so this is drawing from even before complexity in some ways, like systems theory, three types of complex behavior can be distinguished.

So this is not feedback loops and stuff like that.

Those are the mechanisms by which we're gonna be tracking one particle in the space.

So we've got the particle, the one ping pong ball in the airflow,

That's the particle trajectory model.

And then we have the flow, which is the air that the ping pong ball is being spun around in.

In that sort of vector flow trajectory world, sometimes we see chaotic itinerancy.

So that's like when you have two pieces of wood in the stream, and if it's a lowly operative exponent, they go together for a long time.

If there's a lot of chaoticness, then high chaotic divergence, they diverge rapidly.

hetero clinic cycling.

So this is like cycling with, so repeating to come back to some places, but often with a twist and then switching under multi-stability.

So like you can be like, your brain can be like in a sleep mode and then it can go into the waking mode.

And so, yes, there is a gray zone, but you tend to see like phasic or categorical transitions.

So complex systems do that kind of stuff.

Sometimes they're wild and chaotic itinerancy and wacky, and then they can also cycle and also they can switch.

And sometimes we can even uncouple those ideas.

Like something could switch and the switching could reflect it turning on or off chaotic itinerancy or something like that.

So, and then I just copied out the definitions from the chapter in the Friston book.

What do you think about that?

Or what did that make you think about with respect to complexity?


SPEAKER_01:
Just like the dynamical complexity versus like, you know, what's happening in a computer is like just how things change really over time, right?

So in a dynamical system is a system that's changing, not like how complex is this number that is pi or, you know, 1.0000, right?

So it's just that basic difference.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Okay, let's return to the kind of free energy perspective.

Again, thinking about the dynamical complexity, but we want to be thinking about the complexity of these dynamical systems.

So this is because the computations performed by a system that minimizes variational free energy and inferences, which correspond to movements on the system's extrinsic statistical manifold.

Existing measures of dynamical complexity, however, do not measure complexity in terms of probabilities encoded by neural activity, but in terms of statistical properties of neural activity, that is, properties of the intrinsic statistical manifold.

Hence, dynamical complexity, at least measured by existing approaches, should be associated with NCCs, at least from the point of view of the FEP.

So this is to their point that we want to move from thinking about neural states to neural trajectories and flows

is otherwise we don't get access to this kind of a dynamical complexity measure.

Because if we just think in terms of snapshot states, we're going to think Shannon entropy.

How surprised am I by this neuron being lit instead of unlit at this time slice?

Whereas in the flow model, we can think about the dynamics of trajectories through really high dimensional state spaces.

And that's where FEP suggests an alternative.

An FEP-inspired measure of dynamical complexity would be based on the information length of neurally encoded probability distributions, i.e.

Bayesian beliefs, instead of considering the statistical properties of a neural time series as such.

So that's kind of what I just mentioned.

All right, conscious activity and complexity.

Lou, what would you say about this?


SPEAKER_01:
So this goes back to the LV complexity, really, and also the Kolmogorov complexity.

But I'll just read this quote from the paper.

So it says, to the extent that proposed measures of dynamical complexity have empirical validity as measure of consciousness, which is like...

What is consciousness?

What are we measuring?

How do we just know if it's valid?

I don't know.

All those things are packed into that sentence for me.

They may be regarded as empirically adequate, but it would still be desirable to provide a fundamental justification because this could further support their application to controversial cases like islands of awareness.

In addition, it could help resolve an uncertainty about whether existing measures of dynamic complexity also track algorithmic complexity.

So we know that LZ complexity is not the same as Kolmogorov complexity because it just takes in the repeats, but it doesn't take in all of the different ways that Kolmogorov complexity works.

does.

So here it says it's well known that LZ complexity, for instance, constitutes an upper bound on algorithmic complexity.

However, this entertains the possibility that conscious activity maximizes LZ complexity and related measures of dynamic complexity, but it minimizes algorithmic complexity.

This hypothesis is stated, and there's a citation, Ruffini, 2017.

Finally, developing a measure of dynamical complexity within the FEP could help by providing a computational explanation of consciousness.

So I think that that's a really cool idea.

thing that the authors have brought back around.

Like, can we put dynamic complexity in the FEP framework and thereby, you know, put a computational explanation of consciousness forward?

I think that's really awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
Great points.

okay let's talk a little bit more about a formalism that people love and also just an interesting um i think question about realism and instrumentalism and also just how we think about the definitions of which things are contingent on which so here they're going to write a further assumption we shall make is that the system possesses a markov blanket so

the language of whether it possesses or is um or there just is one and then the system is a secondary description and it describes a little bit more about the blanket and so this was kind of related to earlier but we didn't need this level of depth and it talks about where it's drawn on in terms of developing on pearl and the directed acyclic graphs and generalizations from there

But then here what matters is that the existence of a Markov blanket has subtle profound implications.

So is that the Markov blanket exists in the world?

Or is it that the implications of us modeling with a Markov blanket have profound implications?

So how do we think about whether we're describing how the systems are versus being clear when we think that it's actually not how things are or where they might be congruent?

And so is it, how do we know, and this is related to a general question that people has, how do we pull out these Markov blankets from the empirical data and relate it to the analytical concept?

So again, another slide just from Mel Andrews' paper

uh discussion where we talked about the development of the markov blanket topic from markov's initial framing in analytical mathematics and matrix mathematics to pearl's extension into bayesian statistics and graph theory computational approaches

and then where fristen has developed it over the decades and collaborators and then what is now being um done and learned about with respect to this the post markov blanket whatever it's wanting to be called any markov thoughts yep no cool

um this is related to one of the global challenges that were addressed which is that mapping where does consciousness come into play it's like whoa okay all of this flow and the information theory and the geometry but how are we going to connect this back to the consciousness question and relating anything about the system to the actual um question of what is conscious or not

and so this is the one quote that i want to highlight on 39 is being conscious versus just simulating it and so they um write a system with an unequal room steady state and a markov blanket comprises internal external and blanket states as shown in section 3 such a system can also be described as performing certain computations inferences by virtue of causal relations between internal external and blanket states that is what we were measuring those relation dynamical contingencies

in the equations we talked about by virtue of the causal relations.

This is different for a mirror simulation.

To be sure, a simulating system can perform the same computations, and it will perform them because of causal relations between its parts.

So it is true that the A matrix and the B matrix get multiplied together.

in the program.

However, it will not perform them because of causal relations between its internal external blanket states.

The simulation may instantiate a virtual machine, which may have internal external blanket states such that its internal states encode a probability distribution over external states given blanket states.

But the internal states of the virtual machine will not be the internal states of the physical machine on which the virtual machine is running.

So this is getting into the total virtualization, simulation, everything.

And we're not going to read this dialogue, but on 40, it's a section from a conversation about this topic in the book, The Mind's Eye, which is compiled by Hofstetter and Dennett.

And just, it's about, you're simulating a hurricane.

And, oh, well, programmers aren't claiming the simulation is a hurricane.

It's just simulating parts of a hurricane.

Buildings don't get wet.

And then you have to look at it the right way.

Well, what do you mean look at it the right way?

You know, what is getting wet?

It's your perception.

It just, it's a big area.

So it's fun because it's something that, you know, we're all just...

learning about and again no one has a great measuring device so it's not like we can resolve these debates there's not like an open and shut answer so that's what's so interesting it's like there might be a hot take or a quote you like or something that's inspiring to you about whether computers are conscious or not but in the end it's almost like it's a bottomless pit

So that's why it's good that the authors are actually starting to build bridges across it, I think.

All right, and then a last one slide on reservoir computing.

This was suggested by Sarah.

She was bringing up reservoir computing and researching maybe things that we'll hear about in the coming months, like about how it might relate to active inference.

Reservoir computing is a framework for computation that is sort of generalizing or building upon a neural network model.

and it's mapping the inputs not just to a fixed array of nodes or even multiple layers like a deep neural network or something but the way that these nodes internal to the system the reservoir they can actually be any system

So that could be various types of things.

Could be a slowly changing or a fast changing system or a system with a lot of other structures.

And so just, we don't have answers to this, but bringing up just reservoir computing, Sarah had some thoughts on it.

So we'll look forward to hearing about this and about the niche as a reservoir and computation as happening and where's that put computationalism.

Any thoughts on that before we go to our last bit?

nice yeah chill and these were just some things we brought up but you know people will bring up their own in 16.1 uh and anyone else can bring up uh anything they want us to put on the screen for the author and others but there's so much to think about with this paper they concluded just by writing that

um how can research on neural correlates of consciousness lead to an explanation of consciousness and what role could free energy principle play in this endeavor we have suggested that research on neural correlates should be complemented by research on computational correlates of consciousness in order to yield a computational explanation of consciousness

Moreover, according to free energy principle, neural correlates of consciousness must be defined in terms of neural dynamics, not states, and CCCs should be defined in terms of probabilities encoded by the neural states.

specific claims for those to engage with a lot of um footholds and challenging walls to climb by interesting topics a lot of um things that understanding could enable and we're talking about consciousness and neuroscience so everything is kind of adjacent to it any closing thoughts blue on this very nice discussion


SPEAKER_01:
No, thank you so much for having me.

It's been fun participating.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, that was great times.

Thanks so much for joining because it makes it a lot more interesting to make and to do.

So we hope to see people in 16.1 and beyond.

Other than that,

## P6LiF4gTfUo

SPEAKER_07:
Hello, everyone.

Thank you very much for joining.

This is the Active Inference Lab, and you are listening to the Active Inference livestream.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to active inference.

You can find us on our website, Twitter, email, YouTube, Discord, or Keybase team.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we will follow good conversational livestream etiquette.

Today we're really excited to be discussing the Neural Correlates of Consciousness under the Free Energy Principle with one of the two authors, Wanjo Wiese.

And today we're going to be having our first discussion, 16.1, and then next week we'll be having a follow-up discussion on the same paper.

So if you have more thoughts or questions arising in the next week, that will be a great time to bring them up.

Today in ACT InfoStream 16.1, our goal is to be learning, discussing and hearing from everyone.

And that is gonna be facilitated by this awesome presentation that we are about to hear from Wanja.

So for 16.1, we're gonna have a presentation and then we're gonna just pick up with the participatory discussion.

So Wanja, thanks again for joining us and please take it away.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you for having me.


SPEAKER_03:
It's a real pleasure to have the opportunity to present this paper here and discuss it with you.

I'm just going to share my slides.


SPEAKER_05:
I think you can see the looks great.


SPEAKER_03:
So first, I'd like to make a short advertisement for my journal.

So together with Sasha Fink and Jennifer Wind, I

Founded Philosophy in the Mind Sciences, an open access journal for work at the intersection of philosophy, neuroscience and psychology.

And we recently published a special issue on the neural correlates of consciousness, which you can find at philosophymindscience.org.

So if you're interested in this topic, you might want to check this special issue out.

Now, in this short presentation, I'm going to mention just some key points from the preprint.

And this is the structure of the paper.

These are just section titles.

from all sections after the introduction and we are currently revising the paper so we received some very useful reviewer comments and actually one of the reviewers pointed out that if you're not already committed to or interested in the free energy principle

the results that we present in this paper may not be that interesting or may not seem that relevant.

And in fact, in part, this is, I think, a fair comment, because in the first section after the introduction, we review the standard notion of a neural correlate of consciousness

which has been provided by David Chalmers in a seminal paper in 2000.

And we then mentioned some challenges for this concept.

And this motivates moving from the neural correlates of consciousness to the computational correlates.

and actually then in the next discussion you also relate this to the free energy principle and then it turns out that there are some problems if you want to apply the free energy principle to this

kind of research, because the main reason is that the free energy principle is not itself a theory of consciousness.

And it's not a theory of computational correlates of consciousness.

and there are first some obstacles that have to be overcome if you want to apply the free energy principle to research on consciousness or on neural and computational correlates of consciousness in particular.

And if you're not already committed to the free energy principle or not really interested in it, you may wonder, well, why should I even bother thinking about this if it only creates new problems that you don't get into if you're not dealing with the free energy principle in the first place?

So this is, I think, a fair question.

And we're trying to highlight the

on genuine contributions that we're making or that we're trying to make in this paper and the revisions.

And these mainly relate to the final two sections before the conclusion in which we talk about computational explanations of consciousness in general and what the free energy principle can provide or can contribute to this project.

And then we try to explain what the specific role of the free energy principle can be here.

And we suggest that it may provide unification.

So I will take a few minutes to talk about these things in a bit more detail.

So let's see, this is a more detailed

overview of the paper.

So in the section in which we talk about the neural correlates of consciousness, we mentioned that according to the standard definition, a neural correlate of consciousness is a minimally sufficient neural structure.

And then there are three challenges that we mentioned.

One is that

Actually, what is interesting about the neural activity associated with consciousness may not be that it happens in a particular place in the brain, but more that it displays a certain dynamics.

And this can even be global dynamics.

So it's not what's happening at a place, but what's happening over time and maybe in the entire brain or in large parts at least of the brain.

Then another question is, even if you can map certain

types of neural activity to conscious experiences, this mapping can be seemingly arbitrary.

So we need to understand why or would like to understand why that particular type of activity is associated with consciousness.

And then a third challenge is that the notion of a neural correlate of consciousness

as defined by Chalmers and as used in much research on NCCs, only applies to usual conditions and does not apply to unusual conditions.

So after brain damage, for instance, and another very unusual condition is provided by

potential cases of islands of awareness.

So this is from a recent paper by Tim Bain, Anil Seth and Marcello Massimini, in which they ask the question whether there can be systems that are constantly isolated from the body and the environment and still be conscious.

So can there be conscious states in systems that neither receive sensory input nor produce motor output?

And there are some potential candidates for such systems, which include X cranial brains, hemispherotomy and cerebral organoids.

So an X cranial brain is a brain that has been extracted from the cranium, but is kept alive and which can still display some non-trivial activity.

And in hemispherotomy,

a large part of the brain is more or less disconnected from other parts or the rest of the brain.

So neuronal connections to other parts of the brain are cut.

And in, well, organoids such as neural structures grown in the lab.

And in all cases, well, one may wonder, well, could such structures, such systems give rise to activity patterns that are sufficient for consciousness?

And what we suggest is that computational correlates could

provide at least some progress towards an answer because computational correlates can be applied to different kinds of system.

And in fact, the authors of this paper mention complexity measures.

So there's some evidence that neural activity associated with consciousness displays

large or high complexity, high algorithmic complexity.

And in principle, one could measure the complexity of activity generated in these isolated systems, and that could provide some evidence for inferring the presence of consciousness in such systems.

Now, actually,

Complexity is also an issue when it comes to applying the free energy principle.

I will talk about that in a minute.

And one of the things we do in the next section is that we relate the free energy principle to work on computational correlates of consciousness and computational principles that have been associated with consciousness

And we in particular, we also discuss the challenge of islands of awareness.

And this is not just a challenge for neural correlates of consciousness, but also especially a challenge for the free energy principle.

One of the problems that is created by trying to apply the free energy principle.

And the reason is this.

The free energy principle is mainly applicable to systems that are

in causal interaction with the environment.

So systems that are part of an action perception loop in which internal states interact with external states mediated by blanket states, which contain sensory and active states.

But if you have an isolated system which is cut off from sensory input and motor output,

it's not clear that you can apply the free energy principle to describe what's going on in the system.

But actually, there's some existing work on the free energy principle and dreaming by Alan Hobson and Carl Fristen.

And in that work, they suggest that, well, I just go a bit forward.

As is well known, I guess, you can formulate or describe the free energy functional as involving an accuracy and a complexity term.

So you can write variational free energy as complexity minus accuracy or complexity plus inaccuracy.

As it turns out, the accuracy term contains a term denoting particular states which involve blanket states.

And the complexity term does not.

So the complexity term can be minimized by changing internal states.

And so in previous work, it was suggested that during dreaming, the causal interaction with the environment is attenuated.

And so this free energy gradient is mainly driven by the complexity term.

So basically what the brain's doing during dreaming is minimizing complexity.

And we suggest that the same holds a fortiori for cases of islands of awareness.

So such systems should at least for some time minimize free energy by minimizing complexity.

And now this brings up complexity again, and the question how this relates to empirical research, according to which neural activity associated with consciousness maximizes complexity, or at least displays high complexity.

this tension can be resolved by noting that the free energy functional contains a statistical form of complexity and complexity measures in consciousness science are measures of dynamical complexity that

are often based on an approximation to algorithmic complexity.

So there are actually two different notions of complexity in play here.

And according to the free energy principle, islands of awareness should

minimize one type of complexity, but it leaves open the question whether they maximize a different type of complexity.

And we suggest that it would be useful to formulate or develop a notion of dynamical complexity

within the framework provided by the free energy principle.

So it would be useful to define dynamical complexity or measure of dynamical complexity in terms of the intrinsic information geometry of a system as opposed to a definition in terms of the extrinsic information geometry

Um, but this is actually not something I want to dwell on here.

So, um, let's go to the next point.

Um, computation explanations of consciousness.

Um, we,

Well, that's a fundamental problem associated with trying to develop a computational explanation of consciousness, because computations can be performed by vastly different types of system.

So you can perform computations in the game of life, and you can compute mathematical functions

by playing magic the gathering so the game of life is turing complete and as i recently learned magic the gathering is turing complete as well but i wouldn't suppose that anything that happens in the game of life gives rise to consciousness or that you can instantiate consciousness by playing magic the gathering in a particular way so um just

Computing the right mathematical functions in a physical system is not sufficient for consciousness.

Or in other words, there's a difference between simulating consciousness in a system and actually instantiating consciousness.

And the question is, okay, how can we make this difference?

How can we understand the difference between simulating and instantiating consciousness?

And here we,

think that the free energy principle can make a perhaps tiny, but we think relevant contribution.

And the main idea is this, as I already mentioned, this is the causal flow in an action perception loop, according to the free energy principle.

So here we have a

physical system with internal states.

And it's coupled to external states via blanket states, which comprise sensory and active states.

And so the main cause of flow we have here is

in this physical system is between internal states and external states.

So internal states act on external states via active states and external states act on internal states via sensory states.

Okay, now what happens if we simulate this, such a system in a digital computer?

Now this is a caricature or simple

visual model of a computer with a von Neumann architecture.

And one of the characteristic features of such a computing device is that it has a distinct memory unit, which is separate from the CPU of the central processing unit.

So if you simulate a system with this causal flow in such a system, you'd have to store the values of these variables of external, internal, and blanket states within the memory unit.

And in order to compute updates of these variables, you have to engage the CPU.

So the main causal flow would be between the memory unit and the CPU.

Of course, there are also variants of this architecture in which the CPU contains the memory unit, but then the main causal flow would

be within the CPU and also between the memory unit within the CPU and the rest of the CPU.

So it's a different kind of causal flow in this physical system, although the computations

performed by these systems can be the same in the sense that internal states can be interpreted as conditional probabilities of external states given blanket states.

OK.

So this is, we suggest, one of the differences between simulating and instantiating consciousness.

There's a constraint on the causal interaction or causal flow between the system or the system's internal states and its environment.

And of course, this may be different in a computer with a neuromorphic architecture.

OK.

Then in the final section, we relate these ideas to previous work on minimal unifying models of consciousness.

And so I'll just explain this very briefly.

In general, what can computational models bring to

bring to, or how can they facilitate an understanding of consciousness.

So computational models may serve as a bridge between phenomenal properties of experience and properties of neural activity.

They may operationalize theories of consciousness.

They may explain theological functions, that is cognitive capacities associated with consciousness.

And so these are things that, for instance, active inference models could provide.

And the free-energy principle together with such models can then serve as a unifying framework.

And how can it be unifying?

So here's just one possibility.

start with what jonathan birch calls the facilitation hypothesis in a recent paper so there he writes phenomenally conscious perception of a stimulus facilitates relative to unconscious perception a cluster of cognitive abilities in relation to that stimulus so this is just a

a hypothesis which can be empirically investigated.

You can, for instance, look at different non-human animals and see whether

non-human animals that have one of these cognitive abilities in that cluster also have the other cognitive abilities and whether animals that do not have one of these abilities also lack the other cognitive abilities and so this would then corroborate the hypothesis that

There's some mechanism that facilitates or enables all of these, an entire cluster of cognitive abilities, and this could be what consciousness does.

In addition to that, one could also find theoretical supportive evidence if one builds minimal models of these cognitive abilities, and if one could show that a minimal model of one cognitive ability in that cluster is also a minimal model of other abilities, or if one could show that there's a common

computational mechanism that accounts for all of these cognitive abilities and hypothetical example just to illustrate would be active inference models.

If active inference models of such a cluster of abilities

or required deep temporal processing or maybe deep counterfactual processing or something like that.

So if one would have to posit a certain generative model with a certain architecture in order to account for these different abilities, then that could be something like a common computational mechanism which then could further corroborate the hypothesis that there's something that

that facilitates these cognitive abilities together.

Okay, and this is gonna lead to something like a minimal unifying model.

I introduced this term in a paper in Neuroscience of Consciousness.

A minimal unifying model specifies only necessary conditions for consciousness.

It involves determinable descriptions that can be made more specific and unifies existing accounts of consciousness.

And I would now add that it can also unify cognitive abilities associated with consciousness, not just accounts of consciousness, not just theories of consciousness.

OK, but we can talk about this in the discussion and the

A general picture would be that there are these different aspects of the science of consciousness.

There are theories of consciousness.

potential teleological functions of consciousness, that is cognitive capacities associated with consciousness.

And there are mathematical functions that are computed by conscious systems.

There's the notion of complexity and then neural correlates of consciousness and perhaps minimal unifying models could be useful here as I've suggested.

And the free energy principle can provide

a way of relating these different notions and different branches of research together.

For instance, active inference models can be used to develop operationalized theories of consciousness.

I mean, there's been this

recent active inference model of the global neuronal workspace theory of consciousness and active inference can be used to model cognitive capacities and so on.

And relating these different notions and these different kinds of work together could then

also lead an insight into why different neural structures are associated with consciousness and what role complexity actually plays in consciousness and many other questions and problems.

Okay, so this is the end of my short presentation.

Thank you for listening and I'm very much looking forward to the discussion.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

Thank you for that.

For that really awesome.


SPEAKER_07:
So you could great.

Well, what a awesome way to begin this conversation with a presentation and also really appreciated that you're revising the paper and kind of giving us this glimpse of not just a research field that's in evolution, but the paper itself is undergoing changes.

So for the rest of this presentation,

actim stream 16 we'll kind of play it by the usual rules if anybody wants to just raise their hand we'll get to everybody who does um also we do have the slides and blue who's um here and i had done 16.0 so we had thought through a couple of topics so um at this point i guess we'll

open it up to people who want to raise their hand and can also just say hello on their first time speaking.

And then in the absence of hand raising, we'll just continue through these slides.

So thanks again, Juancha.

And let's go to Stephen first and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'd just like to say thanks.

Very interesting to hear the developments on the paper.

I was just going to ask about the

Well, I suppose there's a lot of things that come up.

Stephen, by the way, just say I'm based in Toronto, but I'm working on a practice-based PhD through the UK.

And one thing that came up on your slides there was interesting.

When you were looking at the potential for there to be some sort of memory that relates to those states, and I was curious whether that memory itself might have

to be connected to sensory states or whether that might be something that which is standalone and if so whereabouts you might think that might be in the brain like is it a hippocampus type question grid cell type question or something like that so thank you thank you and that's a very interesting question and i think it could be useful to show my slides again


SPEAKER_03:
Let's do that.

OK, so you're referring to this picture, right?

And yeah, so the idea would be that in a system that simulates a system that is in an action perception loop,

There would be some internal states that encode the internal states of this system that is being simulated.

So this digital computer would have some physical states that encode the internal states of the simulated system.

coming to the first part of your question, that there would have to be some interaction with sensory input.

But what is sensory input?

So this, in principle, one could say, well, any of the other physical states of this digital computer could serve as the sensory input to these internal states, right?

And the question is,

would the causal relations between these physical states that encode internal and sensory states of the simulated systems, would these causal relations be similar to the causal relations we see here?

And I would suggest no.

And then there's

Another aspect you mentioned in your question, which is whether there could be some memory unit in the brain.

And so perhaps you can elaborate a little on this.

Were you thinking about simulations that are going on in the brain?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah i was kind of thinking um or curious if if you could have maybe two parallel kind of you've got the real time real sensory input being like experienced and then there's like an update to this kind of memory but that memory doesn't you know that memory rather than it being a representation

that memory, it could be different.

And with that memory, I'm curious whether that memory itself then connects back to the actual sensory organs.

So it's not like it's in some computed form, but somehow the sense of smell, the multi-sensory integration is still happening.

at some level, you know, but maybe in a different way, which then helps in dreaming and stuff like that.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so this is really interesting.

I mean, you

I think it could be useful to distinguish different types of simulation that could occur in the brain.

One would maybe be involved in imagining certain counterfactual situations, and another would be involved in dreaming.

And you're suggesting that there must be some memories somewhere and which

that maybe have, which would be some states that give rise to these


SPEAKER_00:
conscious experiences but they're not directly connected to a sensory input is that what you're yeah they're not maybe not directly connect they're connected to the sensory organs and so so it's not that it's like a separate it's like you in a way I'm saying it needs to keep some connection to the sensory

what we would call inputs, I suppose, but in a different way.

So it's not like it's completely offline, if that makes sense, but it might be online in a different way, which would then still allow you to have a dynamical system in both cases and a plausible route for how they came about.

So I'm curious about that.

So basically,

um you you know whatever these priors are this they're still somehow um engaged in the sensory organs in in being alive and conscious thanks steven um wangia go for a response there and then we'll continue with adam and marco and then anyone else


SPEAKER_03:
So one thing that comes to mind here is that it may be useful to talk about nested Markov blankets.

So you'd have the brain with sensory states and active states.

And the states of the brain can be regarded as internal states.

But within the brain, there would then be another Markov blanket and internal states within these internal states, which would then be directly associated with simulations or with dreaming or other kinds of experience.

And so there would be an indirect connection to sensory organs.

but the, as it were the sensory states that immediately affect these internal states that are associated with say dreaming, what would be within the brain and not directly connected to sensory organs.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

Thanks a lot.

Adam,

at Denmark.


SPEAKER_10:
Can you hear me?


SPEAKER_06:
Yep.


SPEAKER_10:
Hi, everyone.

Hi, Juanjo.

Thanks for that.

This is really fascinating work, and it's disturbing me in that I've recently attempted to present a minimal unified model using the free energy principle as an overarching framework.

And I'm wondering whether I need to backpedal on some of the claims I made.

So I tried to bring together integrated information theory and global neuronal workspace theory.

But in doing this, one of the things I pushed back against in IIT is the... Sorry, I tried my little breathless.

One claim I was trying to push back on is that you needed a neuromorphic architecture to have consciousness and that you couldn't do it on a von Neumann one.

I think this issue is probably largely moot due to just what probably it would take to get enough compute.

We probably need neuromorphics just for energy efficiency.

But I'm wondering with respect to that,

that slide and in terms of causation, whether like by the time we commit to a core screening that involves those entities, that actually we might need to core screen over the workings of the Von Neumann architecture and actually go into the virtual machine.

And that the causation is in terms of like a, like in Perlian causation, we have to like

commit to an ontology.

And then once we have our directed graphical model, then we're doing the operations and that's like our causation.

And so I'm wondering if there might be like a mixing in that figure and that if we're like, I don't know if that makes sense, but I guess with relation to nested Markov blankets and Steven's question also, I'm wondering if this might end up taking

biological consciousness and potentially putting it in the same kind of epiphenomenal boat in terms of degrees of how much directness allows us to actually treat sensory motor coupling as actually being real and causal.

So I'm wondering if we do that, we end up like being in the same boat of not ascribing consciousness to

biological systems either, even though they're using massively parallel operations and they're in their very dynamics, having this dual aspect character.


SPEAKER_07:
I do not know.

Cool.

Wonja, go for it, and then Marka.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you so much.


SPEAKER_03:
By the way, Adam, thanks for attending this session.

And immediately, I had some comments on Twitter when I posted the link to the preprint.

And I didn't have time to respond to these comments.

So I'm really grateful to you for attending this so we can actually discuss the points that you raised.

And yeah, so how real are virtual machines?

And I think there are two issues that have to be separated.

And so this is one thing I'm sure about.

And then there's one thing that I'm less confident about.

So the thing I'm sure about is if you have a coarse grained description of a system and abstracting away from certain details, that doesn't mean that you end up describing things that are not as real as the things that are happening at a more detailed level.

So if you're describing a brain in terms of what's going on in individual neurons and describe that in a lot of detail, that's a more specific description you have than if you're just considering the average activity of neuronal populations.

But that doesn't mean that what's going on at a population level is less real or that this average activity cannot have causal powers or that relations that you could describe as causal relations at this more coarse-grained level, that these relations are not really causal relations or something like that.

So I think we agree on this.

part and then the question is well if at such a coarse-grained level if i understand you correctly at this at such a more coarse-grained level if this instantiates a virtual machine doesn't this mean that the virtual machine is um as real as the physical machine that instantiates the machine and i'm

I actually I don't know, but there are some things that follow if you accept that virtual machines can be conscious that are really, really counterintuitive and disturbing.

So if you've watched the series Black Mirror, there are these episodes in which a person is uploaded to a computer.

And then there's a virtual version of that person in a virtual environment.

And that virtual person is being tortured for, I don't know, for weeks or even months.

The assumption is that this virtual entity is conscious.

And this happens over a course of, I don't know, minutes in the external real world.

So if a virtual machine can be conscious, then conscious experiences that we have during

during over the course of several weeks or months could take place within minutes or maybe even within seconds.

And that's really strange.

But you could also run these computational processes backwards.

And then you'd have backwards conscious experiences.

Or you could stop them at any moment.

and then continue them.

Or you could have physically highly distributed systems that are connected by some device, which then enables this collection of physically scattered systems to perform some computations.

And if this can then

a rise to consciousness you'd have a very strange conscious entity and other things like that and then there are these thought experiments such as uh netblocks blockhead um experiment in which the chinese nation instantiates consciousness and or at least the functional states that may be associated with consciousness and

So there are these really counterintuitive consequences.

And this is the main motivation for me for trying to make a distinction between simulating consciousness and instantiating consciousness.

And maybe there are some virtual machines that are conscious.

But my intuition is that it would have to

fulfill very specific conditions.

And one of these conditions may be that the interaction it has with its physical environment must be the same type of interaction that the simulated system has with the simulated environment.

And that's what I tried to illustrate here.

But of course, you could

You could argue, well, this is just motivated reasoning because you don't want to accept these counterintuitive consequences.

And why would you make this accept?

Why should one accept this requirement?


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks.

It's an interesting style, the argument from consequences with consciousness.

Well, that can't be correct because then this would be conscious and we know that's not true.

It's like, wait, do we know that?

So Marco and then blue.

Oh, yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Another question.

Another comment about a massive mark of blankets.

And so you suggested that maybe this requirement is too strong if we

Maybe it's fine if we apply that to, to,

digital computers but um if we then apply that to actual to biological organisms that we would regard as conscious then the result would be that they are not really conscious at all so it's too strong i guess that's what you're suggesting about what you're um the question that you're raising so um yeah

I guess one would have to flesh this out in a bit more detail.

But one way would be to say, look, the free energy principle makes some idealizing assumptions.

And the very notion of a Markov blanket as used in the free energy principle is as

I think many know by now, slightly different from the notion used by or proposed by Judea Pearl because Pearl's notion of a Markov blanket is just a feature, Pearl's Markov blanket is just a feature of a model of certain causal graphs and the Markov blanket used in

The free energy principle is an ontological notion or metaphysical notion because it's meant to be actually part of a physical system.

And one quick question that it really exists and yeah, so, or that,

actual biological organisms that are conscious that they actually have these or that they fulfill these idealizing assumptions made by the free energy principle and for this reason if we derive a a constraint on what it means to be a conscious system as opposed to simulating a conscious system from the free energy principle we're actually

requiring that a system has these or fulfills these idealizing assumptions which may be features of a model of a system but are not actually satisfied or not actually instantiated

by the system itself.

I think there's an ongoing discussion or there will be an ongoing discussion about the notion of a Markov blanket and whether it's justified to treating it as a ontological notion, as a feature of an actual physical system.

And we are committed to this strong reading in the paper.

So we're using the notion of a Markov blanket in the ontological sense, not just in the epistemic sense.

So this may be a problem.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

Thank you for that addition.

So Markov, then Blue.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks.

Thanks for the presentation, the great paper.

I've been significantly excited by reading it.

It's actually a great use of FEP and bias, because it articulates a lot of intuitions I had.

And it's also very nice in the spirit of pluralism, this approach of really embracing the unifying quality or power of the FEP and focusing on unification rather than another universal or overly exaggerated claim or proposition.

And it's going to be probably some scattered thoughts, but I'm trying to also touch on what Steven said.

I'm not sure if I understood what it meant, but I'm reminded of amortization.

So Sam Gershman has some nice papers on this.

has a nice paper called uh remembrances of influences past so the parameters or the the components the factors of the strategies used in influence could also be remembered and so maybe that's what i thought you meant when you said something related to or associated with sensory states but not actually central states themselves maybe in the physical substrate that enacts these sensory inferences and there might be partial might be parts or parameters or factors

that can be remembered and that these are the ones that can be updated.

These are the ones that also are reactivated during dreaming despite the absence of sensory inputs.

But anyways, if it's not what you meant, then let's talk about that later.

About your conversation with Adam, I have a bit of a... I'm not sure if you meant virtual machines as popular as actual computers and software.

For me, it's very important to distinguish a mere embeddedness, such as the normal virtual machines, and an embeddedness where the relation between the embedded subsystem and the larger system is one that's related by active systematic mutualistic inference, that these are mutually contextualizing and there is a kind of cybernetic relation to it, which is not the case with normal virtual machines, especially in phenomenon architectures, because these are

more sterile channels, as I would like to say.

So as for my own points upon reading it, so I very much appreciate that you elaborating, emphasizing the notion of dynamical complexity as opposed to mere complexity, and very elegantly avoiding the many perceptual traps that tends to be lurking in these woods.

But as a suggestion or question, so

you suggest that the notion of accuracy kind of falls away in the determination of free energy, variation of free energy, for honest awareness.

But I actually would argue that, in fact, accuracy is still relevant, but it's a reflexive kind of accuracy.

So because of the embeddedness of these ecosystems, you could say that to some subsystems, their concerns of accuracy are relatively the other subsystems, the entire subsystems.

And so you see this in dreaming, right?

So the different subsystems of the brain need to update themselves in relation to each other.

And so, for example, I think Tononi has some work, I'm not sure if it's published yet, but that the activation of, during dreaming,

where the epicenters of the activity radiating outwards seem to correlate with the sites of activation during the waking experience, where something new is learned.

And under the FVP, it becomes extremely clear, well, it suggests an intuitive explanation for why.

Because if there's a local kind of improvement, a local updating occurred in that model,

but all the subsystems in the ecosystem are mutually contingent or contextualized by each other, then it would be useful to extend the fruits outward or share the fruits of an experience with other systems.

And so you also then lose the necessity of a global coherence of the ecosystem because there is no unified external world.

All the contents become local.

It's simply a constellation of local contents.

which in my opinion is an elegant way to look at it because it seems parallel to the phenomenology of dreaming which argues for your paper's motivation because this tentative computational explanation has immediately a nice pathway to the phenomenological aspects to be explained.

So I would just really like to hear your thoughts about whether accuracy should really be dropped, or whether we should see accuracy as still being a part of the variation of energy in the lower levels.

So more specifically, it's as if the complexity at one level is partially constituted by the accuracy improvements in the lower levels.

Especially because you mentioned embedded this, but I don't see it as

well integrated in the paper, but I think it would much more bolster your claims, especially because of its relations with other material and consciousness research, especially the 4E camp and their whole emphasis on embeddedness.

And this also relates a bit

Well, I would say that another way you can see this as a contextual reduction can be seen as configurational accuracy.

So if we assume that the act of choosing the configuration is itself a question of policy selection or the action of configuring yourself in relation to the context, then complexity can be seen.

as configurative accuracy.

And so now you get this weird thing.

So a decomposition of complexity reduction in terms of intrinsic complexity reduction, so kind of the Bayesian model reduction you see in the active intrinsic curiosity paper, and an extrinsic model reduction, a model reduction in relation to the contextual systems in which it stands.

Anyways, I'll stop here.

I think I'm rambling on too much.

So yeah, I would love to hear your thoughts.


SPEAKER_03:
So thank you so much for your comments and questions.

Yeah, so this point about embedded systems and nested Markov blankets, that's definitely something that I have to think about a bit more, which will be relevant.

So when you talked about complexity and

how within an embedded system within the brain there could still be accuracy maximization despite a lack of sensory input via the sensory organs.

I actually was reminded of a discussion we had with a reviewer

but not a reviewer of this paper, but of the Markovian monism paper we published last year.

So one of the reviewers brought this question up, what happens in an isolated system?

And they mentioned that, according to IIT,

I think it could still be conscious, something like that.

It reminded me of what you said, or the other way around.

What you said reminded me of this discussion we had.

And my intuition I had, or the initial reaction I had was that, OK, well, in such systems, we have maybe no sensory input from the external environment, but there's

some environment within the system, within the organism that can provide some simulated sensory signals.

I think this is what you were referring to.

And I don't really remember what happened.

I think Carl had a slightly different opinion regarding this and suggested that most

The more elegant way of treating this case would be to regard the system as a system that just minimizes complexity and ignores accuracy.

But now that it comes up again, I don't think that's the end of the story.

And it may be relevant and interesting to make this a bit more

complicated by actually considering nested systems and simulated sensory signals and so on.

And I don't think that this is something we can throw into the revisions because the paper's already getting quite long.

But it's something that we should focus on in future work.

And I would be grateful if you could point me to some of the literature that you mentioned.

You can send me an email or DM me.

And then there's another thing you mentioned, a distinction between two types of virtual machines or two senses in which a virtual machine can be things that can be associated with that term.

And I've

I don't think I am aware of this distinction, and I'm not sure I really understood it.

So perhaps you can repeat what you said.

So it's that one is nearly embedded, and the other has some additional features.

I think that could be really interesting and relevant.


SPEAKER_07:
Should I do it now or later?

Yeah, go for it.

Keep in thread, and then we'll go to Blue, and then to Dave and Adam, and another question from the chat.


SPEAKER_08:
I'll try to keep it brief.

So actually, one of the reasons why I'm so motivated about this is actually because when I did my master thesis with Carl, I had the same argument of complexity.

So he's also like, no, no, no, it's just complexity reduction.

But the thing is,

As you know, it's about redundant parameters.

But I don't think that's going to be the issue in the story that I told you.

It's not about redundant parameters.

It's parameters that are misattuned because of their...

contextual contingencies having been updated, but they themselves not.

Because in the real life awakening experience, it wasn't, they weren't interacting.

But in a more extended context, it's kind of a weird kind of counterfactual marginalization.

But it's like expanding the scope in which the newly accrued experience might be relevant.

That's how I see it.

And so it doesn't seem to me that it's valid to say it's merely about removing redundant parameters.

It is improving the configurative preparation or anticipation in the future, given the limited scope of the experience that was newly acquired.

As for the virtual machines, one important difference is, for example, the mutualistic relation between, for example, merely the transistors and the virtual machine they're in.

It's kind of flat or low dimension.

There's no multi-scale, multi-level thing.

There's no adaptivity all the way, as in the driving force behind the generation of the virtual machine itself is simply sent out.

It is not in the path itself.

It's not contingent upon the path integration.

So there is this non, it's not an active integration of their relation.

Okay, never mind.

I'll try to think about how to phrase it.

But my intuition says there's a very important difference between virtual machines, classical form, and the kind of virtuality that is relevant for minds, but especially consciousness.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks, Marco, for these awesome points.

And that's the fun of the synchronous moments that we share is to surface all these new connections and ideas, and then we return to the work and the sharing on platforms with each other.

So thanks again for that.

Wanda, if you wanted to add anything, otherwise we can go to Blue and Dave.

Okay, awesome.

So we'll go Blue, Dave, and then we'll have heard from everybody once, then the chat, and then return to Adam and everybody else.


SPEAKER_09:
Hi, so I want to go back to your discussion with Adam also, and it incorporates virtual machines really.

So you were discussing simulating consciousness versus instantiating consciousness and the necessary conditions for both.

And in describing like the Black Mirror episode, which I've seen and is awesome, you know, you really implied that there's this necessary like

arrow of time going forward for maybe instantiating consciousness that's not present in simulating consciousness and so is that like one of the required conditions like does the arrow of time play a role like this bi-directional like time is like not that that can't be conscious and maybe it would also help um and i'm sorry if i missed this in your presentation

because I was a few minutes late, but I don't know how exactly you define consciousness, and I mean, I did the .0 with Daniel, and it's really kind of difficult to measure or ascribe scientific properties to something that's not clearly defined, and I know that there's many definitions, but I just was wondering, Wanja, what you personally take consciousness to be, or how you understand it?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, thank you very much for these questions.


SPEAKER_03:
I'll start with the second question, because in a way it's easier to answer that question, not because I can define what consciousness is, but because I can just tell you that I don't know what consciousness is.

i mean that there are various ways of operationalizing consciousness and ways that are used in research on the moral quality of consciousness in particular and many of these measures of consciousness involve some kind of report verbal or behavioral report and for instance the question is then just

Can the subject reliably report the presence of a certain visual stimulus or not?

And that would just be an example.

And so I don't have a strong opinion about what's the best way to measure consciousness.

So what we are kind of

building on here is just the existing work on neural collars of consciousness, which use various ways of operationalizing consciousness, various ways of measuring consciousness, whatever it is.

But of course, this is a bit unsatisfying.

And we would like to know what is

consciousness.

Perhaps you can tell us how to measure it in different ways, but what is it that is being measured?

And here I actually think that a computational explanation of consciousness could provide an insight into the very concept of

the notion of consciousness in that if there's a common computational mechanism associated with different cognitive capacities that are facilitated by what we call consciousness, then this could provide part of the puzzle that

gives us a definition of consciousness.

Just as an example, think of the global workspace theory according to which consciousness is basically global availability.

You could use that as a definition of consciousness.

Consciousness is of global availability

to different cognitive subsystems.

So information is processed consciously if it's not just available to some individual subsystems, but to all or most of the cognitive subsystems within the system.

And this is, of course, a bit unsatisfying because it seems that it doesn't capture everything that we associate with consciousness.

So consciousness has many interesting features.

So if we try to describe the phenomenology of consciousness,

And we can say that it's typically structured.

We experience spatial relations between things.

So you're not just experiencing, say, a desk and a computer screen and whatever else you're

consciously perceiving right now.

You're not just hearing something, but you're experiencing these things in relation to each other.

And there are spatial relations that you're experiencing.

There are part-whole relations.

and there are also temporal relations of course you're experiencing not just isolated events but successions of events and um it seems that what is happening right now is not just a an instant but is somehow extended or a um

um yeah a um species present as william james called it and and there are further general structural features of consciousness and what a definition of consciousness should provide is a means of making sense of these different properties so for instance um

If consciousness is global availability of information in the cognitive system, why does this mean that why does consciousness have these phenomenological features that characterized

characterize most or maybe all types of conscious experience.

So that's something that a definition of consciousness should provide in addition to just saying what's happening in the brain.

And computational models I think could provide a means of bridging

levels of descriptions, let's say descriptions of neural activity and neural mechanisms and then phenomenological descriptions that describe features of consciousness as they appear from the first person perspective.

And integrated information theory is of course an example of a theory that tries to

achieve just that, starting with phenomenological axioms that characterize consciousness or typical forms of conscious experience, and then trying to operationalize these axioms in a formal way such that they can be applied to neural structures or neural activity or other kinds of systems.

And in principle, I think this would be how one should try to define consciousness.

Finding computational mechanisms underpinning cognitive capacities that are associated with consciousness and trying to relate models of

neural activity or maybe computational models of cognitive capacities to characteristic phenomenological features of conscious experience.

And then, yeah, so this is what I think how one should approach the question, what is consciousness?


SPEAKER_09:
Can I ask a follow up really quick?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.


SPEAKER_09:
So I just wanted to

So you're describing really this global availability and like able, it sounds a lot like David Krakauer described individuality like in 2020 with like this bi-directional information flow in an individual, right?

But there was no...

conscious, so you have to have that downward causation, which sounds a lot like the global availability that you're describing.

And so I just was wondering, I don't know if you've read the paper or not, but it also, I got that out of what you were responding, but I also...

tended to think that um you're maybe only talking about human consciousness but then when you went into iit maybe not so so do you actually draw a line like what what kind of the system can be conscious does it have to be biological does it have to be like higher order vertebrates or um can do you think that this is especially in terms of computationally like defining consciousness which i also think is a great place to start um but but does does this mean that maybe


SPEAKER_03:
all systems up and down the um you know evolutionary ladder can maybe have some degree of consciousness or what do you think what are your thoughts on that thanks for the question um so where to start maybe first um you mentioned top-down causation i wouldn't assume that

consciousness involves top-down causation.

So I don't see a reason for assuming that.

And that's not what I meant by global availability.

So I'm not familiar with this work by David Krakauer that you mentioned.

But it seems to me that it may not be

may not be directly connected to what I was trying to convey.

And then the question, where to draw the line between conscious and unconscious systems.

That's, I think, a really interesting question.

And further, I mean, in the beginning of the talk, in the beginning of the presentation, I mentioned

one motivation for going into research on computational correlates of consciousness.

And that was trying to,

have some correlates of consciousness or criteria for consciousness, maybe necessary conditions for consciousness that can be applied not just to human beings or to human beings in ordinary states or human beings with a normal brain, as it were, but also to unusual cases.

And in the presentation, I only mentioned

possibility of islands of awareness, isolated systems.

But of course, unusual cases also include non-human animals that are physiologically different from human beings, invertebrates, artificial systems as well.

And this is

largely, I would say, an empirical question where to draw this line.

And there's recent work, for instance, by Eva Jablonka and Simona Ginzburg, who have an evolutionary hypothesis about consciousness or hypothesis about the evolution of consciousness.

And they suggest that

a particular type of learning that is a learning capacity can maybe the evolutionary transition mark of consciousness or creatures that learning species that developments capacity

were then also conscious.

And the learning capacity they call unlimited associative learning, which involves particular types of learning, such as cross-model learning and other types of learning.

their suggestion would be to look if there are what systems are capable of this or have this learning capacity and what other what other capacities cognitive capacities they have and so this is

basically an empirical question trying to determine which creatures are conscious and which are not.

And we, of course, need to have some criteria that can be applied to determine whether the creature is conscious or not.

And if we don't have a definition of consciousness or

theory of consciousness that can be applied to non-human animals.

And it's really difficult to tackle this question.

But focusing on teleological functions of consciousness and cognitive capacities of consciousness is one

I think, particularly promising strategy.

And I also mentioned Jonathan Birch, who has proposed this, that there may be clusters of cognitive capacities associated with consciousness, such as race conditioning or cross-modal learning capacities.

Yeah, so I don't know where to draw the line.

is an empirical question.

And these more empirical projects trying to investigate cognitive capacities of certain types of non-human animals can, I think, be complemented by theoretical research

using computational models, because that's one of the advantages of computational models, that it can be applied to different types of systems, not just the systems that have a central neural nervous system, such as ourselves, but also systems that have a different physiology or, in principle, also artificial systems.

I wouldn't assume or wouldn't make the

assumption that artificial systems cannot be conscious, but I think

will be really relevant to determine what constraints, what conditions have to be fulfilled by an artificial system in order to be conscious, and which systems, which types of systems will never be conscious.

And if, for instance, this Black Mirror scenario is a physical possibility, if we could actually build such

devices that simulate conscious beings and thereby create real suffering, for instance, that would be horrible.

And it would also mean that we could just make hundreds of copies of these virtual systems and instantiate the same type of maybe horrible conscious experience

And multiple times, that would be really a disgusting scenario.

I think it would be it's extremely relevant to investigate the difference between simulating a system and instantiated consciousness to avoid creating unnecessary suffering or disturbing conscious experiences and you had a very interesting question about the arrow of time going forward and

Yeah, this is something that I guess I have to think about in a bit more detail.

What happens to the causal flow or the action perception if you reverse the temporal direction of the simulated system?

So intuitively, I would say that it's important whether the arrow of time goes forwards or backwards, that you wouldn't have conscious experience if you rewind the experience of a simulated system.

But I'm not sure about that.

It's a really interesting question.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks for the response.

So we're going to do Dave, then a question from the chat, then Adam and Marco.


SPEAKER_04:
It sounds like getting a handle on consciousness may be suffering because it's been deflated too much.

If you assume that something you're examining is a predicate, it gets really easy to turn it into not just a predicate, but a thing.

And things are pretty hard to work with, mostly.

They seem too easy.

The first over deflation is assuming that conscious acts or conscious activities are

persistent, long-term things, a predicate of an organism.

The organism is present.

Now if you subscript that and say, is present of certain things now and then under some conditions, well then you can ask what conditions enable consciousness?

What's achieved?

What's the evolutionary advantage of being able to be conscious when you need to?

And

People as disparate as Gerald Edelman talking about conscious flashes in the brain, the dynamic core crystallizing now and then, and then there's conscious activity, and then maybe it's not needed because the problem has been resolved.

Earlier, Alfred North Whitehead talking about threads of higher experience within a brain, for instance, something that happens now and then.

and the transformational psychologist Gurdjieff actually gives an exercise to force people to be conscious.

His background is most people are non-conscious the great majority of the time.

However, if I ask you, are you conscious?

The answer is always yes, because I've made you conscious by asking you that specific leading question.

Now the notion that consciousness is something that comes into you from the outside, that's been around for a good while.

That's what the physiologists in the 1870s and 80s assumed.

So Freud, since he was busy thinking about so many things, didn't want to tackle that, and he just assumed, yeah, consciousness comes in, something's going on, the outside of my brain, my neocortex, responds to that.

And that's where the consciousness comes from.

And

If I'm not being stimulated, well, I enter into nirvana.

I don't dislike and I don't like.

I'm just in a great blah state.

And the engine is just idling and waiting for something else to make it do something.

Oh, and the other way conscious...

activity is getting deflated too much is, as I said, being treated as a predicate.

Well, it seems that if you expand it to a relation, it might be a lot easier to start dissecting.

I'd say off the top of my head a relation among ten terms.

Self A is conscious with Self B

of object X in that conscious relation between A and B of X, given the presuppositions of A, B, and the emergent relation, and the three sets of dissatisfactions or goals, whether it's an unpleasant

stimulus, wanting to get away from something, or getting towards something of A and of B and of that emergent relation between the two.

So that's a 10-place predicate right there.

And when I'm thinking hard, I don't really see any of those 10 dropping out because when I'm in dialogue with myself, I'm at least that complex and so is my dialogue with myself.

How about you?


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks, Dave, for the question.

Wanja, and then I'll ask something from chat.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so you made some really interesting remarks.

And in fact, I think it's important to see consciousness not just as a

property that an organism has static property, but as something dynamic that can be transiently lost, and so on.

And so your suggestion to suggestion to treat consciousness as a 10 phase relation is highly interesting.

And I think this speaks to the

the idea of investigating nested Markov blankets and interactions between subsystems within the brain or within conscious organisms.

And I think you're completely right that

a lot of the relations that can hold between a conscious being and other conscious beings or conscious beings and parts of the environment must in some way be mirrored by relations between parts of the system, of subsystems of the system.

These are really complex issues that we try to ignore in the paper, but which I think we should get into at some point, especially the idea that they're nested systems, nested Markov blankets within the brain.

So I think this is really important.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks for the response.

So I'm going to ask a question from Cambridge Breaths in the chat.

And just for this last 25 or a little bit longer, I have the slide up for 16.2.

So we don't need to worry about answering consciousness in the next 20 minutes.

Let's actually build the energy for continuing our discussion as we do in between the weeks.

So Cambridge Breaths' question was, and this is related to this discussion, does every memory or thought episode

have a Markov blanket of its own that can be mathematically characterized and measured?

In other words, can we consider every thought episode, every minimal phenomenal experience as an independent island of awareness on its own?

So, Wanjo, I'd love for you to give a thought on that.

How do we operationalize the Markov blankets?

Are we a singular blanket or is it just this constellation of little transient bubbles?

And how does it relate to this islands of awareness idea that you mentioned in the paper?


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so I'm not sure how to formalize a memory or thought episode, but I'm sure it would involve some Markov blanket.

But that doesn't mean that there's

isolated system or island of awareness within a conscious system.

Because there would be some interaction with the internal environment as it were.

Another question that comes to my mind now is that if you imagine something, I have a thought episode, there will be some part of

And if we assume that some part of your brain realizes this thought episode, would there be a conscious system within a conscious system because of it if it has the right, engages in the right causal interactions with its environment?

And I think this should be added as a, or could be built into

a further constraint of what what it means to simulate as opposed to instantiate consciousness.

I'm not sure how exactly but so no, I wouldn't say there's an island of awareness when you have a thought episode or remember some

events.

But there are some really, I think, relevant points associated with this idea.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks.

And it's just funny how we talk about instantiation and for instance, and we talk about instances of virtual machines in the Linux sense.

So it's actually nice computational language.

So I have Adam, and then Marco, then anyone else who wants to raise their hand.

So Adam, or Yeah, go ahead.


SPEAKER_10:
Hi, can you hear me?


SPEAKER_07:
Yep, as usual.


SPEAKER_10:
Stop asking then.

So you mentioned with the reviewers, you had these lists of places where your intuition is balking.

And I share a lot of those.

Could a nation be conscious?

Could a bunch of tin cans and ropes strung together

And there's a sense in which like, just like Church-Turing thesis, I guess, like there should be a certain universality of computational realisability.

And maybe we can do like, in principle, tin cans and string, but it just might not be practically realisable because there aren't enough, you know, there's enough aluminum in the multiverse or in the universe.

But

I actually liked your proposal that you kind of dismissed it as maybe being a little bit special pleading-y.

But I didn't find that to be the case at all.

So if you actually created a rich embodiment and embedding within a virtual world, and then if there are some sort of homomorphism between this and this, I guess.

Actually, I don't even know if it needs to actually couple with the physical world.

The importance would be that you're having this sort of functional closure with respect to active and perceptual states in this sort of self-evidencing and self-making that you're having within the system you're doing inference on this interaction.

And within the context of the virtual machine, the virtual world in which you're running this,

It seems like we could say that consciousness is arising here, but I'm not sure.

In terms of functions of it, I've been wondering whether we can think of consciousness as a kind of like world model that we're doing divergence minimization with respect to, and it's having some causal significance of this kind, and where it needs to have certain additional necessary

properties for it to be a world-model capable of generating experience of having basically coherence with respect to like spatial, temporal, and causal kinds of coherence.

And I'm wondering if that could potentially speak to the issue to bring up functions of

which systems are more or less likely to possess consciousness.

Like, we just add in additional stipulations as additional necessary conditions, and I'm basically wondering if, like, quasi-Kantian, like, a priori categories are some of the things people talk about in terms of core knowledge, that these might just be necessary for any kind of world to appear to any being whatsoever, for any kind of coherent sense-making.

With the function being, you have, um,

some sort of data structure corresponding to the agent and its situation to the world, and this is acting as a top-down controller and in ways maybe is a virtual machine of sorts.


SPEAKER_06:
If you have any thoughts on that, otherwise


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, thank you, Adam.

Does a system need a world model in order to be conscious or not?

So I think if it needs a world model, it doesn't have to be a very compact model.

And

I mean, it must have a world model in the sense that its internal states must encode probability distributions over external states given blanket states.

But this is not the world model you were thinking of, right?


SPEAKER_10:
You were...

I'm wondering if we need a little more to actually have like composition and I guess like the kind of like to have like things melted to things with particular like distinct properties, um, where those properties are situated for the various things that are in relation to each other and whether this is basically serving the function of, um, allowing you to serve uncertainty, basically like allowing you to both, uh,

be informed by and inform these action-perception cycles.

And maybe you need additional structure built in for this to actually be like a world represented by the eternal states.

Not sure though.


SPEAKER_03:
I think perhaps you don't have to have a model that

contains objects, like a system that is conscious.

You can have a conscious system that doesn't know what a tree is or what an apple is.

But I think, I mean, you hinted at spatial, temporal, and causal relations.

I think it must have a sense of spatial and temporal relations and causation.

candidate i guess so that would be a world model which um could be fairly abstract in a way about um

gives the system a notion of time and space and causation.

One thing that I completely sidestepped here is the issue of what Jennifer Wynne has called minimal phenomenal experiences.

That is, conscious experiences that are characterized by the absence of

spatial relations or even temporal relations in which there's no subject-object structure.

So these are also sometimes called non-egoic states or

are states of pure awareness or consciousness as such, and are described especially in the literature from Eastern traditions, because these are states that can be experienced during meditation, but also in other states.

Perhaps you don't need a world model and these types of experience and minimal phenomena experiences.


SPEAKER_10:
Thanks.

Oh, yeah.

Adam, go for it.

Do you think it's possible in those sorts of non-dual states that there could be a very minimal coherence along those lines?

Sometimes it's described as just spaciousness.

It's just the space of awareness.

as these stripped down non-dual states?

Could there still be sort of, it's not enough that it's necessarily a movie.

It's not clearly like identifiable as like, here's a movie from your point of view and you're separate from the world and you're an agent represented, but still there's just enough of a point of view, just enough, like they're in there, but they're not like reflexively modelable or nothing.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's a possibility and actually a really interesting option.

So with respect to a so-called non egoic states of consciousness or states which the ego dissolves, there's a possibility that actually the subject object distinction disappears.

So those are non dual states of awareness.

but not because there's no subject, but because the subject is expanded and contains everything there is.

So, I mean, in such states or in the transition to such states, subjects often describe a dissolution of the boundary between themselves and the environment.

And one possibility is that what happens is not that the

a word that the boundary becomes blurry and then the self disappears, but actually that

I become the world.

And so I cannot distinguish myself from the world anymore.

And that's why people say there was no I. So that's at least one possibility.

I think Sasha Fink has argued for this point.

And one could apply the same idea to space, I would say.

And that would be similar to what you suggested.

there's there are no points in space anymore no place where i am but if i'm the world then i'm everywhere so there are no

points in space that I could distinguish from the point at which I myself am located, because I am everywhere and have become one with the world.

And so there's only space as such, perhaps, only the world, but no places within the world, no points that could be differentiated.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks for the response.

Makes me think of king of infinite space and a circle with circumference of everything and inside of nothing or however you want to phrase it.

So we've got 10 minutes left.

Marco, and then anyone for closing thoughts.

And again, I have this slide up where we're writing things down for next week.

So Marco, and then anyone else who wants to give a closing thought.

And there's one last little question in the chat too.

So go ahead, Marco.


SPEAKER_08:
I'll do my best to keep it short.

Regarding the last few comments, hopefully

say that which is called space is called by Buddha as no space, therefore it is called space.

And so your conversation was very much about the notion of emptiness or the rate of luminosity, which is a fascinating body of literature in Buddhism, right?

But I would argue against the notion that we should take as valid the context, the idea that, oh, now we contain the whole world, because it's exactly in that phenomenological state where language breaks down.

And so any reports of that phenomenology must be taken with a heavy grade of salt.

So the way I would see it in semi-FEP terms is that it's a state of maximum potential reach.

So it's not that everything is contained within that state, it's that everything is reachable from that state.

It's a kind of optimal readiness.

But contrasting that maximum potential reach is a minimal determinacy, which relates to the Buddhist notion of no grasping or no clutching.

You're not grasping to any duality, any determination.

you're just letting go of any determination whilst being ready to determine whenever it arises or is necessary, which is related to the codependent arising, which again, is beautifully congruent with active inferential tracks.

So I've tried to refrain too much from trying to solve consciousness, but since some things already been raised, so I think I've pinned down why I talked about the virtual model in that sense.

virtual machine.

And so just like Adam, as always, I also agree very much with with with emphasizing the cybernetic imperative, which I found surprising for you not to have included from what I saw so far in the paper.

So, so, so, um, I think, I think one problem in the, in the kind of the folks ecology slash language we're used to when talking about these things.

So we say that the brain is conscious, but we only say that because we don't have the ability to specify in what way the brain generates relates to consciousness.

And so following David Chalmers, I would argue that it's better to use something neutral, right?

Instead of saying consciousness.

we could take seriously the phonological invariance across people's reports and say that this must be some integrated reality, let's call that a local space or a local ontology, I prefer to call it the C-space.

And so you could say that the C-space embedded in the mind's brain, which nicely has an acronym with NB, like Markovnik, is that the C-space effectively has primarily a cybernetic imperative.

But in the pursuit of that cybernetic imperative, it actually

Finds itself doing different things or inferential tips simply by the virtue of the fact that it needs to model its environment Which would see space where that's a sensible conscious space?

Would not be the world as such but but the world modeling mind-body system

And so you get this weird tripartite distinction, which actually Joshua Bach is the first one who actually pointed to this idea.

So that you have embedded in the universe, in the physical world, a particular system called the body with the brain, with the systematicity that we call the mind, and embedded in turn, we have something called the sea space.

Importantly, that itself, due to its imperative cybernetics or good regulation, learns about that my body,

And it's the mutual contextualization therein.

So upon instantiation or realization of this kind of sense, they become mutually dependent on each other.

The mind-brains activity or let's say fitness,

would translate transitively to the fitness of the species, which in turn transitively translates back to the fitness of the entire mind-body.

And so this is very important to note, the requisites of the problem, the initial challenge of creating enough

challenge enough free energy gradients to necessitate the instantiation of such a space.

And so I don't agree at all with these unnecessary debates about whether organelles are goddamn conscious.

Like, what the hell?

What's going to come in for them?

They have no adaptive imperative.

There's no incentive to instantiate some kind of regulatory space, regulatory subsystem, right?

There is no coherent instantiator to even lead to that.

There's no initial ignition to scaffold that complexity.

And so, yeah, anyways, that's my personal annoyance.

Another notion I would like to share is the island is the awareness.

The fact that the island is embedded in this huge amorphous sea is what we should relate to that seemingly secluded experience.

And crucially, and this is very intensive, but I want to share it because of your paper.

So I would argue...

or propose that the C-space is there where the intrinsic manifolds and the extrinsic manifolds become equivalent, or at least approximately or asymptotically.

Why?

Because it's another way of phrasing that it's pure reflexivity.

Those causal flows, spatial, temporal, causal activity, that is purely reflexive,

therefore would not pertain to directly that which is outside there.

In other words, that sea space is by definition the self-referring islands.

And now comes one more crazy thing, because Chalmers said we need crazy ideas, so here's a crazy idea.

So the point is that it's possible, perhaps, that this tentative islands

um should be embedded in something and therefore we can potentially say there's a blanket or an encapsulation which can be seen as like a channel like a two-dimensional surface which acts as a channel but each channel mathematically has a bottom a limit so what if what happens when that island that sea space um generates more entropy than can actually be expressed through the interface with which it stands relation to the greater world right

And so I basically was trying to vindicate, in part, Adam's suggestions, and in turn elaborate what I meant with the difference between virtual machines, because normal virtual machines aren't in this mutually contextualized relation, not at the level of the physics as such.


SPEAKER_07:
um and because it's purely in the virtual whereas here the physics themselves are co-opted in that mutually contextualized relation okay sorry that's enough for now yeah all good thank you marco so everyone thanks so much for participating if anyone wants to raise their hand and give a final just

little tweet length recap.

But what I'll say here as organizer is our next conversation live is going to be on February 23rd.

And we wrote down a bunch of questions for next time.

And there was also things that were asked in the chat, like about the difference between quantum and classical computers and simulation.

So I know that we're going to have so many fun directions to go to in our next synchronous and asynchronous

conversations and communications through the interface.

So if anyone wants to give a final thought, um, Wanda, thanks so much for coming on.

It really, it was, um, it's a, it's a special paper.

It was a lot of fun to work through in live in our lab and our collective thought processes.

And, um, yep.

So if anyone else wants to give any final thoughts, um, Steven, and then anyone else raises their hand just for the last short thoughts, Steven unmute.


SPEAKER_00:
just wanted to say thank you very much and I know there's a lot of stuff has come at you so you've managed to field a huge amount of questions but I'd be really curious to maybe see your thoughts on how this work can pan out in the world in terms of people's practices and ways of thinking about

other research and how this kind of way of understanding consciousness could you know play out possibly in because a lot of work in psychology is using brain neural correlates to justify what they think people are thinking you know so it'd be interesting maybe next week to think about how how does some of these ideas have implications and application which I think they do so thank you


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks, Steven.

Adam, and then anyone else with a raised hand?


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, this, I mean, fantastic as usual.

And this is my most fascinating thing there is.

And I also think, though, it's extremely important we get this right.

So like Marco was just discussing, I'm organized and we're talking about Islands of Awareness.

Like, how quickly do we move forward with this research program, which could potentially help countless people, but we don't want to inadvertently

create like black mirrorish scenarios.

So if we can place a very low prior on consciousness for organoids due to not having the proper cybernetic grounding contextualization embedding, that would be great.

Like similarly, like with artificial intelligence, we might eventually create systems where it is in question.

And so then we're dealing with, you know, are these ethical beings on our own?

Are we like doing mind crime against these beings or like,

both avoiding negative outcomes and maybe wanting there to be positive outcomes in terms of creating beings who are conscious and are of value in their own right as subjects who experience and there's something that it's like to be them.

So they should be part of our moral communities.

Maybe, you know, it's not, we're not there yet, but we might get there eventually.

And these might be the questions that are the key questions for what really matters for those events.


SPEAKER_07:
yep and what's on the table adam as you often highlight is everything from who we include in our moral community false positives and false negatives are quite vitally severe in this issue um so looks like that's all the raised hands 16.1 thanks everyone for coming this is really a great discussion and look forward to continuing this discussion in 16.2 and beyond thanks

## 93lAa-xEmHY

SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome to the Active Inference live stream.

Today it is Active Inference live stream 16.2 on February 23rd, 2021.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us on our website, Twitter, email, YouTube, Discord, KeyBase teams.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can be improving on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome.

And as far as the netiquette, the video etiquette for the live streams, we'll be muting, raising our hand, writing down our points, using respectful speech behavior.

Today in 16.2, at the end of February, we are having a follow-up discussion on the paper of Wanja Wiese and Carl Fristen, Neural Correlates of Consciousness.

And last week, it was really special to have Wanja come on the stream and quite interesting stuff.

And next week, we're going to be having our first-ever quarterly roundtable, which will be providing some updates on the different projects of the Active Inference Lab.

Also, as far as upcoming streams and events, we have a new, I guess, series called the guest stream.

So this is the live stream, which is the participatory group discussion.

We have the model stream, which is the walkthrough or a tutorial of a more technical piece.

And then the guest stream is going to be kind of like anything goes, just anytime somebody has a new paper out,

or they want to be raising some topic to visibility, we want to be there for them and help them on that.

So tomorrow, we're going to be having Majid Beni speak on his recent paper, A Critical Analysis of Markovian Monism.

And then in March and in May, we'll have guest visits from Dimitris Bolas and Anna Siayunica.

And if you have a suggestion for any of these other events, or you want to be featured on an event, or you'd like to co-organize an event with us, then all you have to do is let us know and we go from there.

Today in ActiveStream 16.2, the goal is to learn, discuss, and hear from everybody.

And just knowing Dave and Adam, I think we'll be able to have a really awesome discussion where we are going to bring up a lot of fun ideas, centering and strangely attracting back to this paper, the neural correlates of consciousness under the free energy principle from computational correlates to computational explanation from Visa and Friston in 2020.

So today, with a small group and a follow-up discussion, there's a bunch of slides from last time that we can definitely go to.

There's also the paper itself.

But let's just start with an introduction.

So we're going to go around and introduce ourselves.

And again, seeing as just Dave, Adam, and I are here, we can each introduce ourselves and maybe provide a little context on some of these warm-up questions.

So whichever of you two would like to go first.

We can still utilize hand raising or perhaps it'll be a little easier to just have it like a regular tripartite conversation.

So we'll go with Dave and then Adam on the introduction and on the context.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, I'm gathering up some reference material from a number of different ontologies.

in order to get those aligned with the topics for the edu project i'm also going through a great big brain dump from uh

the most noted neuropsychoanalyst in South Africa who has gotten two papers and a book out just in the last two weeks, and I'm struggling through those.

He has rewritten the Project for a Scientific Psychology by Sigmund Freud from 1895 in absolutely state-of-the-art Carl Fristin

terminology.

The only thing he doesn't hammer on a lot is specifically active inference, but all the other cool stuff.

And it's just a brain breaker.


SPEAKER_01:
Who is this?

Thanks for the update.

So we'll post any links and we'll try to keep it on the discussion that people are here to be listening about.

So if you have any other thoughts, Dave, otherwise, Adam, go for it.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi.

So I guess...

I'm Adam.

Uh, like an introduction or just what I'm working on or just how, um, say, you know, say hello.


SPEAKER_01:
We can just ask how, how did we come to be here?

How did we follow up, fall into a followup discussion on a computational consciousness paper?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

So, um, I guess I have been, uh, working for some time to try to understand, uh, what the heck consciousness is.

Uh, if that question even makes sense.

uh, from different perspectives where the free energy principle and active inference, um, has in general been, I guess the overarching view from which I'm attempting to think.

And so I've been following what different people are saying, proposing some ideas of my own.

Um, and, uh, just, uh, along these lines of learning about active inference, I found like the live streams and what Daniel's doing and the, the discussions slash, uh,


SPEAKER_01:
potential movements that he's creating and um this is just one of the most uh interesting conversations around as far as I'm concerned thanks Adam also Dave I have a question I know you have a lot of background in classical cybernetics if it could be called that so how does cybernetics deal with this question of Consciousness or what have been some of the long-running threads as far as the way cyberneticians pre-active inference have been thinking about this question


SPEAKER_00:
Well, Gregory Bateson did a lot of work on this in the 40s through the 60s.

Working as a therapist and as an anthropologist, he paid a lot of attention to how people get fouled up.

He uses a term of schizogenesis, that is the origins of splits.

Sometimes it's a sort of a good thing.

It's a way that a society can become more differentiated.

But in a child, it's a great danger.

The child, for instance, the thesis, which turns out not to be all that useful, is that small children are constantly misunderstanding what their parents are saying.

The parents are not addressing them very effectively.

They're assuming the kid's

either have less intense emotions than they do, or that the kids understand more about the world of shared reality.

So the kid will get flustered, demoralized, alienated, and in the best case, there's a reconciliation.

And the mother, typically, and the baby...

will get back in sync.

They're now happy with one another.

But sometimes the split gets worse and worse, and those same combination of rage and demoralization plays out into adulthood and too often as parents.

And Bateson draws a lot on Bertrand Russell's theory of types.

So he analyzes society's interactions, roles, with a very elaborate treatment of hierarchies of meaning, hierarchies of reference, hierarchies of control and communication.

So it loops right back to the old definition of the study of communication and control.

Now, my teacher, Gordon Pask,

put a great deal of emphasis on two areas that I don't see addressed adequately today.

On the one hand, the inevitability of dialogue or conversation in any conscious occasion.

He says there's no consciousness without dialogue.

Second point, there's no consciousness, in fact, no concept without emotion.

And third, there's no persistent concept without circular causation.

And we know how important circular causation is in explaining how the Markov bounded system and its environment co-create.

And Stuart Kaufman does a lot of discussion of co-creation between the niche and the worker, that is, the organism, the society.

the person, the evolving language, culture, whatever it might be.

So it's not that these concepts are completely missing, but they're not as articulated as they were even in the 1970s when PASC was developing the first really effective teaching learning systems.

With tiny, clunky computers that were half made up of cards that the students had to be prompted to pick up a cardboard card and put it on the display because there was no way to display text.

You had the light little lights and that would be labeled A1, which means go grab card A1 and read it.


SPEAKER_01:
cool it's like now in some ways sounds like playing Battleship with your computer um but what what you said there about the multiple like perspectives in pursuing this Consciousness question there's the anthropologists studying humans there's the therapist who might be interested in social systems more generally but they're in a very specific relationship and they might not be trying to do a full ethnography or an anthropology research project the therapist relationship is one that's based upon

it's more medical.

It's based upon helping reduce someone's suffering.

And then even zooming out further and further away from the experience, there's the biologist who might compare human society or behavior with other animals.

And then even a systems researcher that might even go beyond the biological and ask about where computers fit into all this.

And so it's like in the center, we have our own experience and the experience of other people.

And that is what is negotiated

in that sort of kernel of the therapy relationship or in the dialogue, which can be therapeutic even if someone's not licensed, but then we're going in these concentric shells out towards broader systems thinking.

So I think that is what I liked and remembered about the paper, and one of the things that motivates me to...

think about it go down different rabbit holes and hear from people's perspectives on it because there isn't a priori a best approach and even within an approach or one of those concentric spheres it's not like there's one way to do biology or one way to do anthropology one way to do therapy so how are we going to make adequate guidance and navigation for the bigger system when

if we just get lost in all the possible ways it could go then we are going to be doing a lot of moving words around but maybe not a lot of useful actions so looking forward to hearing about that and then also what you said about the different developmental phases having different cybernetic or communication needs

So cybernetic principles like having requisite variety or good regulator, whether we want to use the classical cybernetic terminology or just thinking about communicating systems, different developmental stages are able to deal with different stresses and are able to achieve different goals.

And so there might be some things that are overwhelming for a child, but then maybe later on, we hope that that information could be integrated or virtualized or emulated or somehow used in a controllable way.

Any other just off the top of the head thoughts?

Because I think we'll actually have a lot of great discussion stemming from just walking through some of these slides.

Is that cool?

right nice um so just to recap maybe those who have listened to the dot zero and dot one conversations or not but the paper that we're following up on today is called the neural correlates of consciousness under the free energy principle from computational quotes to computational explanation and the aims and the claims of the paper were to integrate the neural correlates of consciousness

with the computational correlates of consciousness and implicitly also the behavioral correlates of consciousness bcc if we could use that and then think about how free energy principle and active inference are going to be integrating these

We went through the abstract and the roadmap last time.

So today we're going to just start off by looking at some of the questions that people had raised in 16.1, which

We've now separated out into different slides and added CC images in the background.

So if anyone in the live chat is just wanting to post a question or something comes to mind, we're definitely open.

Otherwise, we'll just slowly march through these fun slides and then hopefully get to look at some of the paper as well.

So the first question and the one that Blue sort of brought back to the table in 16.1 and helped integrate into the construction of 16.0 is how do we define and measure consciousness?

So it's related to what is consciousness, but we're almost approaching it instrumentally instead of what is it?

Which is the realism question.

We're going to take the instrumentalist approach.

How do we operationally define it and how do we measure it or what are we measuring?

Because if you're discussing what something is or isn't without the instruments in mind, how you're actually going to be measuring it or observing it.

What is it going to be there for?

So we had a few different terms that people brought up, but either of you would be welcome to give a thought or Adam, I'd be curious just from, yeah, you can speak and I'll ask you a question too is in your approach to studying consciousness, what measurements do you think are the most important?

Whether they're data sets we already have or whether it's a kind of data that doesn't quite exist yet, but what measurement would be the most informative for you?


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, so

This is, oh, can you hear me?

Yep.

Okay.

Microsoft says my microphone is noisy.


SPEAKER_01:
Sometimes just the little background sounds, but it doesn't sound noisy to me.

So I would let people know if it did.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_03:
So I guess the approach I'm trying to do is factorize as much as I can consciousness into different senses of the word and then try to bring those in

relation to each other in some coherent way.

And so I might think of consciousness in terms of a set of concentric circles which might be approached differently at each level.

So maybe like the innermost core shell we might have, the innermost core, you might have some kind of proto-creature consciousness, we might not even want to use the word, some sort of organismic modeling.

whether or not we talk about this in terms of consciousness could be a matter of debate.

And then at some point we get to this, like the appearance of a world to a creature, subjectivity, what it is likeness, qualia, phenomenality.

There's, um, I haven't heard like a definition that really satisfies people universally and they all sound very vague, but just the, you know, the lights coming on what it is like, uh, to be us.

Um, but then you get into this, what is likeness and then there's all the particular ways of what it is like.

And now the actual stream of experience is shaped by in different ways and has certain other properties.

So you might get into like access consciousness.

So this would be like net blocks, distinction between phenomenal consciousness or your experience itself.

And this would be where a framework like integrated information theory would come in.

Or you might have then another level of complexity, access consciousness, or the ability to manipulate on the objects of experience in your mind and report on them to have knowledge of them.

But then it's like we're still somewhat vague in terms of...

what we mean by, um, uh, knowledge of like what, how much knowledge, what kind of, and so you might have even more complex vacations, things like self-consciousness, like, uh, auto noetic or reflexive consciousness.

And, um, it's there, there might not be like any bound in terms of the complex vacation.

And so at each level, you might have a different handling.

And as you go like out at the outer shells, it seems like they blend themselves

best to operationalization and experimentation.

Or it's, you know, you can actually do tasks like, did you pass the mirror test?

Even though there's people debate about what that means.

Like, do you have certain, can you report?

What's the nature of the reports?

How sophisticated are they as you're dealing with the more complex varieties of conscious experience?

So that's very straightforwardly lends itself to empiricism.

As you start to go into, like, I guess the phenomenality itself, to the degree that we want to hold to this distinction between phenomenal access consciousness or different kinds, and I personally make use of it, but once you get to experience itself, you have the problem of the first person versus third person ontology, the privateness of it.

It's like you can make inferences about different systems based on their properties and what you think is

helpful for realizing what might allow a world to appear to a certain type of system, which you can't know because consciousness is private.

You can only come at it indirectly.

And so it's, there's things like no report paradigms that people have worked with, things like, you know, are there coherent, like most recently a paper just came out looking for basically neural dynamics and are they responsive in a certain way that

suggests a sensitivity and a knowledge, but still it's an indirect inference and it's a problem.

It seems like we always have to go through, usually, by some degree of directness, report and to get it experienced.

So to actually, where the rubber hits the road of the initial emergence of a world appearing to a system, it's, as far as I'm concerned, really super fraught.

And so my best attempt has been to try to basically cross-reference as many perspectives as possible

and try to basically line up all three of Marian levels to the extent I can of functional, algorithmic, and implementation level, cross-reference this with phenomenality, and then try to say, okay, what types of computational principles, what types of algorithms might help to create a world that could appear to a system?


SPEAKER_02:
And I've heard your thoughts on that, but I can...


SPEAKER_01:
now and keep talking about it thanks for this um this idea of cross-referencing doing the scholarship and really being up to date with what people are actually asking and the ways that they're really investigating it and then looking for some underlying or some inner

generative processes, it's very similar to what is being done in Wanja's previous work on the minimum unifying models, which is like, could we find a cluster of attributes that seem to be co-extant, like they're existing together?

And then could there be some minimal underlying

speculated model that would lead to those clusters of traits?

And then would that help us design better experiments, reduce our uncertainty about how to act?

And then the other part that I would just ask about is like, you know, we hear a lot about first person, that's the eye.

And then we hear a lot about third person, like third person, bird's eye view.

But then I'm wondering about the second person, because that's actually where Dave's questions about the no consciousness without dialogue or without,

interchange of information, as well as Vygotsky and even Demetrius Bolas's and Schilbach's work on becoming who we are through interaction.

So it's just like, will we be able to localize it in the brain or in the brain body or in the brain body niche, in the social niche?

Because if it turns out that it's something that's distributed a little bit beyond the cranium,

then maybe neural measurements matter.

Maybe button tapping can matter, just like you could have one thermometer and make an assessment about a broader area.

But we shouldn't confuse the map and the territory or the measurements and the territory.

If we think it's relational, then any kind of objective measurement is only ever going to tell a partial picture.

What do you think about that, Dave?

Or how does the second person come into play?


SPEAKER_00:
I don't think I can advance the discussion right now.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

All good.

Yeah.

Go ahead, Adam.


SPEAKER_03:
Um, so I think in terms of like the relate, so I've tended to, um, in terms of like degrees of, I guess, internalism versus externalism.

Um, I tended to, I guess, separate out consciousness or experience from

uh mind or intelligence or modeling where i think like the relevant um generative modeling for intelligence or mind would indeed be distributed and extended and would spill out beyond and exist between agents um i've tended to reserve um thinking of like a subset of these generative processes a subset of generative modeling um as being kind of stuck in the cranium of the generation of consciousness itself

And even more, I've tended to actually restrict it to even not the full, I wouldn't draw the boundary or the Markov blanket across the whole nervous system, but actually within the scope of these sort of metastable synchronous complexes, which through their synchrony would entail, I guess, message passing and the calculation of a joint estimate

over the entire sensorium of the agent of its embodied, embedded interaction with the world.

And so for me, this would be like a, not even like the whole, when these estimates are being generated, when these metastable states are forming, you could think of them as a kind of non-equilibrium steady state that there would be a general boundary around them that wouldn't include the whole nervous system in on the act.

And, but in terms of like practically what would, so, so in terms of like, so in terms of like the onion of consciousness, in terms of like the kind of consciousnesses that we have, the exact nature of our streams of experience, our self-consciousness and, you know, our autobiographical, you know, auto and allobiographical consciousness, that would definitely be relational.

That would definitely be,

even if the generative pulses for the qualia might not be, and then they might be confined in the skull, the processes whereby you would come to model yourself in a world and we would be able to coordinate and just live, that would definitely be relational.

But I'm wondering whether the initial generation of phenomenality itself, while practically requiring, at least for mammals and birds, most of them,

this communication, this relationality, sometimes even maybe like a bootstrapping or a back and forth between perspectives, between a second person point of view and a first person to actually like you figure it, figuring out like, who am I by figuring out that through interaction?

Like, who are you?

Who am I?

Who am I in relation to you?

And this is how you bootstrap the whole thing.

And also just practically like, I think you're later going to have like Anna on and like this perspective of like inherent interdependence.

You're not going to even be,

homeostatic at all without the relationality.

And so like the first priors, the exact nature of your consciousness, deeply interdependent.

That being said, I wonder whether you can have systems that are never in relation to any other system except for the world itself, and that they come to model, and that if they have the right architecture, that this could entail an integrated world model, which

would there be something that's like to be such a system?

I don't know where this begins and ends, but I have speculations, but those are some thoughts.


SPEAKER_01:
It's definitely clarifying where you're coming from with the integrated world modeling.

It's almost like if you could have a program on a computer that you could know what was getting passed into the program.

So you could say, yes, when I hit run, this program is going to start from nothing or from the kernel that I've specified.

And then if it ends up doing this autopoiesis or self-reflection and then can do things like the mirror test or...

responding in a way that is akin to a person then at least from a computational perspective it's exhibiting some of these important features or attributes now you're still going to have people who deny consciousness or think everything has it so for me the question will

eternally be open because there's going to be people who say it's all just an illusion or it's not real even for humans and there's other people say well you just don't understand the electron consciousness so you know there's no point in even you know trying to falsify that so it's going to remain an open distribution but we may be able to focus on some of these interesting differences between ourselves and the computational system it's like a little model system

It's not the same thing as us, but let's return to this computational question because I think it's related to the next question.

With a JPEG of a hand reaching out to the sky, how do we relate experience or phenomenology

to neural, computational, and I'll add behavioral dimensions.

So how do we connect seemingly, it's like a marketplace of two different types.

You got the soda machine that transforms the dollars into the soda cans, but how are we going to go back and forth from a behavioral observation to phenomenology to computational?

I think this is just, it's definitely an open question

like these are just starting point discussions because they're not resolved questions i would say people barely even know what the structure of a resolution would look like but it has related to this question we just asked which is for a virtual machine or for any type of system

for it to interface out to the outside world.

So in active inference, we call that action states, whether it's typing or your voice box, or whether it's your eye movements, it's an active state.

It's part of the blanket states with sense and action.

So however you come to know about a system through the action and sensory states,

you're not going to have access to those internal states.

And then it's almost like, even if you knew what those internal states were, it wouldn't always clarify the situation.

So how do we think about this connection or the interface between systems of different kinds, virtual machines or,

seemingly conscious systems how do those link to the outside world and how do we talk about that rigorously and then i believe it was um cambridge breaths last time who just at the end brought up this question about quantum and classical computation it's not

something I know a ton about, but it's interesting to think about whether the sort of Turing computation, zero one von Neumann architecture, just what people think of when they hear a computer, just like this laptop in front of me,

how is that part of a broader perspective on computation?

Especially when we're thinking about computational dimensions, like we're not just thinking about Windows 10, we're thinking maybe about unconventional computation.

So these were just some questions that people addressed.

If anyone has a thought, they can go for it.

Otherwise we can just keep on walking through it.

Yep, go for it.


SPEAKER_03:
So I guess,

I might start with neural behavioral in terms of like in the systems where I think I have some understanding and then move into more general like types of computational systems that could potentially realize things similarly, whether we're talking about like a von Neumann architecture or like the blockhead experiment with the nation of China or like eusocial insect colonies or

any kind of system.

But starting from, I guess, where we have maybe the most purchase, it would seem to me that experience would correspond to, potentially, or try to identify a neurocomputational object of a joint marginal distribution from a

probabilistic world model, which was basically the sensorium of the organism as it is coupling with the world.

And so for me, it would be basically an estimation of a visuospatial field, which would connect to like Rudroff's work with the projected conscious modeling, a point of view, but also the feeling of having a body, the live body, and the relation between these things

potentially involving something like an attention schema, like bringing in like Graziano's type of work.

And so I'm basically thinking like all, like many different theories of consciousness are actually pointed to different aspects of what we need with none of them being on their own jointly sufficient.

But if we bring them together, we might be able to get joint sufficiency.

And so the idea of in terms of neural substrates, I'm thinking that the appearance of a visual world could correspond to basically some kind of maybe the precuneus,

this like midline structure as like the top of the visual spatial sensorium coupling with the posterior cingulate.

And the reason I would like point to these, I guess would be partially empirically in terms of like what happens if you lesion these areas and also the types of information available to them.

So it's both like where they are, their high centrality being hierarchically higher

the empirical associations, like if you lesion the posterior being precuneus, you're going to have lots of problems.

But also in terms of mental imagery, this is like, these would be the neural corals that tend to be associated.

I bring in like the cingulate, posterior cingulate, because basically I think that area might be the most crucial one for establishing a particular point of view on the world.

So you would have,

there's this like old idea of the Pepe's circuit where he was basically dropping electrodes, kind of like figure out epileptic form loci.

And he felt like this highly central inner circuit for emotional memory, where you go from the mammary bodies to, I think it's like the anterior lateral thalamus, posterior cingulate into the hippocampal formation out through the pharynx back to the mammary bodies and like this basic loop

of emotional memory.

I bring it up because if you think of the types of information that you would get there, part of what the mammary bodies are doing is they have this stretch receptor information from the neck.

And so this will actually tell you like where your inner lampreys head is pointing.

And then if you go to the thalamic nuclei, they're now getting that information.

They're also getting information from the vestibular apparatus.

And so you have from the inner ear,

this like crazy conch shell nautilus.

I don't know how to describe it.

It's like crazy shape that basically has these like little particles and move around and stimulate these hair cells that cause different actions.

So basically you can get the yaw pitch and roll of the head.

And so you're getting both like the positional and the vector information of your head coming into this area before it feeds into the hippocampus top of the cortical hierarchy that basically gets your entire

sensorium, all the modalities coming together, pegged according to what you need for an egocentric perspective and reference frame.

So that would be like in a human.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one note on this because I think it's really important is the question of estimating a visual field isn't like just what a convolutional neural network does.

It's not just a fill in the dots, paint by lines.

As we heard from Rudroff and Williford and others, it's actually a very complex affordance-driven projective model that entails a locus of the observer.

So

if a computer is trying to autocomplete some image, it is taking a matrix and it's doing transformations based upon statistical regularities in a matrix.

So we can sort of computationally sketch that out.

But in the locus of our awareness,

visually even it's not quite even the same computational problem because it's integrated like you're saying with um inputs of information that we can observe and you you made a great point with the the neck position and then the angle of your ear it's probably super non-linear how that gets integrated into the control mechanisms but that's like the gyroscope and acceleration on a phone it actually does convey the information

about the pitch and direction, but then it's being conveyed in this very action-oriented way, and it's egocentric action-oriented, because otherwise, if you're calculating the actions for somebody else, what's the point?


SPEAKER_03:
In some ways, it might even be the lion's share of the information, except for rare circumstances.

Unless you're in the midst of a gale force hurricane, it might be the most purchase you have on what is causing the most change in your

sensorium would be your own self-generated actions.

Whether we're talking about like overt motions or like now I'm changing what's coming in or like even just the mic, like, or saccades at three times a second, or even like these potentially faster jiggles and micro saccades, like it's actually all coming from you.

And if you're going to try to make sense of like, make sense of your sensors without this, it might be pretty hopeless unless you're actually accounting for this inactive embedded, like situating of, of, of what's coming in.

And so, yeah, you need all this information for, you know, we're not just like sitting there locked in, videos being displayed in us with our eyes open like in Clockwork Orange.

We're actually engaged in the world.

And even there, your eyes are moving around.

Even there would be hopeless.


SPEAKER_01:
without the efforts copy here's the fun thing is in active inference we know that the imperative is to reduce surprise minimize free energy of the system and there's two ways the system can go about doing that it can learn which is updating its internal model or it can act so you could do action or inference integrated under the same imperative and so let's think about this super

Clockwork Orange, 1984 situation, where even the oculomotor muscles have been paralyzed.

So someone cannot blink, they can't move their eyes, and it's like just they can't act at all.

They're maybe in an induced... Hopeless.

Yes.

In that situation, there would be an internal experience, let's just say.

And because they couldn't act...

all the adaptation and the free energy minimization would have to be based upon their internal model.

Now their internal model could be a crystallization of, I don't like what's happening to me and I'm not listening to the propaganda and that's not me, for example.

but that's not always maybe the case.

And then we can go from that super limited situation into cases where we actually do have degrees of freedom of action and degrees of freedom of thought.

And it's a really interesting point that our active experimentation in the environment

is what is leading along the trajectory of our experience.

It's like, oh, what's on the other side of this pen?

I picked it up and now all the experience is my arm, all my visual field is different, but that wasn't externally induced.

It was part of an endogenous active sequence of active experimentation in the niche.

And then, so it's really, okay, cool.

That's where we get action and inference coming together.

So continue on.


SPEAKER_03:
Like in AI, they're trying to figure out how to get inductive biases for things like objectness and different kinds of core knowledge.

And I think it's actually a real problem that this inactivist perspective is lacking.

Because they just want to sort of like plop in different, as core knowledge is different evolutionary priors.

as inductive biases right from the beginning.

So it's like you have somehow, you know, wave your hands, base magic, objectness prior, causation prior.

You might have things such as this, but it's going to actually be helpful for an objectness prior if the system actually has experience with objects.

That might be helpful.

And it's still this idea of like you're trying to solve vision completely divorced from the engagement with the world.

So you can actually like reach up and

If you have experiences like touching and moving things around and saying, huh, I have uncertainty.

I'm going to, like you were just saying, I can resolve my uncertainty.

Oh, that's what's on the other side.

And now I'm building up an object model.

And now I'm building up causal models of like, what happens if like I let go of this?

I'm not going to do it.

But now you've had a sense of the causation of the world that is basically allowing you to have this internal model instead of just like hammering it into the architecture somehow through something like, you know, some sort of architectural prior.

Not that those things don't exist and are going to be crucially important, but I think it's completely hopeless that they're going to solve that enduring problem of AI without this inactivist perspective.

I think it's just the hypothesis space is way too unconstrained.

You will be lost there forever.

You could throw all the compute of the universe at it.

It still might not be enough.

I could be wrong about that, but that's a claim.


SPEAKER_01:
Another way of thinking about that is, let's say the space of all possible chess boards or the space of all possible cup designs.

It's a big number.

But actually, the space of all strategies for chess...

it has to be bigger than the number of chess boards because any chess board, there's multiple strategies.

Or the number of strategies for determining the coffee cup, like what is each joint going to do as you're seeking to infer what kind of coffee cup it is?

Again, it's like chess strategies.

It's another level of...

of strategy above the state and so active inference sort of cuts the knot on seemingly the simpler problem how do we figure out what kind of coffee cup it is rather than just doing exhaustive mapping of all possible coffee cups we actually step back to asking what strategy is going to help us resolve uncertainty about the coffee cup

And then that strategy might be encapsulated with just a few lines of pseudocode.

Like a good strategy for game theory might be start nice and retaliate, but then

Act randomly once in a while and forget sometimes.

Something like that.

That's quite a compression of a lot of things that are relational in the world.

And so it's almost like sometimes the state estimate is too hard or not even what we really want to know.

You don't want every pixel in HD of your visual field.

You need to know how to act.

And then that way, even if you're...

If you have something in your eye or one eye is injured or there's some sort of other visual impairment or even no visual input,

someone can still act effectively.

Whereas if you just have an image recognition module, you disconnect that and now it's like you're walking on nothing.

But if you have action as the core loop and then sense as it is an active inference is being integrated to the extent that it shapes action, it's a very different perspective than sort of this input process output

control theory model.

And I think this is going to come back in a second when we look at the circular closed causality of the actual action inference loop with a blanket state intermediating.

So that's pretty cool.

Any other thoughts there?


SPEAKER_03:
I guess along those lines, something that's something of an open question for me right now and also speaks to like illusionism you mentioned recently.

I kind of bristle against all things illusionist in that, like, I think indeed, I think it implies things, like, it implies things like you are not conscious or that consciousness is not an important, basically, adaptation or component of experience.

But this idea that it might be different than we think, I think, is valid and useful.

So in that sense, I like illusionism, but I also bristle against it.

But the idea, though, being with this sort of

the most useful compression and the most useful, like, how is it encoded?

What is the richness of experience?

We could actually be somewhat mistaken in that it might be as if we have this HD visual field all available to us all at once, or it might just be when we query it, we can have it when we need it.

And so, like, I think, is it O'Regan, I think, like with sensory motor contingency theory,

That's his model and it's more extended and it's like you just query the environment.

But potentially, even internally, you might just be querying an entailed generative world model and it might even be potentially at the resolution of the sensory engagements themselves, which are like, for instance, for visual sampling,

You have basically for the phobia, it's a thumbnail held out at arm's length.

That's basically all you got.

And so it might be at any given moment, that is actually what's in your visual experience.

It could be, but it's just you're moving it around and so you never notice because there's no place to stand to look at yourself not realizing it.

It's kind of like the refrigerator light.

Whenever you open it, there it is.

Interesting.


SPEAKER_01:
The lights are on.

The lights are on because somebody walks by.


SPEAKER_03:
I map like though, like part of like perceptually, like I suggested that there is some sort of richer filling in, and this is part of like, I think, so like, um, I've suggested and Kenai has suggested that like, you can think of Cortex in terms of principles of like variational autoencoders.

And part of what they can do is they can fill in a more rich thing.

So for instance, they might be used for instance, like for like a, a 4k or an 8k television or something for like super resolution for upsampling.

And you have a, a more impoverished signal.

and then you fill in the missing details, or you have an occluded image, and then you fill in what wasn't there.

And maybe this is, for instance, partially how he handled the blind spot.

That's unclear.

But how much filling in exactly happens, I have no idea.

It could be just almost like an Etch-a-Sketch thing that is at the really shockingly low dimensional resolution of the actual sensors themselves, or not.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_01:
Another thought on the richness or the paucity, those are comparators.

They're relative terms.

And so imagine another agent in the niche has different affordances and say only 400 to 700 nanometers.

You know, you can't see anything beyond this.

It's like, who's having a rich experience now?

And so we are having our experience.

And then as you're pointing out,

feeling like things are not changing or like we have good clarity outside of our main focal point, that's a story we're telling ourself that actually might be a very adaptive and self-protective belief.

Because if it's the case that when we're unsure about something, it produces or it is anxiety,

And then tunnel vision is like sort of our de facto sensory reality as far as what the resolution capacity of the retina is.

So how do you square the circle with limited sensory capacity but not wanting to have over anxiety?

Well, you make rapid circuiting and then you have a continual story that everything is okay until something semantically is not okay in the visual field.

Dave?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Uh, did you see the, uh, the, the YouTube address that I just sent through chat several minutes ago?


SPEAKER_01:
Um, I don't look at any chats during the live stream, but what can you tell us about it or how would people find it?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Yeah.

This is a recent, um, presentation by Mark Solms about, uh, why summarizing his recent, his book that just came out.

Um,

And he's addressing how it is that Thomas Nagel and David Chalmers ask these really good questions, really important questions.

Super smart people with a tremendous amount of knowledge have been working at this for decades.

And some of them are despairing.

How can we ever possibly answer these questions?

And he said, well, if you refuse to pay attention to the brainstem...

and the midbrain, and think you're going to find the answers to consciousness, and what it's to be like, and feeling in the cortex, you are not going to find it, because it ain't there.

You want to know, what does it feel like, and you want to look at, and you've confined yourself to a part of the brain where feeling isn't happening.

The part that isn't dedicated to feeling, but rather is this sort of, you might say, computing machine that

might pick up some consciousness when the brain stem needs the neocortex to do consciousness, rather to help it do consciousness.

So I'll send, I don't know, maybe I should send an email.

Or the other thing.


SPEAKER_01:
Leave a comment on this YouTube video and if someone's curious, they'll check back out.


SPEAKER_00:
I don't know if I can do that.

I don't know that I've tried to put comments on the YouTube and I see no evidence that anything that I put in ever goes anywhere that anybody can see.


SPEAKER_01:
Interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
But anyhow, you can put it in the text maybe later on.

The other thing, maybe you both heard me talk about this before, but some folks working on the memory that's used for the recognition of chess positions.

They took a bunch of people from just really beginners who just basically know only how you can move, what are the legal moves, to really good players, to masters.

And they would give them

Just positions.

And let them look at it for a few seconds or 30 seconds or however long.

That was varied.

And then say, now write it down for me.

Or just say, tell me what you can remember about it.

You know, 30, 60 seconds or 15 minutes later.

And in a real position, the master was really, really good.

They could sometimes reproduce all of the pieces in an end game or a mid game.

And the amateurs could barely do it at all.

They'd say, well, white's kind of still in white's territory, and the right side of the board had a lot of stuff in it.

But if they put up impossible positions, positions that you cannot possibly legally move pieces into, the masters would get really upset because they couldn't remember.

I don't know.

I don't know.

In fact, the amateurs were better than the masters at reproducing impossible boards.

And the folks analyzing this said, well, it seems like people who know chess don't remember positions at all.

They remember trajectories.

That seems to be the only thing they remember.

And then they drill down on that.

How can you distract from remembering trajectories and so on?

And they say, yeah, this seems to be what people remember.

The meaningful moves.

They don't remember positions.

I think that might address some of the things Adam was saying about what's really deflated.

What is really the more efficient way to store data?

You've got storage in a

computing machine and you've got the knowledge and the information and the information about my position and where I want to go from here that a living brain uses and they may have no relationship


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks for that, Dave.

And I'm going to pass to you, Adam, with a question from the chat.

Cambridge Breaths asks a question to Adam regarding the computational approach to neurophenomenology.

How would the generative passages possibly help to describe consciousness in a way that generative models can't do?

So it sounds kind of related.

I'm not sure about the generative passage, but it's sort of this trajectory idea, I think, is what we're getting at.

So anything you wanted to say or respond in that?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, so a few things off the stack, and I'll address that if I can, or to the extent I can.

Oh, with relation to the different types of potential illusion or richness or lack thereof, there's this one book that reviews a lot of these phenomena, The Mind is Flat by Nick Chater, which is interesting.

I don't know if the book should be called The Mind is Flat or The Mind is Surprisingly Rich and Deep.

It's just a matter of perspective.

But with respect to, and I also want to address Soames and the idea of a conscious brainstem, which I'm going to push back on that a little bit.

But I guess I'll go to the generative passages versus generative model idea.

And I think that first, and I think that actually speaks to what you were saying, Daniel, in terms of like,

wanting to have this balanced information like dealing with what's the information you actually got um and then what can the agent handle in terms of it's like um it's effective read on itself by which it's regulating itself as a cybernetic system not getting overwhelmed by uncertainty a given point and potentially a kind of additional filling in both for the sake of having um

a richer causal model of the world, but also just to not freak out the agent, to allow it to be more copacetic in handling the uncertainty that it's going to have to handle in engaging with the world and trying to, via potentially some sort of integrated world model.

Now, I guess the... I'm still...

trying to understand aspects of B. So there's a pre-print that just came out by Maxwell Ramson and a few others on neurophenomenology, which talks about this generative passage idea.

But I guess part of it would be if the modeling processes we're doing are temporally deep and they're counterfactually rich,

And this would be different than, for instance, just necessarily inverting the generative model from your sensorium.

So for instance, if you take the posterior lobes, which IIT says are the physical substrates of consciousness and could be, on another perspective, viewed as a kind of workspace that provides a global availability, or it could be viewed as a predictive global neuronal workspace.

predicting what you think your sensory states are at each point.

This could get you a good amount of temporal depth and counterfactual richness.

However,

Really, though, the unfolding is not just a sequence of sensory estimates just stitched together through time, but they're inactively stitched together through time, where the whole process, whether you're engaging in the world or you're imagining it, it's these action perception cycles.

And so now the frontal lobes are in the mix, and now it's getting complicated, where now the agent is shifting its perspective around within either an actual world it's engaged with or some sort of virtual world.

and with some sort of relation between these.

And this is now more extended.

This is a different thing where the closure of these functional cycles, the informational closure, is more extended.

So things like, for instance, the inherent depth of the present moment, the sort of specious present, that might be part of it in terms of, for instance, it's not just this

I'm suggesting like the actual quail are discrete they're being estimated at alpha frequencies primarily with a foci kind of encompassing the posterior lobes and this is where you're getting basically these nests these non-equilibrium steady state densities or I call them self-organizing harmonic modes and this is the stream of experience however the actual what's in the stream that's

involving other things that's involving the cybernetic action perception context and where it begins and ends.

The actual operations engagement, that's a different and much more complicated story.

And I think we're basically going to need to have things.

I actually think like the hippocampal system might be at the core of that.

And that's going to be like the key puzzle piece.

And I'm currently working on moving from basically this basic, like what could do phenomenality to what could do these more complex forms.

I'm trying to grok the hippocampal system to figure that out.

But that's like one distinction between like generative.

I think I might speak to generative passages versus just the components of a gender model that being, being inverted that could entail basic,

creature consciousness phenomenality, or just the estimates of the world, the stream of experience.

I don't know if that makes sense.

So one more thing, though.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one on the passage, then we'll go to the other topic.

So think about memorizing something like the chessboard, but think about memorizing a sequence of sounds.

So if there's sounds that you cannot make, like some sort of whistle or some sort of sound that a human can't make, it's going to be really hard to memorize it.

You could recognize it, but it's going to be hard to reproduce it.

Now there's sounds that you can make in a language you don't know.

If you tried hard enough, you might be able to memorize a song in a different language, but it's going to be hard.

Next would be in the scale of how easy it is to memorize would be like random words in English or language that one speaks, but not grammatical.

That's like the chess boards that are impossible.

It's real pieces, but it's not linked in a way.

Okay, now up another level of easy to memorize, natural language like conversation could be pretty easy to memorize.

Another layer up would be a composed natural language, like a story or a poem.

And then even above the story or the poem, as we know from those who have great experience with memorizing epics, is the embodied and the inactive poem.

So where from the head of the story to the toes of the story, or it invokes your own body.

And so when we think about this generative passage,

It's almost like it's increasingly natural for us to condense or to distill memory in terms of a narrative at increasingly inactive, increasingly self-referential ways.

Whereas stimuli that aren't able to be easily brought on board our own narrative in a relational way, they're kind of like non-sequiturs to our memory.

And so that's who and what we are, the state of the system and how it responds.

And then also on the passage versus the generative model, thinking about the generative model, even though we know in active inference that it's beyond internalism and externalism and tail of two densities.

And so it's not just like the generative model is a matrix, but thinking about a generative model makes you think that you can like pause the sensory input and just, okay, what's the state of the model?

But when we think about generative passages and trajectory estimates, we get past, present, future, we get self and other, and we get planning under uncertainty.

So those are some of the very, very key aspects of passage inference that aren't quite captured by just asking about generative model, which makes it sound like you're doing like a linear regression.

Okay.

Then to the other aspect.

Yep.


SPEAKER_02:
That was beautifully said.

Just need a moment.

Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So, okay.

So I guess the brainstem part.

So I really like Mark Soames' perspective and I'm actually...

very sympathetic to neuropsychoanalysis.

I think it's developmental, it's relational.

I think it acknowledged, like, I think basically since we are either, you know, you could say because we're reinforcement learners, it would be shocking if there weren't things like defense mechanisms, because there's some thoughts you're having more of, some things you're having less of, and the contingencies of value optimization are too numerous and varied

sometimes subtle for you to track.

And so you can go down all sorts of garden paths.

So I'm generally like, while the particular aspects of the Freudian framework you might question, I think we probably should be thinking something kind of psychoanalytic to get at the weirdness of mind and what it's like to be a person.

That being said, while I agree about the fundamental nature of the necessity of the brainstem as part of

of what's contributing to consciousness as not just as being necessary.

You take it out, you're done.

However, the claim that the brainstem itself is the locus of consciousness, I find to be somewhat questionable.

And that I think we're in an even worse position in some ways.

Well, we're, it's,

The reason I would say, so one, I would question the evidence that's cited for this.

But the other is I think you probably need the, at the very least, something like to do temporally deep generative modeling of a kind that would be able to give rise to an integrated world model.

It seems like the Branson doesn't have what it takes.

I suspect you need the thalamocortical system with its ability to do this hierarchical sequence memory,

and its ability to capture this hierarchy of time scales all coupled to model your hierarchically your hierarchy or the dynamics are unfolding in your engagement with the world you need a system that has those properties and i don't think the brainstem quite has what it takes um the

Basically, for me to have consciousness, I want to have, as I say, an integrated world modeling theory.

I want an integrated world model that has coherence with respect to space, time, and cause, and maybe also agency, some sort of basic autonomy as part of it.

And these are all necessary properties that potentially might be jointly sufficient

But they're definitely necessary.

And so I don't think the Branson can do all that.

In terms of the data they cite, one would be ancephalic patients or children without developed cerebral cortex.

Or rather, it's just not there.

And they're showing this rich emotionality.

But my pushback would be that emotions, they go all the way back

all life like that's like and like Damasio's thinking and like the strange order of things um and the um 2012 book I forgot what that one's called but it's this every single it's these coherent changes in organismic modes that are corresponding to means of engaging with the world these classes of events and this is a state of basically action readiness

over your system that allows you to adaptively couple.

And I think like this is what emotions are.

And so this is being shaped

all the way back to a single cell.

And maybe we want to push consciousness that far down.

I personally wouldn't, but the idea is I think you can have very rich, unconscious emotions, very rich affects, and it should be organized organismically.

And so this will all be the level of the brainstem.

You'll see these things.

You'll see like, for instance, potentially laughter, you'll see fear, you'll see rage, but I would argue you'll see in some ways homologues of these things going all the way back to bacteria, bacteria going into like a sporulated form to protect itself.

That could be a kind of like fear thing or a bacteria releasing endotoxins.

That could be a kind of anger response or like extending a pillus to exchange circular chromosome, little chromosome bits with another person.

That could be a kind of bacterial lust.

I don't think there's anything it's like for these affects for the bacteria.

So I kind of push back and that basically the reflex, these reflex arcs being engaged coherently for these things that are basically at the core of our experience, in some ways the most important part.

still um i think this can be done uh potentially just mechanically and like from like a kind of brooksian robotics emergentist perspective uh where it's just the systems intelligence is in it's the what's available like the different modes its body can go into which will um allow for certain types of adaptive coupling yep it's the one more thing i would say would be um they also point to um

So, like, um, like, you'll stimulate these areas, and then they'll generate the emotion.

Okay?

Um, but I think that might be the same story.

Like, the generation of affects, we don't know, or rather, okay, so, we know if you stimulate it in us, so you can stimulate these areas, and you'll generate the emotion, but that that

area itself is sufficient for it that we don't know i would suggest probably not and then for us have experienced the issue though is you have these looping effects you haven't cut it off it's circular causation so you stimulate these like brain stem nuclei or hypothalamic nuclei and then you generate the emotion well the cortex is still online for us and so that's uh i i would i think the evidence is questionable for the the conscious brainstem even though i love everything else about soames's perspective

I think we should move away from conscious brainstems.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, thank you.

Yeah, Freud talks about different, qualitatively different kinds of consciousness, the consciousness that's in the brainstem and the cortical, at least, I'm sorry, I shouldn't say it that way, the way Psalms updates Freud, that there's certain consciousness that does seem to be confined to the brainstem.

And I know listening to his talks that,

he will say it's conscious, and then in the next sentence, it's unconscious, and that differentiation is really important.

It may be that if we were in the habit of talking about what I'm kenning just now versus what we're witting, it wouldn't be as confusing if we separate the


SPEAKER_01:
body knowledge from the um visual knowledge or visual oral knowledge thank you yep thanks for that david um i'm not ready to say that consciousness isn't a helpful word but when you're talking about subtypes just brainstem function

or the neurocomputational components of brainstem function in this or that state it's all of a sudden like it's like explained away and then also this question about the lesions and the measurements which is what is really important to us when we're thinking about this pragmatically it reminds me a lot of genetics where they'll take a gene even just going with the molecular dna concept of a gene so just saying they'll take a gene and they'll knock it out or they'll remove its function and then let's say blood pressure goes up when you delete the gene

And they'll say, oh, well then this gene lowers blood pressure because it went up without it.

But that's actually not true.

To use out of your terminology, the blood pressure is a phenotype that is like a self-organized harmonic mode.

And then when you change one of the nodes,

it's going to lead potentially to a, if it's a buffered node, then it's not going to change the mode at all.

So it'd be like a phenotypically silent mutation, or it could be like a key linchpin, just like the epigenetic landscape behind me.

It changed one of these guys that are key, and then it changes the self-organizing mode.

And so, just like you said, a brain region, when you lesion it, if it removes some trait, that doesn't mean the trait was in that region.

It's actually a total integrated network, and then you change the network or the system's phenotype,

when you change the system.

So I'm always extremely skeptical of, well, this removal of this brain region, remove this trait.

So it's in there.

It's like, actually, you could almost say it isn't in there because the system was able to reorganize without it.

And so it's just, it's almost like the opposite of what people think is being shown with lesion experiments.

It's being shown that the system has capacity that is modified by key elements.

Like if you inject ketamine into your wrist,

there's gonna be a different phenotype than if it goes into some brain region.

Like there's brain regions where a different drug being dripped on is gonna lead to different phenotypic changes.

So that's actually not simply evidence that the brain is the locus of consciousness.

It's just saying, yeah, there's, you know, your elbow is a pivotal spot for the movement of your arm.

And there's brain regions that play critical message passing roles and neuro-functional roles

But that doesn't uniquely identify this sort of object reductionist or regional perspective.

This is fun stuff.

I think we can, let's, Adam, yeah, go for it.

Yeah, yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
I guess in terms of things like virtual machines and what types of systems, so I'm like kind of pushing back on brainstems.

But I'm also, in some ways, broader, I guess, than like maybe potential wandering Carl's perspective.

And that I'm actually really happy with consciousness being supported by a virtual machine.

In fact, I think you might want to even think about it as a kind of virtual machine.

And for me, though, part of what I want to have happen, it's not just this potentially the ability to have, you know, a hierarchy of representation.

with like synchronous dynamics, facilitating the message passing.

But what I'm going to want is for basically these estimates of the organisms or the systems engagement with the world to be generated on a time scale that would allow it to both inform and be informed by evolving action perception cycles.

And where basically the role for me of this basic phenomena awareness would be

a series of estimates who, through their basically high degree of coherence, can also exert powerful control energy.

They end up constituting this center, slow, synergetic, attracting manifold that can enslave the rest of the system to degrees and influence its dynamics, basically influencing action selection.

Series of estimates that can influence action selection and be updated

via your engagement.

So this doesn't necessarily need to be a brain, but for me, I want basically a rich enough estimate of the global state of the system, and I want these estimates to occur on a time scale where they can significantly enough that there's a good amount of grip, enough that you can actually do active inference, both inform and be informed by the engagement.

I want one more thing potentially, or maybe two more,

which would be, I would want a large enough network that you can get some sort of non-equilibrium steady state or self-organizing harmonic mode among some aspect of it, some subset of it, where the closure would be achieved within the system

that you could describe such a object, such a harmonic or such a nest density.

And I think what you might potentially need is a big enough system that you can get an almost like an inner loop or that when you're forming like this metastable state, it's not immediately disrupted by the engagements with the world via the sensory states.

And so I want it to be big enough that there's this, it can form these internal


SPEAKER_01:
complexes can i tie this to a question in the chat because i think it's great okay cambridge breaths asks carl friston was asked if hurricanes have a markov blanket he said reluctantly no what would that say about markov blankets in general and is there any mathematical way to attribute markov blanket to a hurricane so i'm going to put up the image where we have the blanket states

whether it's a Markov or a Friston blanket and the internal states with a generative model.

But what you just said there about the persistence through time of an inner loop, how would you relate that to this question about the hurricane and about what systems like is a hurricane conscious?

It has little inner loops, doesn't it?

Little turbulent eddies.

But what is it about the sort of like sustained memory and this inner looping?

Where does that come into play?

And

Is that a way almost to go about identifying which systems, hint, hint, might be able to be measured as conscious because they'll have an internal dynamics that are complex?


SPEAKER_03:
No idea, especially with the hurricane.

But although a thought that I've been trying to think into recently is,

I'm wondering whether this inner loop might actually be important.

So maybe we can only define a Markov blanket, a Friston blanket, Markov blanket, when you have this sort of separability and maybe only for these like inner loop processes, if you're not basically immediately being disrupted by the engagement where you can't draw the boundaries, just like immediately effaced.

And that would still, you could still do an inference, maybe that'd be kind of like, I don't know if it'd be a amortized inference, but it'd be like, you could still do inference and coupling, but it wouldn't be this, you wouldn't have these series of estimates.

But the thing I'm wondering actually is whether in some ways,

the solution to the hard problem and the solution to what is life along the lines of Markovian monism, even though it might be one in the same.

And that like the boundary of life, non-life, the boundary of conscious, non-conscious, what actually makes for this adaptiveness is to have estimates which can evolve slightly independently from the world, such that you can do things like counterfactuals in terms of your modeling.

So you can get this sort of, um,

sussing out of different possibilities and then using this as a means of surfing your uncertainty, your engagement.

Now, I wouldn't want to go as far as to say that all life is conscious.

I'm not personally of that view.

You can make a case for it because I want the additional coherence properties I don't think all life has.

But this idea, though, that the boundary problem of life and non-life, of unconscious information processing or unconscious perception and conscious perception, it might be exactly the same issue.


SPEAKER_01:
let's connect it let's connect it to what the paper says because i think this is really what we're on the brink of so this is quotations from the paper this is about where free energy principle and active inference is going to step into some of these very challenging perennial questions like what is consciousness how do we measure it who gets to have it

So the first summary point of Wanja and Carl was according to free energy principle, we need to be thinking about neural dynamics, not just neural states.

So I think that's very related to what we've been talking about, not just the states like, oh, well, this neuron has this action potential and this one's doing that.

We need to think about the trajectory through time.

So short, clean point.

And the third point is also a short, clean point.

It's more of like a literature claim, which is that other people's models were generalizing above them.

Okay, so the first and the third point I think are,

short and sweet let's really go into the second point because it relates to what's the difference between being conscious and simulating consciousness people can have different opinions on this but this is where the authors are taking it and then what kind of biological or non-biological systems might have or be conscious so hurricane how about a pilot in the hurricane what if the hurricane yeah so what do they actually say here according to the free energy principle there's a relevant distinction to be made between the probabilities of the neural states

or the trajectories and the probabilities they encode.

So I think I had to read this a bunch of times because they sound so familiar, but it's basically saying there's the probability of the neural state itself.

which is like the probability that the brain is in that exact stance, which is actually never going to return to, and the probabilities that the brain is encoding.

So, for example, if the brain is involved in a decision-making task,

there's the probability of the microstates of the brain, which you can go reduce all the way down and it's never gonna replicate those microstates.

So instead of focusing on the probability of the states or even the probabilities of the trajectories, which are always gonna be vanishingly zero,

we can think about what are the probabilities encoded by those states like the action readiness is this person in a global dynamic state where they're action ready to move like they're awake or they're not action ready so they're like asleep

How are we gonna do this subtle shift from thinking about the probabilities of states and trajectories versus the probabilities encoded by states and trajectories?

Well, this is where they introduced the information geometry and they call this partitioning between the probability of the state and the probability encoded by the state as intrinsic versus extrinsic information geometry.

So in line with this distinction, neural dynamics are movements on this intrinsic statistical manifold.

And then the computational component, what the observer is modeling them as, what's the shortest algorithm that generates that behavior, that is movement on the extrinsic manifold.

And so this relates to what is being conscious versus simulating it.

For the Hurricane, let's just say, those two manifolds are actually mapped.

Like, there's no hidden states.

The microstates and the macrostates are... They're...

they're one in the same.

Whereas when you have systems that are engaged in these very vanishingly rare microstates, but then they converge upon reproducible algorithmic or computational or behavioral features,

that partitioning can tell us something if there's a system where those are one in the same like it's a double pendulum and you're curious about its behavior it still could be chaotic but there's no like hidden interactors whereas there's other systems where computationally we have to approach them in a really different way i'm not sure if that's correct but that's kind of what we tried to um read about in this paper and explore where is the intrinsic and extrinsic

concepts coming into play, and how do we take all these interesting things that are happening here and move towards a definition or some sort of operationalization?

Adam?


SPEAKER_02:
Yep, go for it.

I don't know, but... That one stopped me.

So...


SPEAKER_03:
I guess, so as I was saying before, I think actually we might want to think of consciousness as a kind of virtual machine.

And I think especially once we get to this sort of generative passages and these richer senses of consciousness, I think we're definitely dealing with a virtual machine in these cases.

But in terms of this, maybe this place where it's this one-to-one mapping between the extrinsic and intrinsic,

manifolds is this one-to-one mapping of information geometries.

I guess at least within, kind of come back to brains.

So for instance, I focus on alpha frequencies because these are the, basically, if you look at like the scope of what could be synchronized, it's this big swaths of posterior cortices.

So about eight to 12 times a second, you can generate these metastable states.

where the neurons are all basically more aligned in their activity.

And so I think Pascal Fries would call this communication through coherence.

You can actually get integration and message passing.

And so I'm claiming that this is entailing basically some joint marginal of the sensorium, the engagement with the world, or potentially a maximum opposite or estimate thereof.

I don't know which.

And part of the relation, though, is I'm thinking that this would be maybe the first inner loop type process that you might get.

And in terms of its relation to the coupling of the worlds, it might have certain special properties in terms of... So I have this kind of weird idea that by the time you get to the precuneus, I mentioned, these posterior medial cortices,

that you're going to get these ensemble activity of neuronal ensembles, neuronal populations that would have a kind of chronotopic or consistent time varying relationship of the neuronal ensembles evolving and what's happening in the world on the organismic scale.

So it would be like, if I'm moving my hand like this, it's going above my eyes and there might be some mapping out into the ensemble activity, which is then changing

roughly at that time scale and you can detect this.

What it would partially do to bring it together into this like Cartesian theater-esque thing would be is this would, I suspect it's potentially not even, there's some sort of not just chronotopic in terms of like a correspondence of time, there might even be kind of quasi topographic Euclidean properties of it in terms of the ability of, for instance,

what's in the mind's eye to actually couple with the oculomotor system, which itself is going to have a kind of coherent topography.


SPEAKER_02:
But I guess the idea is that the idea would be that these


SPEAKER_03:
So I'm basically thinking of consciousness as discrete updating of the generative model, which at 8 to 12 times a second, in terms of phenomenal consciousness, and that these discrete updates, if you look at them, they're actually inner.

They're divorced.

And so there's not a direct mapping by the time that these functional cycles achieve closure.

And so I don't know if this is consistent or not with Juanjo and Carl's arguments.


SPEAKER_01:
So the 8 to 12 part seems like that's an implementation-specific detail, right?

Because that's related to our... So it could be totally important for us, but it may not be a general feature, right?

Now, let's look at this equation set.

Um, we're thinking about this intrinsic extrinsic information approach, and it's saying it's saying the free energy of the policy of the doubt.

It's a little confusing because pie is used to mean policy in almost all situations.

But here I think pie is actually comprising blanket states and internal states.

So it's a slightly different pi variable.

We could get that clarified.

But the point is that the system is going to be acting as if it's minimizing the difference between accuracy and complexity.

Now, in the case of, let's call it a one-to-one system, like whether it's a double pendulum, which is a chaotic system, it's simple, but it's chaotic, or it's a hurricane with turbulence and Reynolds numbers,

If it's a one-to-one system, it's not acting as if it's co-optimizing this trade-off of accuracy and complexity.

Even if you said, well, the hurricane is like a model of its environment, it's just, it's actually, it's a perfect model.

It's not minimizing the complexity at all.

Just not making an absolute claim, just saying.

On the other hand, if you take the intentional stance and you're thinking about an agent and that agent is acting as if it is minimizing the difference between accuracy and complexity, that means that it's extrinsic information manifold is rich according to this LZ complexity metric.

So when they're the same, there's no delta.

It just is that system.

So it's almost like when you have a total state space representation and the mapping, there's actually not that much more you need to express.

You say, well, yeah, the chatbot said I'm conscious and I love the Beatles, but that's because that's what was preloaded.

So when you have the full, and that's actually why the neuroreductionist direction, I believe, is ultimately fallacious because let's just say you had every atom in the brain.

Then what?

Are we conscious or not?

but people are acting like just a few more measurements or a couple more EEGs.

No.

On the other hand, when we think about separating the internal and the external information geometry, if we find systems that have a big delta, they're acting really, really as if they're minimizing accuracy minus complexity.

And that extrinsic information manifold, we could say whether it is LZ or another type of complexity, but that extrinsic manifold is complex.

Like a human might get a tweet every hour and then engage in some like super interesting behavior.

That would be a big divergence between the intrinsic and the extrinsic manifold.

And the extrinsic behavior would be difficult to compress with respect to the inputs.

So that might lend it a higher complexity.

So there's sort of two things.

There's how much does it look like it's minimizing its free energy according to this structure?

is the extrinsic information manifold complex and then what are the measures of complexity i know that's like a bunch of random stuff i'm trying to trace the argument of the paper because these might be the kinds of measurements or comparators even relative measurements or ratios that help us understand um adam so


SPEAKER_03:
I guess the first speak to what you're saying about the generalization and to not get too bogged down by the specifics of how it might be realized within, for instance, the mammalian nervous system.

I think that's really important and I don't want to do that.

I think some of the principles would generalize.

And so for me, the...

I'm wondering whether actually, in terms of this closure with respect to action perception cycles, that actually this is potentially double the frequent, or you're nesting actually two quail states within a broader envelope, a functional cycle that closes on a slower time scale.

And so for the brain, this would be something like theta potentially orchestrated by something like the Campbell system, which might be doing this kind of comparator operation as a kind of like contrastive energy-based learning.

But this would be like a more general thing where you might need to be doing is comparing things and like for the organism to adaptively navigate the world and generate a causal model.

It might be that you have this more extended generative passage level unfolding, and that within there, you're forming other nest densities or harmonics at other timescales that you can then use these as objects, which you then compare between and put in relation to each other.

And so any system, I'm thinking you would have, like, essentially these nested Markov blankets where some of them would correspond to, like,

the system as a whole and its engagement with the world where this is its own best model.

And it's just the whole, it's a perfect mapping with like the hurricane or the whirlpool example.

But then you're then getting basically on, as you move inwards or outwards, you're getting these other nest densities forming on different timescales, which are then encompassing.

their Markov blankets encompass the other ones.

And some of these, I think we really should be thinking of these in terms of virtual machines.

You can't point to it at any given point and say, aha, there you are.

And it might actually extend not even within the system.

It would be within and between.

It would be relational out into the world.

And I'm personally suspecting that there's this like, within like this onion of nested Markov blankets, some of them corresponding,

to different, some of them corresponding to virtual machines, some of them corresponding to the world as its own best model or the world as model, that there might be a point where it's like, aha, there you are.

I'm personally thinking this is for the mammalian brain.

It's at the alpha frequency.

But it would just be at that.

And so I guess the one more thing would be, in terms of the difference between simulation and emulation,

I actually think in the figure that Wanda showed where he had the description of the von Neumann architecture and then you had this memory register with the terms from active inference.

I think that mixed ontology is revealing and it could potentially

mislead and that I'm wondering whether by the time we've committed ourselves to having these kinds of active sensory and blanket states that you can put into that memory register of the von Neumann architecture, we actually ought to be core screening differently and we shouldn't be thinking of the von Neumann architecture anymore.

It's actually I don't know if you can actually do brilliant analysis on that.

I think it's like it might break the rules of causal inference.


SPEAKER_01:
Totally agree with that.

Whether it's Lambda, Calculus, or some other algorithmic description, the current implementations of computers are only one way.

And so if we mistake the map for the territory or the specific for the general, then we're going to be like, well, it's the RAM.

And then this channel, you know, if you lesion the RAM, it doesn't have short-term memory.

Doesn't that sound like these computationalist reductionist researchers?

because they are working sort of not clearly whether it's general or specific, brain or computer.

And then the quote that that reminded me of, it's by John Muir, the Californian forest lover.

He wrote, "'I only went out for a walk "'and finally concluded to stay out till sundown "'for going out I found was really going in.'"

So it's like, I went out for a walk, it's action planning, and finally concluded to stay out till sundown.

Deep temporal inference.

For going out, I was really going in because when he was in the niche acting and inferring, he was being himself.

And so it really captures like a lot of these dimensions

that we're getting at.

And then also I'll raise a question from Cambridge Breaths in the chat.

And it's related to what you said about the nested systems, Adam.

Cambridge writes, can we have a non-metacognitive conscious entity, so to speak, or are consciousness and metacognition inseparable?

So we've used this idea of self-reflexive, autopoetic, autonoetic.

It's come up a ton of times.

Are those one and the same to be aware, conscious, and recursive?

Or might there be some differentiating wedge somewhere?


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, I guess it depends what we mean by metacognition.

So if we're talking about a very minimal metacognition, I think what would be necessary in terms of...

a way i think you might be able to think of like precision weighting as a kind of minimal metacognition and um and even like on what levels are you doing your precision weighting but this might be essential because you can't do good inference uh without it like for it to be base it's this combination of precision weighted probabilities that's what gives it its power is weighing things by the relative reliability or part of what does that like the ability to like iteratively refine

Um, by leveraging your priors, but the, and so we're going to need at least precision waiting to have probably any kind of coherent world modeling, whether it's exactly Bayesian or not.

Um, you know, but it's gotta be Bayesian-ish enough, I think in order for there to be coherence, um, you need to be able to take the reliability of information.

And so these precision estimations could be, for instance, entailed

on many different levels they might be for instance entailed um mammalian so they might be just emergent and distributed um through this like game of free energy minimization taking place among all these distributed coupling elements but there might even be also like centralized control structures which help to give you additional levels of precision weighting things like um cingulate cortices potentially or um the pulvinar and like um a

The thalamus, part of what might make that so essential for humans would be its precision weighting.

And you might see in a variety of systems, there might be like, even like within a cell, I don't know, but there could be like, you need some sort of like centralized integration structures for this more global precision weighting to occur.

Not sure.


SPEAKER_01:
But in terms of like metacognitive, go on.

Oh, just to bring it to the frist in formalisms or formulisms, like what would you say that idea connects to when we're thinking about how it was formulated in the paper?

You know, to ground the conversation for listeners and for ourselves, like, when we ground it in the formalisms, then we can say, well, I don't think the formalism is trying to describe the right thing, or I don't think it correctly describes what we're agreed upon is the correct thing.

And a lot of times it's easy to invoke these formal frameworks, but then never clarify what our mapping is between like, okay, there's a kinetic, a path independent and a path dependent term.

Sounds like kind of relevant, but then I'm not exactly sure that it's going to transmute into qualia.

And that's like that gap that we want to be sort of hammering out again and again.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, in terms of actually thoroughgoingly connecting back to the formalism, you got the wrong guy.

I think though this would be at least, I think actually consistent with like Marc Solme's perspective also.

For him, consciousness is inherently metacognitive and he is relating it to precision weighting.

But in terms of exactly with this more, in terms of Markovian monism, that I don't know how to describe that well.

But I guess I had one more thing in terms of like the way I'm thinking about it, which would be,

I personally think that you can have, in contrast to a higher order thought type theory, that you actually... So there's some theories which, for instance, try to collapse these different senses of consciousness.

And they would reject, for instance, potentially, the difference between phenomenal and access consciousness.

And they would say, you do need these high-level features for there to be anything at all.

And I personally, um, if it depends on the richness of what we mean by metacognition.

So if we're saying precision waiting, then I'd say yes.

If we're saying though, things like, um, auto-noesis or like reflective self-consciousness, then I'd say probably not.

We, you don't need that.

I think there could be something that it's like, and you could be generating qualia and these could just pop up.

There was something that it's like as they were being, as they are emerging and then.

They go away as soon as they were there.

And you weren't able to reflect on them.

You weren't able to compare them, potentially.

And you even less so were able to contextualize them with relation to yourself and time in a rich sense.

I think that's quite possible.

So I don't think you need the more rich kinds of metacognition to have consciousness in terms of the appearance of the world.

for the appearance of a world to be like our appearance of a world, then you do.

But in terms of just the appearance of any kind of world, any kind of what it is like this or what it feels like this, I don't think you need that.


SPEAKER_01:
i i really love that connection it's like there's the what it's to be like whatever it is but then the way that we actually experience or any given individual experiences is so cultural it can really never be disentangled for example people will tell you just yeah there's xyz it's three axes and they're orthogonal at 90 degrees

Except if you grew up studying synergetics and Buckminster Fuller, then there's four spatial dimensions and the orthogonal angles are 60 degrees.

So is it really a fact of the world that it's XYZ or is that just something that's culturally reified in the way people talk about the world and how they measure and how they communicate?

And so it's always like this question about what are the general attributes, but you never observe the genus, the general.

You always observe the species, the specific.

And so we are in a little bit of a triple bind because we don't know what consciousness is, how to measure it, or what the observables are per se.

And it's sort of like, it's a catch-33.

You have to solve them all in one approach because if you're observing something and you're like, oh, it's all about the EEG and you're going way down the rabbit hole with a four-year transform, I mean, who's to say?

That might be just actually going down the wrong path.

or it might be a very valuable piece of information or it is reducing our uncertainty about something, but it may or may not be related to the general question.

It might be related like, yes, it turns out that this wavelength is a differentiator of whether someone is going to experience pain or remember pain during surgery.

It's so important because we don't want to have people who are suffering unnecessarily.

But then again, is that the general answer to consciousness?

interesting questions and then also to show wanja's 2020 paper 7 11 2020 with these different ways that consciousness behavior and information could be linked and then i added a little qualia maybe consciousness is qualia like you know what if there's a thought without a thinker or a thinker without a thought or there's all these different options and um it's also just

It's a space where there's a lot of possible perspectives in the scientific literature, in the neuroscientific literature of the last, say, 200 years.

It's only one facet of a really nuanced story of humans understanding their local world.

So it's just really awesome.

And we'll have just time for a couple more thoughts and questions.

But yes, Adam, and then Dave, if you'd like to add anything, feel free.

You know, I don't hear you for some reason, Adam, but you're not.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, yeah, go for it.

I personally like making consciousness synonymous with qualia, and that's the IIT stance.

But in terms of what you were saying with respect to different types of senses of space, and in general, what you're pointing out in general is trying to find non-question-begging uses of terminology

and claims.

So for instance, within my own thinking, I talk about spatial, temporal, and causal coherence, but at which level?

And actually, there's a little bit of an ambiguity there in my thinking that it's actually, I think, it's showing up and entering at every scale, but in different ways.

So for instance, you could think of a certain just entailed, and for instance, having a hierarchical predictive memory system, just having something like a hierarchical structure like cortex, you might have itself some element of,

spatial and temporal coherence built in just there via things like um at the initial levels having a topographic mapping to the world and then preserving that to some degree and maybe reintroducing it again later but this idea of like some degree of preserving of space time being preserved by some sort of coupling and then some sort of uh homomorphism and maybe some sort of increasing temporal depth of nested causes that unfold in different time scales via

a hierarchy where the deep levels are things that are unfolding more slowly, so you're getting some time just there.

And cause, you might even think of something like spike-timing-dependent plasticity, where you wire up the system based on the predictive information coming in the right order as being like a kind of proto-causal prior since, like, causes ought to precede effects.

However, that's a different sense than, like, for instance, a richer sense that might be important for the appearance of a world of space-time and cause.

where it would come in, for instance, in terms of

potentially something that's more constructed.

So what type of space are we dealing with?

If you're in like this Buckminster Fuller world, that might be a very different sense of space.

It might not be X, Y, Z. And there might be a different sense of time for you and a different sense of cause by the time we get to phenomenalities or rather, I think it is a different sense.

And then there might be yet another sense in terms of like the intersubjective and the higher, like the more narrative meaning making

of space time and cause where it's like the metaphors we use about space and time and the ways we construct these like linguistically and like these higher order semantics.

And then these might couple as priors for each other in all sorts of interesting ways.

So, um, there's like ambiguity there or like there's, um, and I guess to kind of come back to this idea of like, so I've been thinking that, um, uh, you couldn't think of like within global neural workspace theory,

that I kind of generalize it a bit and that I treat the workspace as not just this like fronto parietal network.

I would consider it to be a type of workspace and potentially a type of virtual machine workspace of where it's involving these action perception cycles being closed, like these kind of fictive imaginative action perception cycles or real ones.

But you could also think of, let's say you're just having like,

the estimates of the sensorium, like you're getting these nest densities or self-organizing harmonic modes.

If you're getting big swaps of cortex, all engaging in marginal messaging, all communicating their beliefs together to create a joint estimate of the engagement of the system with its world, it may not involve the whole system, but if it's big enough, I still consider that to be consistent with a global workspace.

It's big, it's allowing multiple things to do this ensemble slash federated learning and inference.

creating the synergy, getting a whole that's greater than someone's parts, making information more globally available or creating like fame in the brain, as Denna called it.

And so I'd say like, that's still very, that's a workspace.

It's a sort of iterated Bayesian model selection.

But like within, but what do we mean by workspace?

And how much, when we say workspace, at some levels, do we mean spatial itself?

Is it like, is the workspace itself a kind of space?

And, but now to what degree is it a constructed space?

And what kind of constructed space?


SPEAKER_01:
ah and global oh well of course i don't mean like the globe global i mean like you know something else it when things are universal global basic there's so many adjectives that um help people share memes and ideas but really don't always reduce uncertainty about what's being discussed

because they're being used in explicitly a non-helpful way.

And so it's always a challenge to parse out and translate, sometimes even on the fly, which...

types of usage are actually like, okay, attention is actually supposedly about the thing we're talking about here, but global, okay.

It's a totally different usage.

And there's a bunch of times where in the same sentence, you have words that are like really drawn from different namespaces.

They're drawn from quite different views.

Yeah.

Adam.

And then Dave, you ever want to add anything, go ahead and raise your hand, but go ahead, Adam.


SPEAKER_03:
Just a quick thought is it's like, in general, I think part of it is like, we need to use more words and not argue so much about

What words mean is if we're receiving them from Plato's philosopher king, they came on to us on high as this ideal form.

Rather, words as tools and making them useful tools.

And we're going to want to probably stick as much as we can to common usage in folk psychology as much as we can.

But sometimes we won't.

But basically trying to find the one that captures the senses of use that we tend to use.

as much as we can, but also while sometimes pushing back on our common understandings, but I think along this though, using more words like phenomenal consciousness, access consciousness, maybe we want to break those down further.

There's a limit to what we can do before the tools become not serviceable in our hands, but I think

we definitely should be using more than like, I think people are tending to expect like this one-to-one mapping of word to the relevant natural kinds.

And I think that's a problem.

I think that's, uh, I think we should at least two words, maybe as many as three, more than that, I think is a problem.

Um, but I'd say two words would do so much better for always using two.

Thanks Adam.


SPEAKER_01:
Um, Dave.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, the, um,

You mentioned Plato, the latest edition of Sean Carroll's Mindscape.

The guest says there's two scholars in China who are explicit and proud followers of Leo Strauss, and they have followed his method and read all the works of Plato, each one of which proves that Xi Jinping is the perfect leader and that a world that he rules is the best of all possible worlds.

And could you please send me an invitation to the Markovian monism talk, please?


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks for the statements and claims and questions.

Yes, so...


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, go ahead.

In terms of one concrete debate in consciousness studies, for instance, it seems like a lot of the dispute between global neural workspace theory and ingrained information theory could be resolvable, and them just talking about consciousness in different senses.

And if we add additional words, this would become clear.

So instead of fighting, engaging in this death match, if the word will be this, there can be only one, it would be like, okay, so maybe...

iit is focusing on phenomenality and maybe um gnwt is focusing on access and when iit says that the physical and potentially computational substrates of consciousness are tend to be corresponding to posterior hot zone they might be largely correct and when gnwt says it's actually a more broadly distributed frontal parietal nexus they might be correct also but on one case they're talking more about phenomenal conscious

in one case you're talking more about access consciousness and so like there's this huge like adversarial collaboration happening but actually I'm worried that it's all in the wrong terms assuming that like one framework will be the victor when actually it should be

Not that you're all right in a wash that way, but sure, let's go for a minimal unifying model, I want to say.

But there might be like, this minimal model might take in both parties and they might be happy.

IIT people might be happy, GNWT people might be happy if we just use more words.

Yep.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

No one has to be wrong.

You might be, but no one has to be wrong.

I'll give a take on it.

Dave, though?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, maybe some of the folks who helpfully remind us that the map is not the territory should just go back and read Science Insanity.


SPEAKER_01:
Sounds good.

And what I kind of got out of there with consciousness, and this is, I guess, hopefully an approach we're enacting and carrying through is how are we going to share the tools, maybe statistical parametric mapping, SPM toolkit, maybe the developing active inference toolkit.

How are we going to share the tools and align on action

that is within everyone's affordance, within everyone's niche, rather than zero in on the eternal, essential, and truly fundamental differences in our perspectives and contexts, you're not gonna get people to agree on what a pizza is.

You're not going to get people to agree on what culture is.

And so we're way, way, way past physical objects here.

And so how are we going to have a story and an approach field where we can come together and reduce our uncertainty about our physiology and our emotional responses, which are part of our physiology process?

and focus on potentially the before the decimal point shared reality rather than the after the decimal point divergences in the seventh adjective or the list ordering.

Adam?


SPEAKER_03:
I think that what you're saying, actually, in some ways, that's the essence of like the way to proceed in that, like I said, no one has to be wrong because we all have to be wrong all the time.

Like all, you know, all models, all metaphors are wrong.

Some of them are useful.

And we're going for maximal use.

And it's not saying that this is a postmodern wishwash and anything goes.

But there's going to be some uses of terminology that are more or less helpful for getting at basically different grips on the latent world.

And for which all of our words are mere approximations.

There is a world.

There are better and worse ways to describe it.

but these better and worse ways of describing it, there's always an interest and it's our interests.

And so I think bringing like basically our values back into the picture, hopefully our shared values and this being,

That's how you have to proceed.


SPEAKER_01:
I totally agree.

I think that the movement that is reflected by people calling for transparency or interpretability or reproducibility in machine learning, let's say, it reflects a desire to be able to really weave together who is being served and who's being influenced and our values with technical details.

And so it's just...

It's been special and been really interesting to think about how something that, you know, you could call out some technical component, but it provides a starting place for actually fully intertwining our values in.

And yeah, it's gonna be a tight rope to walk between everyone's correct, no one's correct, everyone is neither correct nor uncorrect, or everyone's involved in a process of correction.

How are we gonna move from the essentialist claims, like who's right and who's not,

or which subcomponent of myself are correct or not to a broader story of whatever it ends up being in different people's perspective.

And there wouldn't be any sequence of words, English or otherwise, from any speaker that is going to end up

being the end all because they're just it's like the finger in the moon you're pointing at the moon you're not pointing to the spot at the tip of your finger it's something far far away and something aspirational so that's how the words are and especially with the consciousness you know again even with the food like i would say that food could be an aspirational or an asymptotic or a platonic thing but then this is like quite

wrapped up in our own experience, of course.

So thanks so much to the two of you guys.

Any last thoughts or just what does this excite you about moving forward?

Or what would be some next thoughts or just imagine some archetype of some listener or viewer and what would you suggest to them, ask them?


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, for me,

It's both fundamental, the question, what is consciousness?

What is life?

Who am I?

What's going on?

It's of an existential, meaningful character, these conversations.

But I also think, basically, I'm hoping that we're getting close to bringing back in consciousness in a meaningful way into science.

kind of overcoming basically a kind of behaviorist legacy where it kind of made sense to make some things somewhat taboo for a time because we didn't feel like we had purchase, but then that taboo became maybe stifling and tyrannical.

I don't know if we've completely shrugged it off yet, but there's a sense where by we try to be as precise as we can, we contextualize, you know, what are our value commitments?

What is the specific way in which we're using terminology in this case, trying to be as precise as we can.

I think we might be at a point where we can start to bring things like consciousness back in without having to be embarrassed about it.

And I think this embarrassment actually did something really bad, which basically took your experience and removed it out of the scientific discourse and basically made it unreal.

And I think we're going to discover not only was this bad for us personally, interpersonally, but it was bad for us scientifically because I actually suspect that consciousness is the maximally important element

informational and energetic object in at least our minds and that this we basically hid the main story we made taboo telling the main story and

We made taboo different things.

Part of the reason we didn't have purchase was that we were being imprecise.

It was hard, but part of it was we made taboo the things we would need to make purchase, so phenomenology.

We made experience taboo, and then we wondered why it was so hard to make purchase on consciousness.

No one was talking about embodiment, and then we're like, hmm, why aren't I able to cross explanatory gaps with a giant flailing leaf?


SPEAKER_01:
And that, unfortunately, in a historical and a cultural context, it led to divide and conquer of academia.

It led to the bifurcation of non-academic experience with academic research.

It led to disciplinary, unneeded friction.

I really agree with that.

It's like it was a scientific error to think that the finger was pointing at the tip of the finger and say, well, because we don't know exactly the detail, we're going to not just...

you know, write a review paper and then go back to our lab, we're going to go on stage and we're going to tell people that they're zombies.

We're going to tell people that they're robots or we're going to tell them this is how the brain generates consciousness.

And so that's why I'm always excited to hear about new research in the field.

But I would hope that kind of like coffee and cream, like it would always be blended with a recognition that it's an open question.

It's an experienced, um,

it's something we're experiencing.

And so we're not just gonna cut it and dry it, leave on stage, 15 minute talk, it's done.

Because think about how many thousands of those lectures have been delivered in the last hundred years from when today's nurse, oh, that was too early, but they were just being enthusiastic to today.

And that's tens of thousands of people or however many people who got pushed in a different direction

Because, um, using legacy credentials, they were told their experience was not concordant with science, which is really something that's hard to estimate the impact of.


SPEAKER_03:
One more thing would be, I want, I'm also open to, there might be some things that might be cut and dry and I don't know.

So for instance, one of them could be at questions like it's possible.

that depending on which senses of consciousness we mean, that there might be cut and dry versus more graded distinctions we should be looking for.

So it could be, or it could not be the case that basic phenomenality is cut and dry.

We don't know.

I have thoughts on this, but one thing would then kind of later coming in, this might have relevance now for things like animal rights, and this might have relevance going forward

for things like the future of AI, maybe can we create artificial general intelligence?

And then when, if, and when we do, if we survive long enough and if we're smart enough, will these be morally relevant agents or will they be part of our moral communities?

And so whether things are graded or not, it could end up being crucial.

There might be some cases where it's like, aha, once we nailed down our use of words based on our interests and we have like this many qualifiers, we feel like, okay,

This is the optimal grip on like numeral space, whatever.

This is like the optimal grip on the world, on latent space.

And you say, okay, cut and dry.

But it might not be.

But these might be the most important questions ultimately that we can ever ask.


SPEAKER_01:
And here's where I think active inference might speak to it.

Dave, then, if you want to add anything or not, is here's where it's cut and dry.

the observables, sense and action.

And so we can be clear about what we're cutting dry and say, here's how using the theory of information processing, we're talking about auditory processing, but then to go that next level of emotional salience and say, and this is why you hear this when this happens,

That's the part where it can be clarified that there's things that are basically cut-and-dry models, but those are cut-and-dry because they've been partitioned from a broader field of discussion, not because one day the cut-and-dry is going to be everything.

It's actually like everything isn't that way, and we've made these islands of stability that are despite that, not like the other way around.

So...

Dave, any last comments?

Thanks so much.

This was really, really awesome conversation.

As always, appreciate the live participants and those in the live chat and watching later.

This is it for actually the first quarter of 2021 for ActiveStream, pretty fun.

Next week, we're gonna be having our quarterly round table.

So if anybody wants to make like a three to five minute video for this one or a future round table, they're welcome to do that.

then we're going to be having these upcoming events.

So it's going to be just on with the show and the learning and doing and participating.

So thanks everyone and see you later.
