## Ln_g3qynnbA

Hello and welcome everyone. This is the Active Inference Institute quarterly roundtable number
one for the year on March 29th, 2024. So welcome Alex, thanks everyone. We're a participatory
online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference. You can
find us at the links on this slide. This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so feel free
to provide feedback so that we can improve our work. All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome
and we'll follow video etiquette for live stream. If you're watching along live, feel free to put any
questions in the live chat and we'll get to them at the end. Well, today we're here in our first
quarterly update of the year. We'll give some updates and remarks at the institute scale.
Then we'll take a look at the Eduactive and Re-Inference organizational units covering the education and research projects
and just talk about moving forward in 2024. Before we jump in, Alex, do you want to add anything?
Just a little celebrate for now one year and the first roundtable for this year. Thank you.
Yeah, feels like a lot has already happened, but I guess that's why we snapshot it quarterly.
So here we go into institute scale updates. Starting with a big picture on where things are at with the
institute. Here in the center, we have a representation of the institute and its relationship with the
ecosystem. We have institute level functions such as our officers, board of director, and scientific
advisory board who help steward and guide directly or indirectly the organizational units focused on
education, eduactive, and research, re-inference. And underneath those organizational units are all of
the projects that we're going to be talking about. Through the projects is where dissemination,
participation, and engagement occurs at the institute, as well as some engagement types that we'll be
discussing more in a few slides that are at the institute scale related to philanthropy and
partnerships. And following on from the quantum free energy principle work of Chris Fields in the course
that he taught last year, we have in this year begun a prepare and measure dual form approach. The
preparation and the measurement forms are always open. They're open to proposals and measurements,
large and small. We use them for projects within the institute, and we also use it to interface
projects in the ecosystem. The proposal or the preparation form describes what the project team
is setting up to operate or do, and it outlines explicitly how the team is thinking about their
contributions to the accessibility, rigor, and applicability of active inference. Also, teams are able to
suggest minimal and higher levels of support that the institute could provide. So, if nothing else is
needed from the institute other than a channel and a chat thread or a certain other kind of small support,
then things might just begin right then, or maybe they're waiting for some kind of support,
or maybe they throw out a high support offer, and one day we hope to be able to fulfill those
in support of the ecosystem. And then the other side of the coin, or the other side of the action
perception loop, as it were, is the measurement form, which describes what the person or the project
or the team did. What did they see, change, and learn? And these measurements reports could be about
open source contributions to code and educational materials that people make. It could be, I read a page
from a book today, and that enables visibility, communication, and the flow of support to projects.
So, we hope that through this project-based engagement and preparation and measurements,
we'll have a lot of very interesting affordances and structures to include and accommodate how diverse
our community and ecosystem are. Which leads to a common and central and critical question, which is,
okay, but how to participate? Well, suffice to say, there's multiple ways to be involved on your own
timelines or on ours, and by even asking, you've begun. Onboard.activeinference.org is one landing
point if you want to get more involved. We also have a Discord that you can jump into, and sending an
email to blanket at activeinference.institute is also always a good way to get the conversation going.
As for projects mentioned on the previous slide, you can join synchronous listed meetings of projects,
or if the time doesn't work or you prefer another mode of engagement, you can communicate with the
project facilitators. So, the activities page is just like a roster or menu or a series of options,
affordances, that you can design your curriculum and tune it in and out as you see fit. For people
looking to have a more structured involvement with projects, as well as maybe to accelerate on their
personal active inference journey, there are other programs that we provide, such as the Institute,
Internship, and for saying updated on happenings in the ecosystem more broadly, we have a newsletter
and a video channel, perhaps one that you're watching right now. And so, some of the paths
through can look like this, beginning with staying updated. This phase could be 15 minutes for some
people, it could be 15 years for some people to learn and absorb, read the papers and the publications
that are coming out about active inference and related topics, watch our videos, follow social media
accounts and read our newsletter, and do your own things in the ecosystem. Learn, apply, share your work,
donate, stay tuned for more opportunities, and so on. And then, across the thin dashed line into the
Institute, someone joins to contribute to a project or just to find out what's going on in a project.
Curiosity is enough. And maybe moving on to participating in an internship, and really getting
more embedded and engaged with the active inference community, and blazing paths or following whatever
is important for you on that personalized journey. So, these are just some of the ways to get involved.
There's a lot to learn, and there's a lot to absorb, and resource sharing is a big piece of that. And if
somebody wants to get in contact or get more involved in the projects that we're going to be describing here,
that is why we are participatory, that's why we're here for everyone. Anything to add on that, Alex?
Yeah, I see it quite important and valuable that new approach that we propose in the implementation in terms of fusion preparation forms,
and also forms that reflect the progress. And I believe maybe for now for people who are familiar with
the Institute, we should see it as developments that we should pay attention and see how to use them.
And for new possible participants also to have more close look on the forums, because this approach,
again, is based on first principles, and it provides ways and affordances for us to organize work on different
different physical scales and also timescales. Thank you.
Thanks.
Carrying on with some more Institute scale updates.
Here's a nice new re-representation of some of the organizational rhythms.
Starting with the quarterly, we have the round table, the video we're in right now, and also quarterly meetings with our
board of directors. This is our second cohort, same people, but our second go around.
On a monthly timescale, we have meetings with our scientific advisory board, which is an informal
guidance and insight board. And day after day, hour after hour, our SAB members make many important and relevant
contributions. So we spoke with them even yesterday, and it's great to continue those conversations and just
the incredible backgrounds and approaches that people bring and how excited and productive it can be when
we're working together all like this. Then on a weekly timescale, Alex, Blue, and I checking in as
officers and on a daily to sub seconds timescale, the actual inference and activity of our community itself.
Also, we're really excited to today discuss a few upcoming programs that are going to be developing in
the coming weeks beyond where they have been and rolled out very soon. The three programs that people
will hear more about in the coming months. But if you're interested in these programs, if you have insight or
experience in any of these areas we're about to discuss, or if you feel like you or your organizations
might want to be some of the truly very first in each of these categories, please get in touch.
And here are the programs. First, for individuals, we will be deploying a research fellowship program.
Research fellows will be individuals who are affiliated with the Institute officially, in terms of being able
to list that on papers and having an email address and so on to reflect the alignment with their
research and contributions to active inference and our open science approach. We'll be providing a variety
of mechanisms to enable and catalyze the innovative work and the discoveries that those fellows make.
And future fellow programs, we would look to more materially support in different ways and also expand
outside of research fellows into education fellows and so on. All these incredible places we see active
inference being applied. The partnership program will provide a structured venue and avenue for
organizations that are looking for any numbers of several different things, including to make meaningful,
impactful and recognized contributions to the active inference open source ecosystem. For organizations
that are looking to upskill and accelerate their own active inference learning and application to form regional and sector level collaborations or collaborations involving a certain language or approach or discipline.
Important input that organizations can provide to the Institute about what we might do to be the best supporting organization for the ecosystem possible.
And also build positive reputation and context and access community and talent as we know that active inference talent can be sometimes a limiting factor.
And the last program here is the philanthropic avenues. These will constitute small and large donations of different types to support the sustainability and, frankly,
the viability of the Institute's mission and vision going forward. Currently, our 501c3 tax exempt status is pending. So, hence, waiting until that is cleared to move forward.
But we envision a continuum from monthly and smaller opportunities for people to provide tax exempt donations all the way on through very large and custom philanthropic relationships.
So, if on the research fellows, organizational partnerships or philanthropic avenues, if any of those sound exciting, or you think,
I've been waiting for this affordance, then this is it. So please get in touch. Anything you want to add on that, Alex?
No.
Cool.
Cool. And then just a few little summary pictures of our growing engagement in outreach and public communications platform and the slow and then all at once growth of complex systems.
Cool. Let's go on to the Eduactive Organizational Unit and briefly cover some of our education-oriented projects.
So, starting with the Institute projects. And these are just screenshots from our activities page, which is where you'll land when you go to onboard.activeinference.org.
This is just screenshotted and snapshotted from there today. This is what is live right now.
At the Institute, we have several educational projects.
First, the Active Inference Ontology, where we are developing the rigor and applicability of the Active Inference Ontology as a core infrastructure for the Institute and ecosystem.
This facilitates the translation across human languages, computer languages, and many, many other kinds of exciting applications for really what is the heart of Active Inference.
And people are taking it in some very exciting cosmological and mythological directions too, I know.
In audiovisual production, we produce a variety of informative and interesting live streams and podcasts.
I'll flip to that slide.
In 2024, we've had 27 videos so far.
We've had Sarah Hamburg with the MorphStream series, continuing to look at biomimetic computing techniques.
OrgStream with a focus on organizational design and applications of Active Inference.
MathStream with a focus on some of the mathematical topics that are central or peripheral in Active Inference.
Insights, the absolutely wonderful series that Darius has been carrying out with many guests.
And guest streams, which are one-off events that allow us to hear from a wide range of voices and projects in the ecosystem, just from sampling, ranging from Marshall McLuhan and Andrew McLuhan carrying on that legacy and tradition through knowledge management, Adrian Bajon with the Constructal Law, empirical status of predictive coding and active inference, open source AI.
By mental gravity, Alexei Tolchinsky, a participant and also a researcher in the area.
Companies applying Active Inference all over the world in their robotic settings and wellness science through the lens of Active Inference.
So just hearing about all these exciting things.
If you have production skills or interest, please do consider joining this very fun and accessible project.
There are a ton of ways that people can help, ranging from curating and suggesting inviting guests, facilitating streams in English or other language, improving communications before, during, and after videos.
There's all kinds of things that people can do, as well as work and articulate the interface between our production of audiovisual materials and the processes at the Active Inference Journal.
There are a ton of ways that people can help, which pick up where the live stream ends and where other media leave off and are able to integrate that into our knowledge management approaches, provide transcription, translations, captionings, all these really critical functionalities that we're developing out.
And then last Institute Educational Project is the textbook group.
So the textbook group rolls on ever since the March 2022 publication of this Parr, Pizzullo, and Friston textbook.
So two years ago, this textbook being published.
And cohort five continues on with the second half of the book.
Cohort six continues with the first half of the book.
We're having great times.
We have people joining one or both groups as they alternate across different time spots week to week.
We've had almost 400 registrations for this group over the six cohorts.
So it demonstrates the strong and continued excitement and curiosity that people have.
And also we know there's many other reading groups and people enjoying and curious about this book.
So for here, I'll just add that all backgrounds and levels of familiarity with active inference, math, statistics, philosophy, all of these different topics that come into play, all these backgrounds are welcome.
And we cherish their questions and curiosity.
The textbook group is a great place to jump in.
You might find that it's a swimming pool.
You jump in and then immediately can quickly route onto, okay, well, here's the more advanced way to apply it computationally.
Or here's a deeper corner in philosophy that that makes me curious about.
Or you might find, as many of us have, that rereading these 10 chapters again and again is its own fun cycle.
Those are the Institute projects.
And then facilitated by the proposal form, which is always open, we've been really excited to host a variety of other projects in the ecosystem facilitated by those outside of the Institute.
So first we have the Fundamentals of Active Inference with Sanjeev Namjoshi.
This has been continuing on since last year and his textbook in progress is an absolutely comprehensive update to the educational materials available.
So we'll look forward to seeing more as that continues.
Action research on collective foraging, negotiation affordances with Susan Hastie.
A really exciting week by week dynamic project that very interesting things are coming in and out of.
And some other projects that we would love to hear more about to be able to share.
But please, anytime, feel free to go to theonboard.activeinference.org and click around and learn from the documentation of these projects, their prior works.
Contact the facilitators, see how it's listed to get involved.
So these are the education projects that are active at the Institute right now.
Alex, anything you want to add here?
Just that it's great to see such a lot of different projects.
Some of them are in different formats, group working.
And for now, in basic form for personal online learning for physics and information processing and social sciences course.
So we test in different formats, improving them.
And that's great.
Yes.
Thank you to everyone for their bravery and commitment to jump in and propose and to let us know and measure and just to be involved and to make these projects something that actually comes true and is enacted for our diverse Nestmates in the ecosystem.
All right.
Moving from education onto the re-inference units into the research projects.
Here's an analogous snapshot of the research work happening right now.
So we have three research-oriented projects, research and development or application at the Institute.
First is the rxinfer.jl learning and development group.
This has been a wonderful project.
We've gotten deeper and deeper into the Julia language package developed by Bias Lab and colleagues called rxinfer.jl.
Julia language as well as some of the analytical formalisms that the package uses like factor graphs and message passing may be new for some slash all.
But we're having an awesome time in a large group working through the examples from coin tossing on through drone flight.
We'll have a live stream with the developers of the package next week to talk more specifically about the active inference drone setting.
And we really look forward to the continued upscaling of the community and the usage and the applicability of rxinfer, which is just a very exciting direction for active inference.
In knowledge engineering, we continue to explore avenues involving more on the library science side, the archiving and curation of materials, and also more into the modern language processing and analysis space into the large language models and different kinds of collaborations there.
So many threads that are developing and brewing, which we hope to reveal more on soon.
And in active blockference, which is wrapping active inference generative models from different language of different styles in CAD CAD, which is a systems engineering execution framework, which exists in Python, Rust, and Julia.
So thinking about the systems engineering side of our work and about the articulation between the specification of composable active inference generative model components and being able to use those in an open source systems engineering framework that's as rich and full featured and first principles as CAD CAD is.
So that's been great collaboration.
And we have a number of research projects in the ecosystem.
We have symbolic cognitive robotics from JF Cloutier continuing his very unique work on symbolic active inference.
Not to go into too much detail, but the high road is the same and you'll find a different low road in this project.
And a variety of proposed and active research projects ranging from exploring PTSD, M theory, humanity's story of an uncertain self, soil biology, and ant biology and beyond.
And we look forward to hearing more updates from these research projects and sharing and highlighting their work as we hear from it.
Anything you want to add on the research side, Alex?
Nope.
Okay.


Okay.
Well then, here are some closing comments.
Just a couple meme and fun slides that I brought together this morning.
meanwhile if you're watching live please feel free to write any questions whatever their epistemic
or pragmatic value be in the chat and we will look at them after this but just wanted to give a few
comments and thoughts and just every day there's new soup from which to draw hearty meals from
but i just wanted to put down a few of these thoughts as we're seeing it right now so one
there are many waves and kinds of active inference catalysts frictions and horizons for people and
organizations we know about the two ways that agents are able to bound their uncertainty and reduce it
which is to change the mind through inference attention and learning as well as to change the
world through action and this made me think about the so-called multiple horizons model and whether
we see it in terms of these stacking horizons based upon maintenance nurturing and novel creation
or whether we see the horizons in any other number of different ways such as like what's the hill that
we're on right now and then the next hill and then the next hill after that broadly and i look forward
to refining this with people is the first horizon that we're on is the familiarity awareness and skill
right now the rate limiting step in applying active inference to any system basically is not computational
resources it's not gpu access it's people's familiarity and fluency with active inference with the ontology
with the process of generative modeling with statistics all these different kinds of features that come into
play the second horizon on this image on the right is the software and the methods so after getting to a
basic level of familiarity one may start to bump up rather quickly with limitations of the tools and packages
whether fundamental limitations of the packages that require basically like open source updates to progress
on or one's skill and fluency with using that software or toolkit like rx infer and then there's a deeper
broader horizon involving hardware and beyond ecosystems of shared intelligence heterogeneous computing
substrates analog and quantum wetware all these different kinds of deeper approaches which over a given timeline
will have tremendous impacts in the active inference ecosystem but whether we choose to focus on the first horizon
which is the accessibility and participation of active inference with the ability to make it more broadly understood
and applicable more game ready downloadable press playable than it is today whether we choose to focus on that second horizon
of the utility provided by software packages and then whether we look into the deeper tech beyond even that into the
unconventional computing substrates beyond turing computation and so on these are all places and times for bold action to support active inference
i think it calls for passionate holistic responsivity i think it calls for individual inquiry
organizational commitments and ecological partnerships and again where there's a discrepancy where someone thinks well there should be
a machine learning answer to this or there should be a communication for that or there should be a course made for this kind of person
there's two ways to deal with that discrepancy
either to update one's beliefs that such a thing doesn't exist and doesn't have to and then walk away calmly or be that change and we hope that the institute can be the locus of those changes
so again for individuals and organizations who are ready for that we want to continue that conversation
2024 is a unique year i mean in a sense every year is a unique year but it's not so common that we have a full true tetrahedral new year 2024 is a perfect tet year
that hasn't happened since 1771 and it won't happen again till 2300
there's a few other ways to kind of work with or play with our date which is um
of the ways listed here i'll just read the last one we can think about two as the external states the external
unity in multiplicity the zero as the gap the two as our blanket perception and action on the inbound and outbound
and then four our internal states which themselves compose a tetrahedron all good and i'm sure there's
many other ways to see it but just so fun that our year can reflect a nice shape like this and also we
think more and more about these two ways that stability and stationarity can appear and one is the construction
project that's dead on the ground and the other is the top in motion which has a stationarity and a stability even a resiliency
but you don't get a bigger dead object to flip over and spin and that's active inference
a few more random fun thoughts
thinking about epistemic modes and tempos with a lot of people's great feedback i wrote a short piece
about wayfinding in the infinite imaginarium juxtaposing epistemic tempos and modes and thinking
about the dynamics of the changes in the speed and type of journeys that we take in the epistemic ecosystems
were in and then just thinking about more organizationally we had a lot of work and
deadlines and timelines in the fall of 2023 leading up to a major nsf grant application which we didn't
get and the third applied active inference uh ecosystem symposium on enacting ecosystems of shared
intelligence so that was fast and a lot of other details coming into play quickly and then december
taking it slow moving with the seasons and consolidating to introduce the project propose
and measure dual always open form system during this first quarter which we discussed at the beginning
the project propose and now the game is afoot again things thicken or quicken there's the growth and
the development of projects in our space there are many internal and external flows that people are innovating
in and around every day at the institute and there's also growing excitement and energy in the ecosystem
to say nothing of capital activity so it's a very interesting time and one of the images from the paper
by long way around from dean is this idea of a gap an epistemic gap and what to do about that gap
it can be appreciated and it can be crossed in multiple ways it can be jumped across that's the canal
jumping quantum approach or it can be filled or a bridge can be built over it and so what are those epistemic gaps
and how do we determine how do we appreciate fill bridge and jump different gaps and then on a different
wavelength another paper here co-written several weeks ago with dean was about the four field fields
of quantum dreams and it was a creative and exploratory piece about visual perception quantum
active inference and all these topics and there's just a few facts that i felt were important to know
the 1923 new york yankees 101 years ago they went 98 and 54 in the playoffs they avenged their previous losses
by defeating the new york giants in six games four games to two and they won their first world series
title so it was a big season for the team babe ruth one of their players had a 393 batting average and
some other great statistics so on one hand it was absolutely historic we're talking about it now and yet at
at least two nested levels of historical success the team scale and the slugger scale with a sample size
of well over a hundred games or at bats the success rates were in the 35 to 65 range babe ruth only was
hitting less than four out of ten times going down six out of ten times and the team was only winning 65
of the games and i think about ants moving pebbles and about moving many 51 correctly gets a nest and yet
apparently to this baseball history comes alive dot com reference what makes this ruth's best season ever
was his outstanding performance in the field he was the american league's best right fielder so despite
the numbers that we can record what made it the best was actually something that was unrecorded so
there's so many fun little twists and turns in that about what is recorded what is unrecorded what are
the success rates and how do we just get up every day and try again and keep it going across multiple scales
so that we can appreciate phil bridge and jump or not appropriately and last meme slide this is
a dual railroad track vision in davis nearby me and i rewrote some famous lines of poetry
i expect and prefer to tell this with a sigh somewhere spaces and times hence two roads diverged in a could
and we took the one less traveled by and that enacted all the difference here's us in the moment of
decisioning and we have the outside dark not to do and then looking forward we have more and more
affordances for what we can do and who we can be and this dovetails well with a recent paper that the final
version came out today actually with mao and colleagues about shared protentions which are prospections
anticipations in multi-agent active inference systems which with the help of toby and others has now been
explored in this category theoretic way so
i didn't want to have nothing here and any something i know is partial limited and incomplete and all these
different features but want to share some of those ideas and memes and thoughts in appreciation of all the
amazing contributions that people have made in this kind of unique fractal nature of our topic which is
the divergence in what could be and different ways that things could be and what we do right there
at the fork in the road how do we take that fork how do we stay with the trouble all these different
things that arise or are in the nexus of sense making and decision making so what a rich and exciting area
what a great time to be able to collaborate and communicate with all so many of you and we
are in the next few minutes and we look forward to many more fun times ahead so hope these last slides
made the right sense to you they were just thrown together they aren't my finest or only statements as
such but i did want to add them in here and so we come to our last slide where since years ago we've looked
at and asked what would an understanding enable what are the predictions and implications what are the
next steps for us and for the free energy principle and for active inference what are our preferences and
what are you still curious about so we will just uh hear any last thoughts from alex then i'll look in the
chat if there's any questions and then in a few minutes as soon as this ends we will just begin our weekly
open office hours discussion in the discord you can find the join link in the video description or
elsewhere otherwise um we'll just chill for a few more minutes hear any questions that people have and then
just jump over to having a open hour alex what are your kind of thoughts
yeah thanks for that last slides uh very exciting exciting and thank you for sharing your ideas this way
and i believe these round tables are aimed to show some information about institute in this way for people
for new people for new people for people who know us and possibly have another look on everything of it
and even if you don't understand for now how to join how to participate but have general interest to
science the first principles to active inference just give us a sign and send an email or message
and discord and discord and we'll find a way how to support you in in that explorations and
possible future applications thank you thank you yeah it's again there's there's so many things to
say and not say but it's always amazing how people reach out and um what active inference means to them
so if you're hearing this it's for you if you're curious doubly so and uh this year a lot is going to
develop and change the institute will be structurally different with the increased numbers of affiliated
individuals with the development of a real partnership group kind of like a league or a federation of
organizations that want to support active inference ecosystem the education all the way on through
professional applications and just providing some of the avenues that are more recognizable
as opposed to the ones that are still not quite yet on the radar but the chorus grows every day of those who
call for it to be that way so we need everyone to help co-create that and be a part of that hence these
communications okay i'll look to the live chat but write any questions if there's anything that we can resolve
here otherwise this is a great length and material for our update here
thank you hello blue neutrino memes of destruction upcycle club susan
okay fun fun discussions great comments there but i don't see any specific questions
questions all right um let's continue the discussion anybody who wants to over in our discord right now
if you're watching this anytime blanket at active inference institute and see you later
thank you thanks alex thanks everyone thank you
thank you