## g2n47dPUyNY

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome to the Active Inference livestream.

My name is Daniel Friedman and this is going to be a solo discussion.

If you're a new listener or not, welcome to Team Calm.

We are an experiment in online team communication and learning related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter at inferenceactive, at activeinference at gmail.com, on Keybase via our public team, or at our YouTube channel.

This is a recorded and archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and also as far as video etiquette goes remember to mute if there's noise in the background raise your hand if you have a question and so on

Here we are in ACT-INF Stream number 5.0.

We're kind of exploring with the numbering system, so give us any feedback as far as what kinds of numbers or what kinds of shows might be helpful for your learning.

But the goal for this discussion is to set the context for ACT-INF Stream 5.1.

In 5.1, we're going to discuss the paper Multiscale Integration Beyond Internalism and Externalism by Ramstad et al. .

The goal of this video is really to contextualize some of the ideas, the historical threads, and the vocabulary that will help you either read or work with the Ramstad paper in terms of other fields that you might be more familiar with or just to sort of connect ideas and thus ground your understanding and your practice.

So I come from a different background from the authors, so I have a slightly different perspective on perhaps even the implications of the paper.

So the goal here is really just to explore that so that whether you listen to this by itself and you're looking to sort of see where active inference is trying to relate itself to other philosophical ideas, or whether you're coming from the active inference side and you want to understand some of the broader philosophical questions that are being addressed potentially by active inference.

In both those cases, I hope this is an interesting video for you.

So here are a few of the topics that we'll be exploring here.

The first one is top-down and bottom-up causation, and that's gonna be an introduction to multi-level systems as well as thinking about causal modeling also.

Next, we'll talk about and raise some questions related to partitioning between internal and external cognition, which is certainly the wedge or the main issue that the Ramstad et al.

paper is going to be focused on.

And then we'll talk about a few different perspectives on systems modeling and action.

That's sort of action and inference, if you will, but there's also been a lot of philosophical thought on systems modeling as well as action.

So we can kind of see how those two fields might come together in the field called active inference.

And next time in number 5.1, we will all come together.

Everybody who wants to can always get in touch with us.

We will all come together and discuss the paper to whatever extent we've read it, whatever we thought about it, any questions that we wanted to address, any of our background knowledge, any of our perspectives that we bring to the paper.

Those are all cool things to...

come about in 5.1.

And if you're listening to this after 5.1 has happened, you can either listen to 5.1 or you could get in touch with us to be on a future discussion.

So next time in 5.1, we're going to be talking about the figures, the abstract, et cetera, in this paper by Ramsted et al.

called Multiscale Integration Beyond Internalism and Externalism.

And that's in the journal Synthes in 2019.

So the goal of that paper, and the only quotes from the paper that are going to be in this video are just from the introduction and the abstract, just so that we can ground the ideas more specifically in what Ramsted et al.

framed their work as.

So the goal of the paper in the author's words was,

We focus on making explicit a description of the boundaries of cognitive systems that we think follows from taking seriously the inactive, embodied, and extended nature of cognition.

This is the idea that the boundaries of cognitive systems are nested and multiple, and that with respect to its study, cognition has no fixed or essential boundaries.

Cool.

I think that that is really exciting and also it doesn't necessarily bring the free energy principle or active inference on too heavily.

It just helps understand what is the broader goal of the paper.

Well, the question that really excited me today was,

this taking it seriously aspect on multiscale integration.

It's the first two words of the paper's title, so maybe they're trying to signal with that.

The story that we want to be working towards is multiscale integration.

So linking things that are different spatial and temporal scales at once, multiscale.

How are we going to do that multiscale integration?

Well, what they're provocatively stating in the title is that we must move beyond this debate of internalism versus externalism, which I'll contextualize soon.

And the way that they're going to take it seriously is using a mathematical framework called free energy principle and its related process theory active inference.

So that's what taking it seriously looks like for them, especially drawing on their background as cognitive science.

uh, experts, they're really framing this as about multi-scale cognition.

And, uh, I came from a, not a cognitive sciences background, more of an evolutionary biology background.

And so multi-scale integration in the ant colony or in the insect brain or in the cell, there's a different set of philosophical baggage that comes along with it.

Sometimes, um, if I could characterize it so, uh, clearly would be the focus on humans tends to focus on the experience.

the internal view since we are humans so at the very least it's one of the ways that we can study emergence is by ourselves as an emergent process whereas in computers ant colonies the cell there's often a tendency following let's just say Dennett and others to imagine it as an automata or just sort of a robot and therefore devoid of experience or speculatively

sorry, speculatively having experience, but sort of on the sci-fi fringe.

And anyways, when you deal with the system, you have to be in that intentional stance.

So those types of systems tend to have perspectives that are devoid of agency, whereas human systems, the debate is just about that, is about our own agency.

But we're all part of the same multi-scale integrated framework.

And so we want to have a story that works for cells that are

in our gut that are in our gut lumen, in the microbiome, why should it matter?

Why should we have a different theory of biology for one side of that over the other, especially when we know that there's important transfer between them, for example?

The authors took it seriously and they wrote this 2019 paper as well as other papers.

I'm going to try to take this seriously from the work in biology that I have learned about over the years.

And that's what taking it seriously and contextualizing looks like to me.

So I just thought I could start with that.

Here's a paper from 2012 by Dennis Noble, who's a great systems biologist, called A Theory of Biological Relativity, No Privileged Level of Causation.

So you can kind of see where he's going, which is taking the idea of relativity, whether that's gravitational relativity, something related to quantum mechanics, for example, or just intersubjective relativity, like focusing on the relations that define something or the interactions that define a person rather than an essentialist take.

So Noble is sort of taking a broad understanding of relativity and saying, well, if we really look at multiscale systems and spatial and temporal cause, then there's going to be this relativity principle.

Maybe that could apply to biology.

And what I like about his figure one, and I've added two rungs at the top, is that it really clearly phrases what he's arguing against, and also makes it clear how some of these logical errors become deployed in real systems, in real analyses.

Figure one is a model of causation for what's called upward causation.

And the way to read this figure is it starts at the bottom with the smallest thing, which are genes, which here is just, I believe, being meant as a string of DNA, but that's a whole other discussion.

Let's just say that genes are able to cause

proteins and RNA, which are another scale of organization, bigger, moving up towards protein and RNA networks, up through cells, tissues, organs, organisms, social interactions, ecological, technological, governance, informational systems, and so on.

So this is a sort of multi-scale systems perspective, and the version of

events that we often get is implicitly one of what Noble is characterizing accurately as upward causation.

One could change the spatial metaphor.

It could be moving downwards.

It could be moving inwards or outwards.

But suffice to say that this is what we mean when we say upward causation is really from small things to big things, because the top-down things are often seen as big, and the things that are just on the fabric level of reality are often seen as small, rightly or wrongly.

And

The story when you have this type of a upward causation model, again, that smaller things cause bigger things, is the genes are upstream of the behavior, or the cell damage is upstream of the organs.

So it makes sense, and there's also a related idea called supervenience that is that, is there a relationship between changing the smaller thing and the bigger thing changing?

So these are the kinds of questions that come up, and this is one direction of causation.

However, what Noble ends up framing in this no privileged level of causation model is that, yes, there is influence or flow from so-called the upward direction.

So that's the genes and going all the way up in influencing things that are at larger scale.

But also in a very real and causal sense, there are.

top-down causation that can be equally important for regulating the system.

So even if in the short timescale the influence of the bottom-up is extremely strong, if there's no top-down force, sometimes any amount of bottom-up power can just cause the system to dissipate and therefore not exist.

So in that sense, all systems that we observe continuing to dissipate energy, for example, like active inference foragers, informational foragers, humans, living creatures,

we can really start to see that there has to be some sort of a top-down organizing force.

Otherwise, it would be like a landslide or a lightning strike.

It would just dissipate away.

So he says, look, because the top-down forces are so important and over evolutionary time end up shaping the parameters and the set of what is possible or functional at the lower level, it really needs to have an equal hand causally.

So we also need to look at this from a top-down, bottom-up perspective.

Lots of people have thought about these types of issues in systems theories and in other areas.

But the three areas that I just want to emphasize here before bridging to active inference are that there's a continuum of larger and smaller things.

That has to basically be true because you can't have something bigger inside of something smaller.

And in the context of this debate that we're framing to get set up for, which is between internalism and externalism, you can think about things that are bigger as being more external and things that are smaller as being more internal.

So like the story about the smaller things is going into the organ, into the cells, into our cells.

But the story going out is about the ecosystem or the constructed niche.

And these are things that are external.

And so that's gonna come back later in the paper.

And then also as a consequence of that, there's this nestedness or this embeddedness to these different levels of analysis.

And there's again, many vocabularies for this type of recursive or embedded system, and hopefully we'll address some, but also feel free to provide feedback.

These are just some of the general aspects of multi-scale systems and some of the questions about multi-scale systems that the paper is going to address eventually.

and the field of research, but also there's some philosophical work from areas other than the inactive cognitive area.

All right.

So the next topic is going to be about partitioning between internal and external cognition, which is another way of saying what is the internalism versus externalism debate about?

How are we going to move beyond that?

How might the free energy principle be involved in that?

And in a sense, the question that this is asking is, how do we do causal modeling of situations where internal and external states interact, for example, through sense and action?

So let's think about how sense and action are interacting even at one level of analysis, what the ant perceives, for example, in its actions, what you perceive in its actions.

And then immediately, one of the questions that many people have asked is, okay, so how do we make that story multi-level?

Because the ant, we could simulate it as just a robot with inputs and outputs and sort of black box inside, but it is also composed of the tissues and the cells.

And it seems a little bit ridiculous if we would have to simulate from the cell up to the ecosystem level.

So we have to be able to separate that model somewhere, even if only for computational tractability or comprehensibility.

So we got to make this trade-off between making causal models of systems that are at one level of analysis,

But including things that are at a smaller level of analysis that can have consequences that bubble up.

For example, a drug binding to a receptor can bubble up to behavior.

That's like a story about upward causation.

Or someone's choice or someone's context could dictate their physiology through any number of mechanisms which food or molecules are available.

So there is going to be times where that cross-level interaction is really important for the stories that we tell, for the narratives, how we understand the world, how we communicate about those things.

So how does the multi-level perspective relate to causal modeling?

If your story is about two people who are fighting, is the story only going to be at that level?

Or are you going to bring in society?

Are you going to bring in the molecular stuff?

How much upper and lower context do you provide for causal modeling at a given level of analysis?

How is causal modeling related to the possible actions of a system, also known as the adjacent possible?

For example, what else could be?

And this just kind of reminds me of how when someone describes a near miss or a situation that could have been another way, they're not saying it could have been any, any other way.

This thought experiment has been carried out by Gould and others in the sense that, yeah, something happened a certain way, which means it was permitted by reality.

And then you're envisioning a slightly different scenario.

For example, the ball hits the other side of the roof and it ends up rolling down a different direction, doing some other outcome.

and the ball still has the same physics and you're still the same person so it's not any alternate reality it's a very tightly constrained causal reality and what kinds of alternate realities do people propose or speculate about ones that are within the causal latent model of the world where

All stories where you cross the freeway are dangerous, for example.

So that's the causal model that underlies what we generally are talking about when we're talking about what could happen.

We're not saying anything could happen.

We're saying a pretty tight model given about how we think about cause and effect in the system.

Why is causal modeling so important to active inference?

and there's two roads into this i would say one perspective is why is causal modeling important from the point of view of the organism and another would be of the scientist or the observer so first from the point of the organism there's a lot of ways to frame exactly what it is an animal does and a really common area that people study this without the psycho

baggage is in animal foraging.

So whether it's a rodent or an ant, people or a bird, people are really interested in the bioenergetics and the decision-making that underlies how the animal goes about searching for food.

and how does that depend on the dynamics of the ecosystem and so one popular framework in studying foraging is optimal foraging theory which you can just by the name of it imagine is kind of like optimal investing strategy

And there's a lot of variations on it, but it's just saying what the ant is trying to do or what the bird is trying to do is given the costs and the benefits or as estimated by the bird, the predicted costs and benefits of the environment and the processing time, it's going to do this reward maximization.

and the good news about that approach is it often works a lot of times animals are near their predicted efficiency however other times it can be quite far off and it's not exactly apparent why that might be perhaps some constraint exists that was not modeled

And so the reward maximization idea often succeeds or it captures a story or an important variable about a foraging system, as you might expect, but it doesn't really go the full way in explaining how the model is embodied or carried out by the animal.

because it doesn't necessarily have the kind of computational processing that a human simulation might.

Not to compare the brain or the niche to a computer, but just to say that that, even as a physical computer imagined, is still something that's quite different than the models that are being used to study the error divergence by which ultimately people are going to be asking whether the strategy was optimal in terms of its reward or not.

What active inference does is it says, right, the overall reward model is intractable.

It contains variables that are inaccessible or just not realistic for the nematode to be calculating, for example, in any way directly.

But what the animal can be doing is

engaging in this cycle between action and perception and so it is making these sensory hypotheses about the world embodied through action so for example the eyes are circadian around very rapidly where are they moving they're moving to where your brain predicts that you need to resolve your uncertainty about your visual field most so that's why even though your actual visual resolution on your retina

or the density of the cells, the ability to perceive the fine granularity of vision is quite different across the back of your eye.

Yet the whole visual field, unless you have some sort of visual alteration, is uniformly clear and doesn't have a blind spot.

So that's evidence that at least visually we're in a generative model of what's happening.

And it shouldn't be too far away to say that that's what other animals are also having, at least visually.

with a total secondary question of whether it's experiential or not, but just visually.

So active inference is a process theory that we can go into more another time that has to do with how organisms actually act in their ecological niche to resolve their uncertainty about the kinds of problems they actually need to resolve.

Therefore, framing things like foraging as a reward obtaining, but a precision maximization behavior sequence.

And that framing turns out to have big implications.

So just wanted to frame it that way.

As far as the scientist's active inference, the scientist also, from an informational perspective, has to think about which hypotheses they're experimenting or modeling with to reduce their uncertainty about what.

just as in active inference where the generative model of the internal state the organism in this example the scientist the internal model includes a generative model of the latent causes in the world and understanding the latent causes better is what facilitates better action and also better experiments and hopefully clearer transmission as well

How does the Markov blanket idea come into play?

What pierces the blanket?

So here, any figure that you look at of the Markov blanket is going to have basically the active inference cycle with a Markov blanket superimposed down the middle.

There's internal and external states, and then external states influence sensory states.

Sensory states influence internal states.

Internal states have their own autonomous or self-influencing dynamics, and through policy selection, end up implementing action states, for example, the movement of an arm.

Action states influence the external states, the world states, for example, which are also, of course, involved in their own dynamics.

The Markov blanket is pierced on one side by sense coming in and by action on the other side going out.

And then the whole multi-scale question is going to be about applying that Markov blanket all the way down idea, taking that seriously as far as cognition.

One other area that I thought could be kind of interesting to relate this to would be like other partitioning problems.

And another partitioning problem that comes up in biological philosophy realms is this question of nature versus nurture.

And here I would point people towards two pretty recent and excellent books on the left is beyond versus the struggle to understand the interaction of nature and nurture.

by James Tabury, and then on the right, The Mirage of a Space Between Nature and Nurture by Evelyn Fox Keller.

And they both have a different perspective on the same question, but in both cases, there's this idea of moving beyond the binary partitioning of nature and nurture.

And so here in the Ramstead 2019 paper,

the framing of internalism and externalism, where they're sort of entering into this stack, is at the level of cognition.

It's about cognitive entities.

Whereas here's the partitioning problem in the area of genetics and in environmental and developmental studies, for example,

And here's an example of where similar internalism, internal is the genes, right, smaller things, or externalism, outside bigger things, the ecosystem is seen as bigger than the person with this implicit focused level of analysis on the individual.

And so just to draw on Evelyn Fox Keller's book,

She uses a metaphor of different kinds of tasks and how even if you just had two people, so the same type of agent, if you had two people building a brick wall together, you could at the end of the day say, well, this person added so and so many bricks and this person added the rest of the bricks.

And so maybe you could say, well, 40% of the work on this wall was performed by that person.

However,

Imagine a situation where two people are needed to hold a hose to fill up a bucket, for example.

Even if one of the roles requires a specialty or more training or some other attribute, even in that case, that person can't do it alone.

So no matter how much water comes through that hose, and it's all water coming through the hose,

you're never going to be able to say, well, 80% of the water was due to person A and 20% was due to person B. So she uses that really clear metaphor to describe the relationship between nature and nurture, how they're obviously related.

There is no such thing as a niche-free organism, especially when you think about this from an evolutionary ecology or ultimately active inference perspective,

Organisms and their niche are what fitness is about.

That is what is being fit to what is the organism to their niche.

And you don't see things that aren't fit.

So it's unsurprising that we're finally attuned to things in our niche.

Also, there was one interesting section in Mirage of a Space Between where she traces the linguistic origins of the framing nature versus nurture, because everyone has heard the phrase nature versus nurture.

Is it nature or is it nurture?

Or it's in our DNA, it's in our nature.

How did things come to be in this versus sense?

That's also alluded to in the title of Taveri's book.

And what Fox Keller writes is,

Recently, a fashion has arisen for tracing the phrase nature and nurture and the debate with which that phrase is associated back to Shakespeare, or at least to Prospero in The Tempest, 1623, who writes off Caliban as uneducable, quoting Shakespeare, a born devil on whose nature slash nurture will never stick.

Back to Fox Keller.

Some have traced it further back to a monograph on children's education written by an Elizabethan pedagogue, Richard Mulcaster.

Mulcaster's words were, nature makes boy towered, nurture sees him forward.

Maybe it rhymes.

in another pronunciation it's from 1581 and then she concludes but in fact although both molcaster and shakespeare juxtapose the workings of nature and nurture neither invokes the term as an explicit conjunction so not an or they do not write of nature and nurture as such so they don't separate them and they don't um make them

contradistincted versus each other.

Indeed, when we look more closely at what they do write, we can see that their use of the two terms does not invite such a conjunction, for there is no presumption of an a priori disjunction.

So what she's getting at there is there really is no need to do an argument against the concept of nature and nurture.

It's kind of like writing a hit article on somebody who you disagree with.

People who understand that there has to be a move beyond versus, beyond an oppositional framing of nature and nurture.

those people should be and are making their positive arguments for why it should be framed a different way where the nature and the nurture are things that are pulled out or controlled for specifically and transparently in specific systems.

So that's an example about how the philosophy of science, for example, how we think about the partition between internal and external states of phenotype, relates to how we think about multi-scale systems overall.

Because I think, okay, it reminds me so much of this internalism and externalism in cognitive sciences debate, reminds me a lot of this historical debate in genetics.

All right.

Next section, perspectives on systems modeling and action.

And here, the motivating question is about how do we carve nature at the joints, which is a quote attributed to Plato and the Phaedrus, allegedly.

And the quote alludes to this idea that nature, whether one thinks that systems can be defined tightly and they're just on their own billiard ball trajectory, or whether one has a relational perspective where there's just these

multi-level networks of relations and being and becoming whatever it is at some point we want to carve it at the joints because otherwise we're going to get swept up in the storm and people will often hold that that's not their position or that they don't want to carve systems at the joints but i think

If you're listening to this, I hope you can see that at some point, at least in action, you have to be dealing with nature at the joints, so to speak.

Are they the right ones or not?

Isn't that the whole question?

So one thing that is a connection is

We can ask, how is the FEP, the free energy principle, or active inference going to help us frame this problem of carving nature at the joints?

This is kind of one of the big ideas from a philosophical perspective.

It's about classification and about distinguishing things, whether it's objects or types of processes or ideas.

distinguishing things, and those are part of nature, is part of philosophy.

And so coming back to this essential question of carving nature at the joint and then asking, well, how can we use things like FEP, active inference, to frame the problem structurally to give us an ontology?

And in fact, in the paper, they'll talk about an ontology and subsequent work also worked on ontologies.

So that's sort of the big motivation.

It's why this quote is being brought up in the context of this paper we're about to discuss, because the whole point is about us carving nature at the joints.

So let's go a little bit deeper into systems modeling and carving nature at the joints.

And the question is, how are descriptive, we'll just call that type one, and action-oriented, type two, models related or different?

And so just to explain what those one and two are.

By descriptive model, I mean a system description only.

And so two examples, just to sort of pin down the qualitative to quantitative spectrum.

The first mentioned here is to Bruno Latour's Actor Network Theory, or ANT, and it's an awesome piece of

maybe meta sociology, not sure exactly what Latour would call it, that just says the way to approach the system is by showing up, finding out what are the traces, and being open with respect to which actors are involved in which processes through which networks of influence.

So it's a very unbiased description or moving towards unbiased, not to step into that sort of trap, I guess.

And then it's very qualitative.

It's relational.

It's also about the observer's knowing and relationship with the system, not just the way that aspects of the system are associated with each other.

So often those things are left out in quantitative or in some scientific worldviews.

And on the other end of the systems description only spectrum, I've pointed to a package of complex systems design tools called CADCAD.

Now, CADCAD goes beyond systems description.

It turns out to also be able to do things like simulation and other more dynamical

approaches like signal processing.

But what I mean by putting CAD-CAD here is that it can be used purely depictively to specify a complex system, especially one that's computational.

So there might be a question when you're actually trying to model a organic ecosystem of how do you measure every single piece of the ecosystem and how many variables is enough to describe the fineness of the temperature gradient or something like that.

But when the simulation is about a digital system, it can be more deterministically and controllably simulated, if one can imagine.

So there's one type of world modeling related to system description, but that obviously enables simulation and inference as well.

The second kind of models are action-oriented models.

So action-oriented models are those where ultimately we're assigning meaning to states, voting with your feet, voting with your dollars.

It's when we want to have effective action, or at least the system acts like it wants to, something like maybe what Dennett would call the intentional stance.

So the descriptive modeling might be a question that you're asking the computer, like, given this scatter of points, which axes capture the most statistical variance?

And that would be just it running some sort of algorithm to find the maximum variance explained.

Whereas another type of algorithm, like more of a type two action oriented algorithm, might be learn the relationship between this input and the optimal performing behavior in the output.

So that's what action oriented

models are about.

Next question.

How does the multi-level perspective influence our answers above?

So if we're going to have a story where there's nature's being carved at its joints, maybe around the Markov blankets, maybe with sense coming in and action coming out, even if we have that at one level.

So we have an agent-based model of the ants that are bumping into each other.

And at one level, the sense of one is the action of another.

And so we have a sort of bumper car model.

Where does the multilevel perspective come into play?

And that's kind of thinking about the bumper car one.

It's where you would model first the cars bumping into each other and then you could go into the engine or you could go out to the power grid and to the people who are riding on the bumper cars or something like that.

So how are we going to deal with the complexity of causal stories, relationships, some of which might be really important?

like the example of a molecule that binds to a receptor, others which might be spurious.

And the reality is that because of the combinatorics, most of the options across levels will be spurious.

So most of the ecological relationships can't be, for example, one-to-one because there's so many that are just bumping into each other all the time.

Just to give one example from ecology.

So how are we going to carve nature at its joints?

Do it cleanly?

Are we trying to represent stuff like one?

Are we trying to act like two?

Do one and two fall out as a function of doing one?

Do we get one and two as a function of falling out just two?

How does emergence and emergent properties fit into all of this?

So by emergence or emergent properties, people often mean a sort of system outcome where there's some property or a characteristic or attribute that is arising at a higher level, again, bigger,

broader spatial and temporal scales based upon interactions or some sort of interfacing of the smaller level.

So sometimes these emergent properties, using the classification here of Bedal, are in the weak category and in the strong category.

It's not the only way to break down emergence, not the only take here, but I find this one pretty helpful.

First, strong emergence, Badao equates with basically magic.

You can read the papers more if you want to explore more nuance, but the strong emergence is from something that's totally disjoint to something that has a total integrity like language or awareness, for example.

And then weak emergence is contrasted.

And that's most of the physical systems where even if the relationships between subunits are really nuanced or the computational capacity required to simulate, the system would be extreme.

those systems are still weakly emergent in that it still just is ants bumping into each other.

Now they're developing and that's sort of crazy and evolution shapes that and everything, but still we're talking about a physical system, not in the genre, for example, of awareness arising spontaneously.

So how is that going to play into the discussion with active inference showing up on the scene?

Where will this relate to emergence?

These are things anyone's welcome to chime in on.

Also, we can tie the idea of emergence and the multi-scale systems approach to this debate that we often hear about reductionism versus holism.

So reductionism is simply a method of explanation where bigger things are made sensitive by appeals to the properties of their smaller things.

The bigger wall is orange because each of the smaller pixels is orange or something like that.

There's a variety of reductionist explanations, and it's just one of our hands.

It's one of our approaches or our wings.

Holism is kind of flipping that

schema of reductionism saying actually smaller things are made sense of in terms of the bigger thing.

And that is kind of the opposite edge viewpoint.

And so we have some sliding toward a holistic understanding, some sliding towards a reductionist understanding, a lot of philosophical work in this area and the

thing that we would just want to note here would just be first ask continually, how is the free energy principle or active inference relating to reductionism versus holism?

Because sometimes it may feel like there is a sort of a philosophy of science shift

associated with taking on the active inference framework.

And so what are the implications of taking that seriously?

Where does that put this reductionism versus holism?

Is it going to be put into a similar bin as nature versus nurture, as kind of a turn of phrase or a false dichotomy that was just eventually seen through?

Or will there be people who still think that that sort of binary phrasing, whichever side they find themselves on,

is going to be appropriate.

And again, this is where Dennis Noble's work on the bottom up and top down is related.

The other work here is Gödel Escher Bach, which is the 1979 book by Douglas Hofstetter.

And here's one of the figures from the book where it says Mu, Mu, I don't know how you'd say it, which is a, allegorically at least, a sort of

innovative response or a canonical response depending on who you ask of a Zen koan and Zen is a topic that's brought up in the book and the M is written of letters that are containing smaller letters that say reductionism and then the U is made up of letters that spell out the other words so it's kind of this multi-scale thought loop really

captures the spirit of the book well, and also captures, at least informally, through art, as often is the case, what it looks like to go beyond the reductionism versus holism debate.

So first, if only in a text illustration, but then eventually, how does that relate to a computer screen?

How about a person interacting with a computer screen?

How about two people interacting with their computer screens?

All right, a few more perspectives on systems modeling and action.

How is world modeling related to pragmatics and action?

So the questions to ask here is really, is there a best map of the territory?

Short answer, no.

And this is true for geospatial maps, as well as fields of affordances, which we talked about in the previous ACT-M streams, which also often demand to be mapped.

For example, skill set mappings or concept mappings.

So there's a lot to say about map and territory, of course, but for here, it suffices to say that the best map is defined by the mission, by the context, by the degree of certainty, by all these other features and factors related to the user and the situation.

So we're talking about making maps of meaning, maps for the world.

We're talking about doing world modeling for effective inference and action, as we were talking about previously.

so here's just one quote from the paper to motivate you towards the things that you might be able to hear them expand more on they write the multi-scale free energy principle model allows us to cast the boundaries of cognition as assembled and maintained in an informational dynamics across multiple spatial and temporal scales

Crucially, we shall show that this multi-scale application of the FEP implies both ontological and methodological pluralism.

So if you thought questions whether this is before or after reading the paper, you could ask, is the free energy principle pluralistic with respect to non-free energy principle theories or frameworks or principles?

which levels or types of theory is the FEP consistent or discordant with?

And one starting point there would be searching for Carl Fristen's interview in the 2018 Alias Bulletin.

And it's an interesting question to ask about any theory is, okay, well, who is this

changing the mind of or what is the opposite of this theory and is it true or does anyone hold the true opposite of this theory does anyone hold a 50 opposite is it 50 by outcome or is it 50 by axiom in that they diverge so you can always ask that and i found that that was a very um interesting route to go down as far as the fep

Another quote from the paper is just because it's such a direct claim.

Our claim is that

which among these, which are the situated barriers of cognitive systems, which among these are the most relevant will depend on the phenomena being studied and the explanatory interests of researchers.

And so there's a few notions like Markov blanket, which we talked about earlier, is that sense and action piercing that's related to ecological psychological concepts as well.

The

Markov blankets are defined in a few different ways.

They're defined by statistical co-variations, but one type of those is going to be causal.

And also another type of those could be like a measurement.

And so the kinds of measurements that we make, the types of causal relationships that are important, and then which models we apply to them is going to depend on what is enacted by the researchers, because they're also part of embodied and encultured cognition.

Briefly, what are methodological and ontological pluralism?

Methodological pluralism means using a variety of methods or ways of doing.

Ontological pluralism means having a variety of ontologies or ways of knowing.

And pluralism is referring to there being multiple.

Now, there are other schools of thought that are sort of higher order than pluralism as to how do you cut through that?

Is it just theory anarchy like Farabend suggested where the pluralism can just be taken to this extreme equivalent to almost a novelty search in theory space?

Or is there going to be some way to cut through that and determine which of the pluralistic options or possibilities or actualities is preferable?

Because ultimately we do have to act.

That's that type two type of model.

So ask yourself for direct action or for more philosophical topics, what is utilitarianism or pragmatism?

How do such ideas relate to pluralism?

So it's one thing to say we're scientists and whichever level of analysis is most relevant, well, that's going to depend on what we're studying and what we're interested in explaining.

But should it?

Is that really the best way to approach these systems?

Should we really, knowing that we can never remove, for example, individual bias, but still wanting to model systems so that we can act effectively, how are we going to balance just this sort of ruthless utilitarianism, pragmatism, whatever ends justify the means, whatever preconceived worldview, whatever your Bayesian prior is, just stick with that no matter what happens.

How is that related to cutting through the noise of pluralism?

These are again just questions to raise.

In active inference, how are ideas related to action and what kind of ideas or mental states are there?

There's a few kind of interesting categories that we perceive at least experientially.

various schools of thought on that, but where are we going to fit these into the active inference framework?

Are those just different loops in our generative model, things like emotion or desires or dreams or secrets?

Where are those going to fit into this active inference framework?

How integrated is that going to be across types of ideas?

And how are our conserved or novel ideas

respectively meaning orthodoxy or heterodoxy, associated with the expression of conserved or novel actions.

So that is orthopractice or heteropractice.

And linking that to active inference, which is kind of just framing this two-stroke engine or this continual OODA loop, a lot of ways to think about it.

It's just framing this continual flow between action and inference.

So how are those two linked?

Here's another way of asking it.

And just to conclude with two books to study how this has been studied from a philosophy of science perspective.

On the right is Scientific Pluralism, edited by Keller, Longino and Waters.

And then on the left is a book called Studying Human Behavior, How Scientists Investigate Aggression and Sexuality by Helen Longino.

And these books talk about the question of pluralism in science and different ways that people have sort of cut through the massive theories or not or contributed to it, I guess, in some cases.

And there's just a really interesting body of thought.

And so it's useful to think for people who are in the free energy space as well as from the outside, what are the bridges that link

what's happening with the free energy principle and active inference to more classical philosophy of science questions.

And so hopefully in the Fierstein-Alias paper from 2018 and also some other excellent work from the last few years, we'll come to a better understanding of that.

Thanks for participating, which I guess was me and you as the listener.

We will provide a follow-up form to live participants, and we would welcome any feedback, suggestions, questions you have.

And yeah, stay in communication with us.

So thanks again for listening, and we hope to either see you at 5.1 or at a future discussion.

## B6Uqf_T-nec

SPEAKER_09:
Hello and welcome, everyone.

This is the Active Inference live stream.

It is September 29th, 2020, and this is our episode 5.1.

Welcome to Team Calm, whether you are a first-time listener participant or whether this is not your first time.

We are an experiment in online team communication and learning related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter at Inference Active.

You can find us on email at ActiveInference at gmail.com, through our public Keybase team, or through our YouTube channel.

This is a recorded and archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

We really want to hear about everyone's individual experience.

And also, as far as video etiquette goes, please mute if it's noisy in your background.

And remember to raise your hand.

It's awesome that we have so many participants today.

And so to hear from everybody, let's just make sure to raise hand and all keep a queue of people who have raised their hand.

So today in ACT-INF Stream 5.1, the roadmap for our discussion over the next hour and a half will be as follows.

First, we'll have a warmup section where we give a quick intro and check-in, then we'll be discussing the paper.

We'll talk about the goal of the paper, we'll talk about the roadmap or the section headers, go through the abstract, and then go through all the figures.

We'll also be able to touch on some background concepts if we have time and address some excellent questions submitted by Sasha and other participants.

And next week on 5.2, we're going to have further discussion on this same paper.

So please remember to save and submit any questions that you might have that don't get addressed in this first discussion.

Awesome.

So here we go into the introduction section.

Please introduce yourself and your location and just say hello to everyone in a short introduction and then pass to somebody who you haven't heard introduce themselves yet.

So I'm Daniel Friedman.

I'm in Davis, California, and I would like to pass it first to Alejandra.


SPEAKER_02:
you're muted yeah well hello everybody um well i'm in mexico uh specifically in cuernavaca and this is state where i'm living now um but well

in my professional background.

I'm a full-time associate professor in Cognitive and Behavioral Sciences at the School of Psychology at the UNAM.

And also, I'm an active member of the Cognitive Robotics Lab at the UAM Mexico also.

And well, my research focuses on perceptual optimization processes, such as sensory attenuation and sensory enhancement.

Also the computational modeling of perception, cognition.

And I'm hooked with the predictive processing, active inference, predictive coding, and the energy principles since long time ago.

It's like my passion.

And I'm giving a full time some of my days reading and trying to understand

this particular free energy principle.

So, yeah, that's me.


SPEAKER_09:
Let's pass to Alex.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everybody.

My name is Alex.

I'm from Moscow, Russia.

I'm a researcher in system management school and trying to find a way

how to join concepts from system engineering and active inference frameworks.

So let's say for Sasha.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, thank you.

My name is Sasha.

I'm a neuroscience graduate student at Davis.

And my background in free energy principle is just

reading and enthusiasm for figuring out how to apply this to my own work with developmental neuroscience.

And just looking forward to the conversation.

I'm going to pass it to Mel.


SPEAKER_04:
Hello?


SPEAKER_09:
Yep.


SPEAKER_04:
Can you hear me?

Awesome.

Perfect.

Hi, I'm Mel Andrews.

I'm in Cincinnati, Ohio right now.

I have a background in cognitive science and have always been fascinated by issues in theoretical biology and switched to philosophy for my PhD to really focus on sort of what are called life-mind continuity theories.

And in particular, I'm focusing on the free energy principle as a formal articulation of a life-mind continuity theory.

Oh, I'm going to pass this on to

Richard.


SPEAKER_12:
Thanks.

So my name is Richard Niemeyer.

I'm an assistant professor of sociology in Denver, Colorado, in the United States.

My interest is mainly in understanding how we can integrate neuroscience, cognitive psychology, and sociology into a more integrated framework.

Most of sociological and criminological theory is drawing on a lot of behaviorism from the 70s and 80s.

It's kind of its theory of mind and how the mind society

relates to one another.

So I'm trying to figure out more up-to-date ways to integrate mind, body, and society.

Most of the mathematics that I'm familiar with in terms of how to do that is a lot of fractal geometry, graph theory, dynamic systems theory, which is really fascinating.

But I've been really interested in the free energy principle.

It seems to do a much more intuitive

fluid, dynamic way of integrating different levels of analysis and integrating specifically cognitive emotion, action, things like that, which are really critical when you get into that social level of reality.

So I would

tried my best to work my way through a lot of papers by myself, and it's been a struggle.

So to find a community who's kind of doing this together and can kind of listen to other people talk about these ideas is really, really helpful.

So I really appreciate the opportunity to be here.

I'm going to pass it on to Muddy.


SPEAKER_06:
Oh, classic.

It was on mute.

Hi, guys.

My name is Maddy.

So I was a PhD student with Carl Briston, graduating back in 2016, but I also was a medical student on the MD-PhD pathway.

So my interest was in applying free energy principle to study stroke dynamics non-invasively using neuroimaging.

I since left the medical world, I practiced medicine for about a week and then went into the tech world.

I worked for Google DeepMind and started the medical tech company, which was acquired by the company I currently work for now, Versus, where I'm the director of AI.

And we're really interested in spatial web technologies, spatial web protocols and building provenance AIs that are not only explainable, but action-based and adaptable.

So that's kind of my background.

And I will pass it on to Professor Klippinger, who is quietly sat there.


SPEAKER_07:
Thank you.

Hi, everybody.

My name is John Klippinger.

I am now in northern New Hampshire, Jefferson, New Hampshire, but I actually am generally out of Cambridge, Mass.,

and with the MIT Media Lab, the City Science Group, and I've been at MIT, the Human Dynamics Group, for a number of years.

My interest, actually, I'm a full convert, recent convert to Friston, the Friston cult, as it were, but I continue to be amazed by, continue reading the papers that are coming out, the productivity of this,

and working with Maxwell and Casper about how to apply this to modeling new concept of firm, new concept of market, new concept of community.

So we have some projects that we're focusing on that and actually collaborating with Muddy on that as well.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Let's go to Shannon.


SPEAKER_13:
Hi.

I'm Shannon Prooks.

I'm in South Dakota currently, but I'm usually based at the University of California

in Merced.

And I'm in a sensory motor neuroscience lab.

I investigate the neural dynamics of music cognition and specifically how we process rhythm.

And I'm interested in how predictive processing approaches can help us understand how we perceive rhythm in music.

I'm also interested in how groups of people interact when they're experiencing music, when they're playing it or listening to it.

and in larger dynamics of crowds.

I'm excited for today's discussion specifically for how a crowd could have a different markup blanket based on its interactions throughout maybe a musical performance or a sporting event.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool, I think we have Maxwell.

Muted Maxwell.


SPEAKER_10:
Sorry about that.

Hey, I'm Maxwell Ramstad.

I'm a postdoctoral fellow at McGill University, and I'm one of the main architects of the multiscale active inference formulation that we'll be discussing today, and the first author on this paper, Multiscale Integration Beyond Externalism, and Beyond Internalism and Externalism.

And I will pass it off to Alex Kiefer.


SPEAKER_11:
Hi, everyone.

I'm Alex.

As Maxwell just said, I'm coming from a philosophy and cognitive science background.

I got my PhD at the CUNY Graduate Center.

I'm currently at Monash University in Melbourne, but not actually there because of the pandemic.

So I'm in the New York City area.

And I'm interested in

I'm coming from sort of a traditional philosophy of mind perspective.

I increasingly got into like connectionism, machine learning, modeling, and eventually the FEP.

And I'm interested in how this stuff ties into fairly traditional representationalism on the one hand and sort of physics on the other and how these come together.

So that's my angle on this.

And I'm really excited to talk about this paper.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

I think Steven, and then if Daniela jumps back in, we'll go to her, but Steven, I think you're the last one here.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Hi, I'm Steven.

I'm in Toronto and I do community development projects using theater and immersive participatory approaches.

ended up developing a process called socio-drama topography in South Africa in 2006 and trying to scale that process in different ways has looked at how embodied cognition fits into this kind of

process of engaging communities to make embodied maps together around issues and that's kind of translated over time into other sort of immersive practices and I was looking at embodied cognition over a few years and I kept finally seeing this

work with Carl Friston, I thought oh my goodness I've already gone so far down all these avenues and I've seen this other thing and then suddenly I found a page which spoke to how many citations he had and I thought wait a sec and I suddenly saw that his work was actually bringing all these different threads together into this unified framework, so yeah I'm really excited by that.


SPEAKER_09:
Awesome.

Well, thanks so much everyone for coming out to participate.

It's really a spread of countries and levels of experience and fields of expertise.

So it's about bringing it all together and coming together around these topics.

So just as a warm up and to hear from everyone who would like to speak by raising their hand, let's just start with asking what drew you to this paper or topic today?

So I'll start, and while other people are raising their hand, and I described this a little bit in the 5.0 video, but I think the idea of integrating multi-scale systems is really interesting, and there's so many ways to go about it, and it's almost undeniable that we're living in multi-scale systems, but the question is, what now?

And so I'm always interested to hear about systems for thinking about what now, and also for different people's perspective.

Great, Muddy, and anyone else can raise their hand.

muted though with a video off.

It's the fine line between muting the background noise and being ready.

So I understand.

But go ahead, Muddy.


SPEAKER_06:
My apologies.

Yeah, I think nested systems are an incredibly important way to view real dynamical systems that we see all the time in the spatial web.

So we constantly have streams of data coming from IoT.

And then we're kind of met with the scalability challenge of how do we actually model a system

accurately to represent the dynamics that we wish without getting bogged down in this sort of field of complexity.

So by abstracting away these layers into really, really meaningful nested heterarchies is really, really key in being able to practically deploy some of these novel learning paradigms in real world spaces.

So I think without this sort of quote unquote dimensionality reduction, and I mean that in more of a philosophical sense than a mathematical sense,

we're going to struggle to apply AI at scale.

So that's why I'm particularly interested in the work that Maxwell and the Free Energy Principle Group is doing.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Let's hear from Maxwell, then Sasha, and then I also see other people, but just those two next.

Maxwell, also muted.


SPEAKER_10:
Sasha, do you want to go first?

I don't have to go next necessarily.


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

I'll briefly say a bit.

I was drawn to this paper because as a neuroscientist, I think a lot about multi-scale levels and to decide at which level a system should be studied, because even though we're studying something at a molecular level or even in a different species, we ultimately want to make claims about larger cognitive processes and how to do that without abstracting away

really important aspects of the system at the scale that you're studying it, it's a huge question.

So I really like thinking about these Markov blankets at different levels and where to draw the line.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Maxwell, then Richard, then Alex K.


SPEAKER_10:
I think my remarks are going to echo a lot of what's been said.

I got into the free energy principle stuff originally because I was looking for a theory that could address dynamics at and across multiple different – well, the way I used to see it is ontological levels.

In working with the free energy principle, I've come to reject the traditional metaphysics of ontological levels.

in favor of this view that there are big things and there are small things, and big things are made up by small things, and big things tend to be slow, and small things tend to be fast.

And what you actually have is this nested series of systems that are made up of increasingly big things.

And yeah, back when I was starting up my PhD in 2015, there wasn't any theory that I could see that was really able to not only define dynamics at each of these different levels, but propose a way, a mechanism by which they were all integrated.

And this is what I found via the free energy principle.

So I sort of made it my thing from 2016 to now actually to explore the multi-scale implications of this framework.


SPEAKER_09:
Awesome.

Richard, then Alex K.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, I think one thing that I've been really drawn to the last couple of years is the mechanistic philosophical perspective of Carl Craver and Lindsay Darden.

They give you this really nice, I think, tool set on how to talk about decomposing mechanisms, levels of mechanisms, which is very intuitive and I think works well with sociology and biology, which has this very clear conceptual perspective.

way to move up and down quote-unquote levels of reality.

But the thing that's I think always been missing is how do I take that conceptual language and match it with an empirical framework that allows me to model those levels of reality in a way without losing any of the subtleties and any of the conceptual apparatus that is so critical to talking about those different frameworks.

And the more and more I get into the free energy principle, it seems like it can give you that empirical language that has a very nice natural transition into that conceptual language I'm so used to that gives you all of the stuff you're trying to talk about conceptually, but then also gives you these empirical tools that allows you to go above that and talk about the organization of the mechanism in a very nice, precise empirical language that's just impossible to do, I think, with a lot of existing methods in the fields that I'm used to.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Let's do Alex, Kay, and Steven, and then I'm going to go to the second question.


SPEAKER_11:
So I just recently sort of got into this whole multi-scale picture associated with the FVP, and I guess my interest in this is it seems to me like I'm nearly 100% convinced that this is a really good description of reality at multiple scales, but I'm not completely convinced that this...

has the radical kind of philosophical implications that some people think it does.

I mean, this paper actually strikes kind of a nice middle ground, but I guess to put it briefly, like, I view this as we've got nested multiple systems, each of which plausibly has a physical as well as a cognitive description, and maybe the bounds of cognition within that hierarchy are maybe

uh less strict than may have been thought like i'm happy describing cognition or ascribing cognition to systems at at various levels within this hierarchy but but i don't see that it's so hard to pin uh the cognitive properties of one particular system um onto a particular physical system so i'm not i'm not sure anyway i hope that that gets we can get through some of that also i'm not sure which system i am in this hierarchy of embedded systems that

you know my brain involved many systems in itself and that's itself embedded in larger systems so i'm trying to figure out which type of system within that hierarchy an individual person might be identified with cool steven and then we're going to go to the next question to muddy and mel or anyone else who raises their hand


SPEAKER_01:
I'm very interested in how this gives a kind of action orientated MISO level approach which is really useful because when I'm working with say a community trying to understand how to connect to the individual, to the group, to the team, to the organisation or maybe influencing change of the municipality or

broader social levels there's this real problem with bridging scale and it ends up getting caught up in all this language in the whichever field has been you know the psychological perspective or this perspective or that perspective so

This gives a kind of seems like a fairly neutral, clean way of understanding how people make sense of different levels.

And that's really valuable.

I think that's been missing from community psychology is really actually psychology itself suffering from that because it's kind of stuck in this.

level of perspective or interpretation.

So this gives a way to actually go into the sub-personal.

So for me, getting into all of this has actually opened up all this sub-personal neuroscience side, which I actually haven't really got into before.

So it's kind of interesting.


SPEAKER_09:
Nice.

Thanks for all these responses.

Mel also raised her hand.

Yes.

So next on the stack is Muddy and then Mel.

And feel free to answer either the first question or the second question about what a multi-scale system you work with is.

So Muddy first.


SPEAKER_06:
Great.

So they actually kind of fold into each other.

So one of the things that I wanted to mention was the practical challenges of implementing inference in an industry, which we kind of do it in a black box way.

I think it was Sasha who mentioned that, or Alex who mentioned he had an interest in this as well.

And what we find is that the practical correlates in terms of hardware and chip design that we need to deploy this stuff in reality is difficult based on the data sets that we collect.

So one of the systems that we're currently modeling right now is warehouse pick and pack working for Amazon.

and understanding that the systems that drive why people pick certain boxes from certain shelves, for example, is a multi-nested system of everything from how valuable an item is to how tired the pick and pack worker is, even down to the function of how tall they are versus how high on the shelf the particular item on the waiting list is.

So understanding how to pick that apart and deliver value essentially in industry eventually.

So yes, we have this wonderful way of viewing the world, but we also have a practical set of tools which are a wonderful way of modeling the world as well.

And so having this nested system, I think, is really, really important in terms of biting into the problem of practical deployment of these types of models at scale in order to deliver value.

Now, I don't just mean business value.

I mean, you know, inside value as well.

Those are just a couple of comments that I wanted to introduce into the discussion as well.

Thanks for that.


SPEAKER_09:
Mel, and then anyone else can raise their hand.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi.

I was drawn to this topic because I've been trying to convince Maxwell for a long time that the FUP is just...

that basically we should be taking as instrumental as an approach to this as we possibly can.

This is like the bare bones, it's just a model, it doesn't constitute knowledge of the world, it doesn't constitute falsifiable claims, it doesn't constitute et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, it's just a model.

And we just, we use it to get at things in the world and that's it.

And this paper is interesting to me because in it, Maxwell is the one pushing the instrumentalist line that I don't want to bite.

Namely, that there's nothing more to the boundaries of systems than is it useful to model it that way, right?

Can it be usefully modeled as the batteries here?

For me, I'm very...

I'm very willing to privilege the organism as a privileged scale or level or unit of analysis.

And I'm very willing to privilege the brain as well.

So in that order.


SPEAKER_09:
Interesting fighting words, Mel.

Shannon, and then anyone else can raise their hand too.


SPEAKER_13:
I feel partial to those last words from Mel on privileging the organism

or the brain, but that could be just because I study the brain.

I want to know the neural mechanisms that are giving us any of our perceptions or engagement with the world.

But I think I was drawn to this topic because I was drawn through predictive processing literature and like Andy Clark's work and then eventually

on here to the free energy principle.

But a lot of what was written and like is now has these great mathematical models that we've touched on before, like an ability to translate maybe some sort of phenomenological experience into a formal model.

It meshed really well with my studies in music and what like teachers of music will instill upon you in that you are

basically through your musical experience, you're modeling something about the human experience.

So you're choreographing aspects of tension and release, which sounds a little bit like balancing predictions and prediction errors.

And you're trying to maintain a certain boundary within a musical piece of the emotion that you are experiencing or that you want your audience to experience.

And this sounds a lot like

a boundary on a certain phenotype of experience.

And just sort of this like superficial matching of the language of musical expression and then this empirical, like statistical language is sort of what drew me in.

And I suppose that answers the multi-scale system I work with.

It's music and musicians and people.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool, very interesting.

We'll go to Richard and then the third question.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, kind of building a little bit on Mel's point in terms of the multi-scale system.

So obviously as a sociologist, I deal with groups, I deal with society.

And I can take an individual and I can take two individuals.

Now I have a dyad, I have another one, I have a triad.

I can model that as a network.

I can collapse the network down and model it as a dynamical system.

And now I can talk about organizations.

I can have multiple dynamical systems, talk about them interacting.

Now I have a network of coupled oscillators.

I can go in, I can use fractal geometry to talk about how properties are scaling up and down from the dyad, the triad, all the way up to that network of coupled oscillators.

And at the end of the day, I'm never really confused about whether or not I'm really talking about networks or am I really talking about dynamical systems.

They're all just models that allow me to capture the phenomenon that I do believe is real.

I do believe society exists.

If you ever want to get into a very strange conversation, go to a conference of sociologists arguing about whether or not the United States is real.

And my comeback is always, don't pay your taxes on April 15th, and you'll figure out very quickly if the United States is real or not.

And so I think, you know, a lot of these philosophical questions are always fascinating, especially at three o'clock in the morning in a pub when you've had too many to drink.

But I think ultimately at the end of the day, you know, there is a concrete reality.

The question is what empirical model just allows you to model it as true to the theory or the concepts that you're that you're dealing with.

without losing information unnecessarily.

So I think, again, I think any empirical model that allows me to do that is fascinating.

But at the end of the day, I do believe the humans that I'm ultimately talking about are concrete and are real.


SPEAKER_09:
Nice.

I'm going to introduce the third question.

We'll go to Buddy first here, and anyone else can raise their hand.

The third question is, why does our philosophy of systems matter?


SPEAKER_06:
That is quite bizarrely scary and psychic, because that's what the point I was going to make, just to piggyback on Richard's comments just there, which is, I remember these discussions, these really, really lively discussions about how representative is this model of reality, and

I remember at some point just thinking, well, how useful is this a question to ask?

At some point, is the model just a tool, a means to an end?

And do we employ bounds on what we expect from these models in terms of their utility?

And if these models and their outputs satisfy these bounds, great.

Sometimes I see some of the discourse around free energy principles and what it means philosophically.

and we lose what it gives us in terms of explainability and actual measurable dynamics.

I actually fall probably very far on the side of I don't think our philosophy of systems matter at all.

I think our explainability of empirically measured data is by far the most important thing.

And trying to explain systems where our data sets are incredibly sparse, so for example, the entire hierarchical organization of the brain from cell to effective connectivity, I think is


SPEAKER_01:
sometimes missing the point of just how valuable these novel schemes can be so that that's kind of what i wanted to touch on that nice stephen and then anyone else before we close out this question yeah i think that that empirical piece is and practicality or practice application is really a good point one thing that has caught me out though and i've realized is

is that perspectivism is very much part of systems generally and it's also part of psychology like we take a perspective on stuff and there's this assumption that everything well what's your perspective that word just gets used all the time and it's like but the thing is that

the free energy principle gives you a way and then they say okay and now we're going to do stuff that's performative or arts based and it's a bit like we don't know what to do with that so we just call it another field right and then they do that but the active inference gives you realize well there's a way that you can abductively or from within

be creating meaning during experience, and it's I suppose a bit like that person picking stuff from the shelves, and they're not sitting there as they do it having a perspective.

They may take a perspective if you give them a qualitative survey later, which is what nearly all social science does.

So you take a perspective, a first-person perspective on your experience, but the experience wasn't first-person perspective.

The experience was just the experience.

So this gives a way for that to all be kind of unified in some way.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Let's go to Alex and then Richard, then close out this check-in.


SPEAKER_11:
Just really briefly, I mean, I think it matters, philosophy of systems matters because I think the philosophy, well, I guess I'm sort of a wholist in a way, at least in terms of explanation.

So I think it matters because the philosophy of every little bit matters because it connects to everything else.

But also this is sort of a question that can be applied at multiple scales.

So it could potentially matter a lot.

I guess, I mean, that doesn't really answer the question of why philosophy matters ever.

But I think it's because it's part of a big theoretical framework.

I'm sort of a about this stuff.

So these questions about realism and instrumentalism don't land all that well with me because, I mean, for example, I think the FEP, if it ends up being part of our best overall sort of account of things,

then I think it's confirmed or disconfirmed by proxy whenever any observation is recorded, right?

So unless you want to say that it doesn't have any inferential connections to anything else, in which case it's really weird, and I don't know why we're talking about it.

Anyway, that's enough for me.

Perfect.

Richard and Mel to close out this section.


SPEAKER_09:
Thanks.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, I think in many ways, and this is probably just maybe disciplinary specific, but the philosophy of systems and the philosophy of what we do in science, I think, is incredibly important in the social sciences because so much of our concepts, so much of our theory that we deal with now is deeply indebted to Dewey and Kant and Hegel and these

philosophical arguments about the relationship between mind body and society what is a thing what are the boundaries of things and these things have been baked into our theories and many times we don't recognize that they're there and they're they're deeply affecting concepts and how things are operationalized and what we consider to be a truth value or not and to go in and unpack those theories find those philosophical arguments and then interrogate them from

these kind of emerging perspectives and say, you know, was Whitehead onto something about kind of, you know, the extension of reality as an ontological category, or was he not?

And if he wasn't, and this new principle can deal with a lot of those ideas in ways that were significantly shaped sociology, then great, we have something to kind of move on to.

So I think philosophy is always this thing, as much as I try and get rid of it, it's always coming in the back door somehow, some way.

And I think just being sensitive to it, being comfortable dealing with it and interrogating it from these new perspectives, I think is always going to be something that's very important because it's always there in the background somewhere if you dig deep enough.


SPEAKER_08:
Thanks.

Well said.

And then Mel, and then we'll let Maxwell have a last thought as well.


SPEAKER_04:
In my mind, philosophy doesn't answer questions.

raises questions and the empirical sciences attempts to answer those questions but you need philosophy but don't chew on the computer Jesus Christ you you need philosophy to both raise those questions and then to to tell you how those questions have been potentially answered by the empirical

results.

So there is no such thing as kind of science operating in a vacuum without philosophy of science.

That's my opinion, that there's this necessary dialectic between the philosophy of science and science itself going on.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Agreed.

Maxwell, and then Professor Klippinger, if you'd like.


SPEAKER_10:
um well so i think that there's a there's a methodological component to this as well i want to echo what what everyone said earlier uh you know if if we're gonna study uh multi-scale systems it's good to get our ontologies straight uh and you know the fact that nature seems to have this multi-scale structure suggests that our theoretical accounts of nature should also reflect its uh

multi-scale structure.

But I think from a more pragmatic point of view, I like to think that a lot of the kind of single discipline topics have been covered in a very significant way, but that there isn't the same kind of, you know, established work

connecting different methodologies that operate at different scales.

So I think that getting this systems take right not only has theoretical implications, but also has practical implications for the way that we conduct research, namely that we should aim to form multidisciplinary groups that address questions of interest from several different angles.

simultaneously so and this is echoed in the paper that we'll be discussing today where what we're essentially trying to do is advance on the one hand a pluralistic ontology a multi-scale ontology and on the other hand a methodological pluralism where several different sets of methodologies can come and interact together


SPEAKER_07:
nice professor clevenger or anything else there you're muted but yes um okay i have to apologize because i have to leave early but this is a great discussion a great beginning i'd have to uh i just want to throw my hat in to say i'm sort of in in uh muddy's camp uh and looking at explanatory power um and i think a lot of that is there i i'm supposed to uh ditto with with uh what maxwell is saying in terms of providing a integrated framework

Of course, the philosophy has a place in it, but I think there are so many philosophies embedded in historical situations that I think we're at another level of understanding that

It's what becomes really important is being able to start to test these things and be able to rigorously test them.

And because there are a lot of very powerful claims that are being made that if they're true, they're quite transformative, but they need to be tested.


SPEAKER_09:
Awesome.

Thank you everyone for this very exciting check-in.

And I'll just add one comment on why the philosophy of systems matter.

And it's examples that are brought up by Helen Longino in her book, Studying Human Behavior.

Which level of analysis, which discipline we default to, molecular neuroscience or environmental studies, if we default to a higher level of organization or lower level to look for our explanations philosophically,

it's going to directly translate to what kinds of interventions we think are going to be possible in the system.

And so if the story about, for example, aggression and sexuality, which is what Professor Longino studies in that book, if the story is it comes from genes, well, then you're going to be less likely to undertake affordances related to the environment.

If the story is about the environment, you're going to be unlikely to take affordances related to molecular interventions.

So even before we say what it actually is, and that's of course a complex question, or what is the best thing for the system, I would fall on the side that it really does matter in the background, and sometimes it's just the water we swim in, how we think about these multi-level systems.


SPEAKER_06:
For a three second aside, I will happily admit that I'm a staunch empiricist, somebody who worked in industry basically the moment I could.

And so, you know what, I'm just conceding a little bit that actually you're right, without the philosophy of science, we don't introduce novel ideas that are worth testing in the first place.

that discourse is what leads to the models that allow me to try to issue value from that quote-unquote value from that so i am backing down just a little bit from my empiricism after this discussion so i just wanted to say that yeah nice um a live conversion story you heard it here first but even pragmatism is defined within a use view


SPEAKER_09:
so it's like all models are wrong some are useful and then the second part of that sentence might be useful for whom or under what conception there's no model that's just useful outside of a value set so pragmatics isn't just like let's just do the most useful thing there is not just one useful thing so

After that extremely interesting check-in, let's get to what the paper is about and what the goals of the paper are.

So the paper is Multiscale Integration Beyond Internalism and Externalism by Ramstad, Kirchhoff, Constant, and Friston from 2019.

And what the paper writes their goal as is, here we focus on making, sorry, someone needs to mute.

I'm going to mute that person.

Here we focus on making explicit a description of the boundaries of cognitive systems that we think follow from taking seriously the inactive, embodied, and extended nature of cognition.

This is the idea that the boundaries of cognitive systems are nested and multiple, and that with respect to its study, cognition has no fixed or essential boundaries.

And so it's all about this taking it seriously with a multi-scale integration.

So how are we going to take the multi-scale integration seriously?

I'm going to run quickly through the section headers and anyone can just raise their hand and I'll pause the section headers just to address the question.

So first, there's an introduction of the paper, which makes sense because there's so many areas that are being tied together here.

There's the first figure, which is about Markov blankets and active inference.

In the second section of the paper, which is called A Variational Principle for Living Systems, first, they talk about this variational free energy formulation for living systems and show a figure of how the free energy principle and self-evidencing are related to living systems.

They then talk about generative models and action policies, because when we're talking about internal models or internal states of an organism, we're talking about generative models and action policies.

They then talk a little bit more specifically in the text about Markov blankets and the boundaries of cognitive systems, which, recalling their goals, they're going to take us to somewhere where these boundaries are real and they're not equally prescient, as they say.

However, that doesn't imply that there's one single correct level of analysis.

This is related as Maxwell also brought up earlier on the formal ontology for the boundaries of cognitive systems, because the modeling approach, the descriptive or action-oriented modeling approach that we take to a system is related to how we think about it.

And so that's the background.

If your ontology has a certain type of scheme pre-built, pre-installed, then your models are downstream of that.

So when we're talking about philosophy of science, philosophy of multi-scale systems,

complex systems, we're talking about what ontology will let us draw the boundaries around these systems in a way that's, yes, useful, but also aware about these other aspects and the fact that we're not the only perspective on use out there.

This takes us to section three on cognitive boundaries, specifically this debate, longstanding, between internalism and externalism.

It ends with an "-ism," so it's a dogmatic belief.

And it is just what it seems to be.

It's about whether the external factors in cognition or whether the internal factors in cognition play a more relevant role or a primary role.

And the internal and the external are implicitly at the level of the organism.

And so one of the, I think, strongest stances of this multi-scale analysis is

Well, isn't there an internal and external to the group?

Isn't there an internal and an external to the enacted ecological cognition, like a human in a building with a computer?

What does internalism and externalism mean when we're talking about niche construction, when we're talking about sociological systems?

And so to explore that, first they talk about externalism in the context of radical views of cognition.

So radical means from the root.

And so to take it from the root that externalism is the nature of cognition would be to kind of have a causal model where the outside things are more causative going in rather than the other way around.

In figure three, there's a very nice abstract representation of operational closure, which is actually related to Kant and the idea of teleology and whether the organism is the fundamental unit of analysis in biology or whether other levels might be important too.

And figure four shows from a autopoetic point of view about autocatalytic closure.

And so it's relating using a few different metaphors, including autocatalysis, like a metabolic loop metaphor for closure, as well as an informational closure that will be returned to when talking about the Markov blanket.

Internalism is then given their say, and it is pushing back against externalism.

And if one can imagine what radical externalism looks like, you can probably imagine what radical internalism looks like.

And then after bringing up in section two, the variational free energy principle, and then in section three, framing this debate about internalism and externalism, in section four, we combine sections two and three, which is to say that we apply the free energy principle formalism to taking it seriously, integrating multi-level systems between internalism and externalism or moving beyond it.

And that implies re-analyzing generative models, what they are and how they're used to study cognition.

A section called inactivism 2.0, which is a callback to earlier generations of inactivism.

Then there's a section on nestedness or how to study cognition beyond the brain.

So, okay, neuroscience or behavioral neuro is about what's happening in the brain, but that's nested within a body, that's nested within a social group.

So how does this nestedness change how we study cognition in the brain and beyond?

And that's represented in figure five with this blanket of blanket ideas.

And in figure six with a multi-scale self-organization and active inference figure.

And then the paper closes with a movement towards multidisciplinary research heuristics for cognitive science.

So just as far as today's discussion goes, in the next 30 minutes, we're going to try to run through the abstract and the figures, and then we'll have some closing thoughts, and then that will hopefully get everyone excited and interesting, thinking about different types of questions, which we'll be able to address in live session 5.2.

In the service of

the half hour we have to get through the six figures i'm just going to put the abstract part one up here what they're doing is presenting a multi-scale integration interpretation of the boundaries of cognitive systems and they're wanting this to be a corrective for the debate between internalist and externalist positions

The second part of the abstract, they discuss how they first survey key principles of this radical extended or externalized cognitive perspective, also implicitly in the context of the internalist perspective.

And then they develop a multi-scale account, building on the free energy principle, trying to move beyond this internalism-externalism debate.

And then in the third part of the abstract, they close up that discussion by saying that their approach does not privilege any specific given boundary of the world, but it also doesn't argue that all boundaries are equally prescient.

So that's going to be something interesting to unpack.

And then they close just by saying that they are drawing the boundaries of cognitive systems using this multidisciplinary research approach.

So, let's get to the figures, and this first discussion, let's just try to understand what are the figures about, what is being shown in the figure just at the first pass level visually, what do you see, but also where does it fit a little bit more broadly into the A to Z of the paper, or just what did you think about the figure, what did you see in the figure, or what were you wondering about?

so here we are in figure one would anyone like to take a first pass at describing figure one what they see or um what it shows or means for the paper all right so i'll start describing it and someone can okay maxwell go ahead well so this is uh this is a depiction of the markov blanket


SPEAKER_10:
And so Markov blankets are one of the kind of building blocks or ingredients that go into the free energy formalism.

And essentially a Markov blanket, well, mathematically what it does is if you have a set of random variables,

and you want to effectively map or individuate a random variable or a set of random variables from another set of random variables.

For instance, you want to individuate a system like the brain from all the other dynamical systems with which it interacts.

What you do is that you stipulatively define

A third set of states between the internal states of the system that you're interested in discussing and the external states of the embedding environment

This third set of states is called a Markov blanket, and it's defined by the absence of connections.

So effectively, the internal states are influenced by sensory states but do not influence them, and external states are influenced by active states but do not influence them.

So by precluding these two basically directed edges of this kind of connected graph,

What we're doing is essentially formalizing the kind of channel through which any interactions between the environment and the internal states of the system, the interactions have to go through this channel effectively.

So yeah, that's what the formalism does for us.

It allows us to individuate a system formally in terms of the interactions that it has with its embedding environment.


SPEAKER_09:
Great.

And Mel, go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think a lot of people publishing on the FEP and the Markov Blanket formalism

But even more so in kind of the discussions you get after a conference, people really expect of the Markov blanket formalism that it's picking out not token distinctions, but type distinctions.

So people really want the Markov blanket formalism to cut at natural joints.

That is to find kind of the tight boundaries between

natural kinds sorts of natural systems and it really doesn't do this it really really doesn't do this it really picks out individual systems that's what it does is it finds token systems um and naturally i think a a formal methodology that that isn't about um it's not about finding privileged scales privileged

spatial scales or privileged time scales.

It's about finding particular systems.

And so I think naturally when we employ this formalism, it's not going to lend us a view of privileged scales because that's not what formalism does.

And I think that's kind of against, goes against what people tend to think the Markov blanket formalism is for.


SPEAKER_06:
Awesome.

Muddy?

I was just going to say that, so I would say that most people on this call are far more intelligent than I am.

And I try to come up with my own sort of baby interpretations of this, which to my knowledge, nobody has been angered by before.

And I think really what this tells me is if I have an agent that is interacting with an environment,

the only channel by which they can actually update their beliefs in order to change their actions, say, comes through this sort of border state, these sensory states.

So it's interesting in that I don't consider this... Well, I mean, it is a separation, obviously, between two objectively different realities, shall we say.

But it also speaks to the force with which...

forcing the the analytical link between the two through a certain set of sub states which is which is really important right and this is this border set on on all your sensory states so your sensory and active state so that's kind of how i've always viewed this i have two sets of realities that are trying to come together in terms of um what's going on one of them uh has a belief state one of them just is

and the the belief state is really trying to figure out what is and the only way it can do that is by modifying its sensor state so that's just something which for maybe people who aren't actively part of the community might make it a little bit more reductionist and simple to to digest but if anybody disagrees with me please let me know nice well said um richard and then if anyone else wants to raise their hand


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, so I'm sure this is probably a naive question, but when I was listening to Maxwell talk about it and looking at this figure, do Markov blankets work in the sense of I hypothesize a priori that there's a thing called an environment, there's a thing called an organism, there's a thing called sensory states, and then the Markov blanket allows me to go in and find it statistically and determine whether or not these things work.

can be isolated you know empirically and therefore kind of reinforcing my idea that that these things actually exist in reality or can i just feed a markov blanket a whole bunch of random data and it's gonna find something you know kind of that garbage in garbage out model so like what when you're when we're talking about markov blankets and finding these boundaries um how exactly does that does that work let's have maxwell just directly respond to that very nice question and then we'll continue on the stack with stephen and then mel


SPEAKER_10:
Sure.

To answer that question, it would be easier if you could change figures and go to figure... Let me just check on the... In the paper, it's figure five.

Sure.

So this is my favorite figure in any of our papers.

And yeah, so this basically tells you what's basically going on here in the construction of Markov Blanket.

So...

In more recent work, this has been formalized in terms of two operators, a grouping operator and a dimensionality reduction operator.

And effectively what we're doing is, well, so to answer the question, Richard's question directly, in principle, what we've been able to do recently is develop techniques that more or less automatically, although, you know, we can discuss, there are a few design decisions that have to be made, and these have been discussed in a few of our discussion channels recently.

I'm sure Mel will, I'm sure you'll remind me of this.

But basically what happens is what you do is you start with a bunch of states, right?

So we're working from a dynamical systems perspective and we define whatever states are of interest for us.

And essentially the Markov blankets are constructed by looking at the relative rates of change of variables with respect to each other.

Mathematically what we're doing is taking the partial derivatives of each variable with respect to each other and then using effectively these rates of change to construct the Markov blankets automatically.

So you start with a bunch of states.

Here I'm at the bottom panel in the figure where you have essentially these nine circles that represent states.

So these can be anything whatsoever.

In a recent paper that was pre-printed, this has been used to analyze fMRI data.

So in that paper, each of your states is one 3D voxel.

And basically what you do is you write down an adjacency matrix.

So an adjacency matrix is effectively a matrix where you have all of your states by all of your states, and the entries in the matrix are quantifying the effect, the influence that one state has on another.

And if you take the Jacobian of this adjacency matrix, you're replacing all of these entries with the partial derivatives of one variable with respect to others.

And so having said all that,

you can construct the Markov blankets analytically by noting the absence of dependencies in this adjacency matrix.

So zeros in your Jacobian mean that the partial derivative of one variable with respect to that other variable is zero, which is another way of saying that basically the two variables in question are conditionally independent in that direction.

There are a few modeling decisions that you need to make effectively.

There are two, to my knowledge.

One is basically going to be deciding which states are internal states.

Effectively, so you're going to say, okay, if this one is an internal state, then its blanket is this, and the external states relative to it are that.

That arbitrariness isn't all that arbitrary in the sense that the, you know,

The blanket structures are going to be essentially the same.

It's just what's going to count as an internal state might change.

And then there are a few design decisions when you're implementing this.

Basically, when you're constructing your adjacency matrix, you have to kind of decide what counts as a cutoff for interaction.

So those two things might make it less objective.

But in principle, if you'll allow for these two kind of modeling decisions, you can feed these algorithms like a time series data, for example, and it'll chunk out the Markov blankets from it.


SPEAKER_09:
Very nice answer, Maxwell.

Thank you.

So we'll go to Stephen and then Mel, then Alex K and Shannon.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

I'm going to just get my head into it.

But one of the things that I think this also is maybe not always easy to imagine is the dynamical nature of all of this, that it's talking about states.

So you're never actually being one thing.

You're always in this state of...

unfolding and that the Markov blanket then is that kind of statistical kind of, you could say record keeping at the different scales.

Ultimately, I would say everything's at the cell level to some level because that's the kind of engine that's enabling everything else to be created.

The only thing I kind of feel that

is important to maybe distinguish when talking because I think there's a danger with the word systems is that there's like I see these blankets as more like a swarming of statistics which creates the structures and the networks such as the kind of leafs or whatever and they and it's that kind of structures which actually are

kind of in the world, so to speak, and those structures have systemic properties.

They become the support mechanism for a plant, the leaf does, but the structure has come out from the swarming of the actual blankets.

So I think I'm still trying to get my head around how to pass it.


SPEAKER_09:
Nice.

We can return to that.

Mel, and then Alex K.?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think Maxwell basically said it all, but the short of it is you have some time series, basically, and that could be real data or that could be sim data, that could be simulation, right?

and you're pointing the Markov blanket formalism, you're directing it to the internal state, and you're handing it your threshold for how conditionally dependent should be conditionally independent enough to count.

And then that does the rest of the work for you.

That will partition your state.

So you give it the internal states, and you give it the kind of threshold for conditional independence, and that partitions the rest into external states

sensory states and active states.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Alex K., then Shannon and Muddy.


SPEAKER_11:
Yeah, just a really brief point.

I'm just wondering if one way of thinking of this is that the Markov blanket partition, insofar as it's objective, together with some data, like maybe it cuts nature at particular joints, but it just doesn't cut at types of joints in a way.

So I don't know, maybe we can pick that up later.


SPEAKER_10:
Well, yeah, that's a good point.

If I can just jump in here, I think Mel is right.

when they say that the Markov blankets are always going to pick out individuals.

If there's anything like a species level regularity that we can express, or regularities that are specific to members of the same group, that'll be more in terms of the generative model, non-equilibrium, steady state density.

So, I mean, you know, this is also discussed in the paper, but essentially what we're saying is you can imagine a joint probability distribution over all of the variables of the system and implicitly also over some fictive external states that the system is interacting with.

And this entire joint density you can think of as the phenotype of the system.

And it's known as a non-equilibrium steady state density.

regenerative model so I think yes things that pick out types have more to do with this joint density that tells you like about the kind of creature that I am whereas as Mel was just pointing out like these are these these Markov boundaries are effectively the boundaries of individuals every time so cool Shannon and then muddy


SPEAKER_13:
I think I might be echoing a lot of what was said already.

But on what the Markov boundary is separating, it's always going to be a decision on the part of the researcher for what correlations seem to matter for the explanation that you're looking for for the particular system's behavior.

So if there's certain long-range correlations that are constraining short-range correlations, whatever you're wanting to answer.

So if I want to answer how a certain musical phrase affects the movement of the person listening to it, the particular

the particular part of the system that's interesting to me is maybe not going to be the electrical firing of a neuron at that moment because the electrical firing of a neuron at that really short range correlation, that really short range time scale, isn't going to have a huge effect at the long range time scale in my explanation.

Even though it's important, you can't have the reaction without the brain having some electrical activity.

It's still not the most informative

Skill of analysis.


SPEAKER_06:
Nice.

Muddy and then melt.

Awesome.

So again, just bringing this back to a level of understanding that allows me to get some sort of intuition why this hierarchical markup framework is really, really important and useful in defining dynamical systems.

So one example, my background in medicine, the reason why we were interested in functional neuroimaging is we wanted to understand

At what scale can we intervene in certain effective connectivity architectures in order to make clinical difference?

So understanding the boundary states of which pieces of this puzzle are genuinely boundary states, you know, genuinely fall within some Markov blanket is really, really important.

And one example of this is if I take my auditory cortex and my visual cortex,

At a hierarchical level of processing in here, one could say that the internal circuitry that allows me to interpret the signals from my cochlea versus my retina are not correlated with each other.

However, an integrative state above this, when I'm trying to actually make some sort of cohesive view of the world, they are both, of course, within that same Markov boundary state.

So here's an example of a hierarchical separation of boundary states, which is really, really important, not only from an empirical modeling decision in terms of what level do I abstract, but also from an understanding perspective.

One can, say, assume a boundary state and then test empirically if this is correct with, say, some sort of dynamic causal model.

simply just by changing what you think the actual Markov boundary states are, or the scopic level of that Markov boundary.

you can start inferring things that are really clinically useful, for example.

So the motor cortex and the cerebellum quite clearly form a Markov boundary for motor processing.

But then motor cortex and S1 also form a Markov boundary in terms of action decision making.

So this tool, it's really a beautiful explanation of the world, but it's really a beautiful modeling tool as well for abstracting away hierarchical noise in terms of your model.

So I just wanted to add that in.


SPEAKER_10:
Oh, I think that's a great point.

I mean, it, it shows the kind of meta modeling, uh, strategy that we have going on here.

Cause so, uh, in another paper that, that I think you've discussed on this podcast, the tale of two densities, um,

Wait, I'm not sure that you did.

We've discussed a few.

Anyway, in that paper... Well, actually, maybe we should just... I'll just cede my turn.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_09:
No, all good, all good.

Let's return to Mel, and then anyone else can raise their hand.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, just to quickly clarify,

Contrary to what Alex said, I think the term, the phrase cutting at natural joints as it's used in philosophy of science actually refers specifically to type distinction, not token distinction.

So it's actually, it's about finding natural kinds.

And natural kinds are definitionally type distinctions and not token distinctions.


SPEAKER_09:
Yep.

Also, if I could add one note there from my field of gene expression analysis, there's often a few different ways to construct a network of relevant genes.

You could pull down and see which proteins are physically touching or which transcription factors are binding to which genes.

So that might be a protein-protein interaction network or a gene regulatory network.

Or there are statistical networks like co-expression networks, which are very related to things like Granger causality or effective connectivity.

They're statistically derived.

And there might be two elements, like two proteins or two genes or something, that are correlated in their expression but never touch.

And those will come up on the functional connectivity matrix.

Or you might have two proteins that touch and actually are very integrally important.

for function, but they're not expressed in a correlated fashion.

And so that might lead to them being missed on the co-expression graph or the co-activation graph on the brain.

And so then somebody might want to say, well, what's the real map of the territory or what's the real network?

And that's where this meta modeling question returns and related to the carving of the joints.

Yes, on the top of figure one, we see, OK, let's carve out the organism from the environment.

But that's not just a really close line around the organism that actually includes some long range statistical dependencies, as well as things that might be touching, but not that important for regulating organismal states.

So there's multiple perspectives that are required.

and certainly multiple disciplines that are required when we want to be asking, how do we design interventions or systems given this causal structure?

The endpoint isn't just scaffolding out this infinitely complicated reference map.

It's an action oriented framework that we want to be talking about multiscale models and then also knowing how to work within them.

Sasha, and then anyone else before we go to figure two?


SPEAKER_03:
Great point, Daniel, about the

different kinds of interactions that exist in systems and whether it's statistical or like physical correlation and I think the kind of overarching theme here is that you wouldn't know unless you measured it.

And you need to know what sorts of variables are important in order to even see statistically if they're going to be related.

So that is where this kind of framework is really critical because we need to

measure the relevant things in our system.

And if things are happening at scales that are too long or too short outside the bounds of our measurement, then we'll never know.


SPEAKER_09:
Nice.

We'll do Maxwell and then Steven and then move to figure two.


SPEAKER_10:
Well, I just want to pick up a bit on this meta modeling thing that had been mentioned.

I think it's one of the strengths of the framework to, on the one hand,

describe like the workings of organisms using this free energy minimization stuff.

So we're sort of adopting

The theory itself, the free energy principle theory itself, adopts an instrumentalist stance on organisms to say, well, what organisms are essentially doing is leveraging the statistical structure of their bodies in movement, which we can interpret as a generative model, as a joint density over all the system variables.

So using the statistical structure of their bodies in movement to generate adaptive patterns of behavior.

So at that first kind of theory level, there's an instrumentalism.

that's going on and there's a modeling aspect going on.

We're saying that effectively organisms are sort of in a process of approximate Bayesian modeling of the causes of their sensory stimuli.

Then there's a kind of meta level of analysis where we can actually as scientists write down a generative model that says well the Markov blanket is here and then score that model in terms of the variational free energy.

And use a variational free energy approach to kind of find where the boundary is of the variational free energy minimizing system.

So I kind of take that meta aspect to be a strength of the framework.


SPEAKER_08:
Nice.

Agreed.

We'll go to Stephen and then Mel.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and sort of following on from that as well, the piece that sometimes gets maybe lost here but is in the other papers when you look at regime of attention,

is that it's not just that the system cleaves, like the whole, the Markov blanket gives a capacity to change how you take your attention from the streams that are coming in.

Like I suddenly feel my hand, then I feel my face.

And I suppose one of the things that would be an example as well of something that's a very large scale is

the threat of climate change and I'm thinking about, when I start thinking about a glacier in Antarctica starting to come away and go into the water and possibly raising sea levels in 20 years, my physiology changes and my whole, when I bring that into my considerations, the way I take my attention and the way I tune to a lot of things around me in the world changes.

So, you know, is that as my system boundary changed or I would say that it's more about my attentional integration that's changed.

So that's where I think there's a question around whether the word systems could be overused sometimes and it's maybe staying with this kind of statistical dynamic is quite useful.


SPEAKER_09:
Right.

It's statistically influencing you whether you like it or not, and then your awareness and your attentional regime is something that's almost separate.

Awesome.

Mel?


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, I just wanted to say goodbye because I'm supposed to be in another call right now.


SPEAKER_09:
Thank you for participating, Mel.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks for having us.

This is lovely.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

So in the last couple of minutes, I just wanted to get all the figures on the screen just so we could run through them, let people take the next week to digest them a little bit more fully, come for whatever exciting parts they were interested in.

So when I look at figure one, I just see on the top the simplest framing of system from surrounding.

And if you think that that's a blurry boundary, then you're not talking about a system.

So to be able to define something is to, you know, to delimit is to define.

So it might not be the most functional boundary, but you can start there and then you ask, well, what kinds of states or interventions connect the system to the environment, just like Muddy was describing.

And those are described in this model as statistical dependencies.

And if we had to put English words on them, they would be sensory states and active states.

But ultimately, it's really about what the model actually says.

Figure 2A goes into a bit more detail in that action, perception, internal, external, two-stroke engine, as I think about it, this feedback loop from internal and external states connected through sense and action.

And then the Markov blanket is what is being pierced bidirectionally by sense and action.

And as we've talked about before, and in some of the work on niche construction, one system's internal is another system's external.

And so in some sense, what is being pierced

discussed is that blanket state because there's some symmetry between the internal and the external in that both internal and external states have their own self-causing or autonomous dynamics as well as influence each other through sense and action respectively.

So figure two is just showing that again in the context of a human, and then also connecting it a little bit more closely to the free energy formalism of energy minus entropy.

And so again, another day for talking about the math there.

Figure 2b just talks about how those formalisms of free energy, respectively complexity minus accuracy on the action bound, and then divergence plus surprise on the perception bound, how the math sort of sketches out another day.

Figure three is an illustration of operational closure.

So what they note here is that the black circles are forming part of an operationally closed network of self-organizing processes.

And this is something like teleological closure.

Like if you're talking about a sustainable ecosystem, you don't want the sustainable ecosystem to be defined from your front door to your trash can.

you're talking about operational functional closure existing at a higher level of analysis.

So that means the multi-level perspective is going to be important, but at one level of analysis or at multiple, we can ask, has operational closure been achieved?

Have we done enough system diagramming or mapping of causal relationships or dependencies such that we actually have the system's dynamics separated out from dynamics outside of the system?


SPEAKER_10:
If I can just jump in, the motivation for including this figure is part of the argument that we're making, I think that's controversial, is that basically most of what the inactive approach does, we can do with the active inference approach, but in a way that isn't just like, well, in a way that's formally backed,

by a principled, physics-based approach.

And so we're just discussing here the notion of operational closure that inactivists use to define an autopoietic entity, like a self-producing entity.

And the argument that we make immediately after is that, well, active inference doesn't just say there is this operational closure, it tells you why there is operational closure.


SPEAKER_09:
Nice.

And also to reference what we were talking about with Mel just briefly, Kant performed a teleological analysis and said that the organism is not just the limits per se of the epithelium, not a physical boundary, but it's actually the teleologically closed epithelium.

entity.

And so that is really consonant with the idea that the eusocial insect colony is an organism, not a superorganism.

By calling it a superorganism, we reify the boundary of organism being at the epithelia.

And people say, oh, well, it's like a superorganism.

It's all these little insect organisms working together.

But actually, because of the major evolutionary shift in eusociality in the ants, for example, the colony is the organism.

We don't draw a little single cell organism barrier around each one of our cells and then spend all of our time running the math on the altruism between the nerve cell and the muscle cell and the sex cell and things like that.

We just say, nope, that's the teleological level.

The liver is going to make sense in a broader end, and that end is the organism.

And then the question about what the privileged level of analysis should be, the organismal teleological analysis says, right, the liver and the stomach make sense at the level of the organism.

But in some sense, doesn't the organism only make sense in the context of its cultural niche and of its social relationship?

So why stop there?

Where should the teleological closure end?

Where should the functional closure end?

And that's what demands, I think, a true multi-level perspective.

Because there's going to be questions where the functional boundary is the epithelium around the person or around the single amp nestmate.

But there's other times where what we're talking about is the closure around the organism as the teleological hole.

And that's not always the same thing as the epithelium.

Yeah, Richard?


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, I think this general argument is really captured well in the Craver and Darden mechanistic philosophical perspective to where a phenomenon is defined by the entities and activities that generate it or produce it.

And so whatever phenomenon you define, whether it's the ant, it's the colony,

there's going to be some mechanism that generates it, and that mechanism is decomposable down to whatever you want.

So the colony can be decomposed down to the individual ant, which can be decomposed down to the various biological structures.

And really, when you want to move up and down, you're just simply identifying, okay,

what are the entities and activities that generate a phenomenon that then interacts with other phenomenon entities and activities to create that right and you build up and down because i think i think it gets really dangerous in sociology we do this a lot to where there is no individual there's only society in this theological reasoning where it gets very hard to keep track of okay well bob commits a crime not the entire society that bob's a part of so how can i drill down on bob

as an entity that I want to talk about, but then recognize that Bob is part of a larger structure and not reducing it to the group as the entity in itself.


SPEAKER_09:
Yes, it's 100% related to that book of Helen Longino, whether, you know, was it the arm that committed the aggression?

Was it the person or was it the group?


SPEAKER_12:
And so it's funny.

I'm sorry.

Because I mean, that's kind of a symptom in schizophrenia where a lot of criminals will say, I didn't kill him.

The bullet did it.

And logically, that makes sense in terms of that reasoning.

But any rational person would say, well, no, you pulled the trigger, so therefore the bullet is responsible, or you're responsible for the bullet's pathway.

Well, no, I didn't kill him.

The bullet did.

So that logic, I think, when pushed to its logical extreme,


SPEAKER_09:
breaks down pretty quickly but yet nonetheless I think we do tend to implicitly rely on it a lot in our analysis yep and before we go to Steven it's again it's those causal stories guns don't kill people people do well depending on cognitive diversity that statement is going to sound true or not to you and someone could say well it's not even the bullets it's actually blood loss or it's not even blood loss it's reduction in blood pressure where does the causal chain end

And so at some point we need to cut through the descriptive approach with an action oriented approach.

Okay, are we gonna ban bullets, guns, people?

Where do we stop?

There's no single answer just from identifying the territory to action.

And so these are really the big questions about causal relationships in multi-level systems.

We'll go with Steven and then Muddy.


SPEAKER_01:
I think the ability to have these mechanisms is made possible because of processes.

So we think about this in art because art is seen as a process that is creating something.

So in the same way with the ants, there may be a mechanism by which ants chew up and masticate pieces of

wood or mud and there's a mechanism by which they build the ant colony and that ant hill has a structural integrity that allows air to flow through certain systems of movement that creates a cooling effect however the processes

which I think the Markov blankets are working with, are what make the mechanisms possible to happen.

Like the ant is following these kind of statistical dependent processes to do what it does.

And in doing so, it has a mechanism, just like if someone's firing the bullet, there's a process the body's using to infer, yet the mechanism is something we see.

So I think this is...

These things are kind of entwined, but they are slightly different.


SPEAKER_08:
Agreed.

Muddy and then back to Maxwell.


SPEAKER_06:
I guess this is where my original gripe with philosophy of science came from an empiricist point of view.

For me, where do you snip the causal chain is something that can be empirically defined.

if I have an extremely strong coupling between action A and action B, such that action B doesn't occur without action A, then move the Markov boundary beyond it.

So anytime anyone says bullets don't kill people,

people do, or sorry, people who kill people with bullets do, I don't know what the spurious phrase is or whatever, but you can say, well, let me actually empirically look at this.

What percentage of time, and I'm sure there is, like, somebody's going to come up with an example, oh, there was this gun that went off by itself, whatever, but statistically speaking, if I threshold that, I can find basically a probability of one, or very, very, or tending towards this, that the gun was fired by a human being.

So I think it's a bit of a

When somebody presents such a philosophical argument, I'm like, well, you know, there is an empirical response.

Science gives you these empirical tools to infer these sorts of things.

So that's kind of where my original gripe about the philosophy of science came out.

Again, I've softened on it, but I just wanted to say, I think there's an answer to these things philosophically, and it comes from sampling the data.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.


SPEAKER_10:
Maxwell, before we finish out the figures.

Cool.

Well, I just want to pick up on something that was mentioned in the chat by Richard.

So there isn't any, I think, systematic work that relates the free energy stuff to neomechanistic philosophy a la Craver.

Something I'd like to discuss with you all next week is, so as I understand it, the multilevel framework, I started off as a neomechanist, I have to say, like, you know, the

The Craver Bechtel orientation was really something that I was pursuing.

And around 2013, 2014, I kind of spent a lot of time trying to see whether I was able to

use the neomechanistic framework to articulate multi-level causation.

And my big gripe with neomechanism, at least in its most popular renditions, is that it effectively eliminates cross-scale causal effects.

So there's a part of this that I buy, which is that part of my rejection of metaphysical levels comes from the neomechanist approach.

But I think that, because with the story, we should discuss this maybe in another podcast, but their story is something like, well, what looks like inter-level causation is really just, it's just the same causal stream that you're re-describing at another level.

One of the things I like about the FEP formalism is that while it's consonant with the broad outline of neomechanistic philosophy, it does explain the way that you have causal effects that trickle up and down.

So I think that's like an outstanding issue that should potentially be discussed.

I just wanted to flag that for the next episode.


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, good call.

Alex K., and then I'll close out the figures.


SPEAKER_11:
All right, I was actually going to lower my hand because Maxwell said we could discuss this another time.

But I guess I briefly just wanted to say, yeah, I think if you go back to Kant's definition of mechanism, which I can't recite, but basically he contrasted mechanism with systems that involve top-down sort of causation as well, like that holes can affect parts.

I would guess you could still get some kind of mechanistic description at each scale, like approximately or something.

But anyway, I think it's an interesting topic.


SPEAKER_10:
Oh, yeah, yeah.

Just to be clear.

My view is that the FEP is broadly consonant with and is in fact an exemplar of the neomechanistic research strategy as outlined by Bechtel and Kraber and so on.

But I think it does impose a different metaphysics of levels than the one that's been attempted, at least in a few papers that I saw by Bechtel and company, like the one called Looking Up, Down and Around, I think.

where they essentially say that, well, there's no such thing as cross-scale influences.

There are really just big things interacting with small things.

And that's where I think I strongly disagree for reasons that hopefully we'll unpack next week and that are related to how these multi-scale systems are actually constructed.

I mean, essentially, you've got the same base system, the tacting, so it's like, I don't know, it's a Ladyman and Ross style.

There are only basically quantum fluctuations or whatever, but what you're doing is whenever you define a new scale of interactions, you're adding a slower and spatially larger set of constraints on the same fundamental set of things.

So there is something like cross-scale talk in the sense that what it is to be a multi-scale system is essentially to have components that are constrained by successively higher level constraints on the dynamics.

But I don't think ultimately this conflicts with the philosophical perspective of neomechanism, which ultimately at the end of the day just says, well, there are parts and processes

and a mechanism is a coordination and an organization of parts and processes that produces some kind of interesting output that we can study so cool yep these are um alejandra go ahead yeah yeah thank you and just following up this idea you're saying maxwell i i was thinking um if


SPEAKER_02:
Is there any differences in how these hierarchies in terms of blankets work?

I was wondering, at the cellular level, maybe belief updating is kind of risky.

So the cell has to behave like having this generative model, but it's phenotype.

But it's not learning.

I don't know, maybe I don't have very clear what I'm thinking, but if you go up to the scale, thinking like in the brain level, the blanket, now belief of dating is crucial for these bodily interactions, and effective bodily interactions, and this coupling with the

environment.

So my question is, is there any differences in terms of how these micro blankets and blankets of blankets of blankets work?

And this, it's also hierarchy, and how this hierarchy belief updating works?


SPEAKER_09:
Let's return to this great question when we have a lot more time next week, which is about the similarities and differences with different systems.

It's really something we should consider.


SPEAKER_10:
I was going to say, this is like the question that we address in this paper in large part.

I mean, a quick answer to your question is that formally speaking, there's a kind of self-similar pattern that is occurring across all these different scales, right?

So you have a

An on equilibrium steady state density and a generative model slash generative model that the end that is kind of directing policy selection in a way that maintains that blanket but that's a very, very like abstract or information theoretic description and, in effect, like.

basically the kind of data that's involved at every scale, the mechanisms involved to make sure that your data, the data that you're sensing fits your preferred data distributions, all these things are going to be radically different from one scale to the next.

I mean, clearly the way that we update beliefs about ourselves by having a conversation, while it has a formal, while it may formally be identical

on a kind of process or information flow level to like what our cells are doing, like clearly this is different, right?

Like the data streams with which we're dealing are different.

The ways that they're being managed are different.

So yeah, I mean, there is a kind of fractal self-similar structure, but it's at the level of the information flows, not so much what makes up.

So in mechanistic terms, the parts are different, but the processes might be different.


SPEAKER_09:
Yep.

And it will be awesome to go into more detail because there's clearly differences between cells that embody their beliefs through morphology that might be slower time changing and brains that can rapidly emulate or at least, you know, simulate various phenotypes being neural states.

And in a previous paper, we talked about whether those neural states are themselves phenotypes.

Just to quickly run through these last figures, figure four is an example of autocatalytic closure.

So this could be like a metabolic network or self-replicating nucleotide sequences or programs that replicate themselves with or without mutation.

And the point here is really to say that that kind of causal dependency structure that we saw in figure three, it might not just be bumper cars or ants bumping into each other.

It could be something like

different types of information that are connected to each other and so as we start to think about different spatial temporal scales and all these different mechanisms that exist we want to find those invariances at a structural and a dynamical levels that help us study this diversity of systems using a common formal framework

Figure 5 is something we already looked a little bit at, but it is this fractal idea, zooming in on the fractal broccoli.

And basically, the left side has sensory and action states surrounding three gray nodes, but that's itself zoomed in from a swarm of similar agents.

And so in a tissue, maybe it's very patterned.

Like in the skin cells, the boundaries between the cells are very stable, so they can have adhesive molecules that make it a functional skin sheet, and they're still exchanging information in that grid topology.

But also, maybe the swarm on the right side consists of moving subunits, so like Stephen was talking about with the swarm.

And at that point especially, it is important to have a statistically driven understanding of causal relationships rather than one that's just around drawing a dashed line around the system as we visually see it.

And then just lastly, figure six, which I think will be perfect to save for later, especially because it in some ways does connect this action inference generalization to specifically morphogenesis.

which is an example of a phenotype decision-making that people might not always expect to be put in the same category along with what it is our brains or CPUs are doing.

But I think that's a perfect jumping off point for next week when we, yeah, yeah, nice.


SPEAKER_10:
And going through this is going to hopefully address Alejandro's question, I think.

So yeah, this is a good jumping off point, I think.


SPEAKER_09:
Perfect.

And we have a few questions just prepared for next week, but we're not going to go to them now.

We will talk about that next time.

That concludes the main section.

And we'll also just have anyone can raise their hand and give a final point.

But I just wanted to say that we'll provide a follow up form to our live participants.

I'll put it in this chat as soon as someone starts to give a final thought.

any feedback suggestions or questions from our listeners participants are always welcome of course everyone's engagement is welcomed and people can stay in communication with us so if anyone has their hand raised i'll be happy to hear their first thoughts while i post the link


SPEAKER_10:
Nobody's hand is raised, but thanks again for the continued engagement with our work.

It means a lot, and I think this is extremely useful, both I think for us as a little community working through these things and for the broader audience of the free energy active inference stuff.

So I'm very grateful.

Thank you very much.


SPEAKER_09:
Awesome.

Muddy raised your hand.

And if anyone else wants to give any final thoughts, what they reflected on from today's discussion, what they'd be excited to hear about in next week's discussion.


SPEAKER_06:
I was just going to say, thanks.

This is really, really great.

I think.

First of all, just on a personal level, it's great to get back involved with people who are much cleverer than I am and be surrounded by this new knowledge.

But secondly, I can really start to sense the snowball effect in the active inference community.

It's only a matter of time before it really leads over into industry.

It's a really, really exciting time to get involved in the space.

Thank you all.

That's really it.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Richard and anyone else, freely raise your hand.


SPEAKER_12:
Yeah, I think this is really interesting.

And I think there's so many different points of connection and interaction with so many different disciplines.

And I think one of the difficulties is the barrier to entry is just so high in terms of the terminology, the mathematics, to try and wrap your head around these things.

But once you begin to understand it conceptually, I think people can start to go, OK, I know what this is and I can talk about this.

And so I think one thing that maybe, you know, discuss moving forward is, are there ways to kind of get almost sandbox working groups where people can kind of start really empirically playing around with ideas and data sets that kind of emerge naturally out of these conversations?

Because, you know, cold calling somebody and saying, hey, I've got this idea.

Can you explain to me what a Markov blanket is?

And let's work together.

People are like, no, son, I got things to do.

I'm sorry.

I think, you know, there's a way that we can kind of merge from these really great productive working group, our discussions into maybe something where people start producing actual collaborations across disciplines, I think would be a really fantastic thing.


SPEAKER_10:
Also, I just want to reiterate also that there's this reading group that's ongoing on the Carl Friston's monograph.

So for those of you who are interested in actually, you know,

Surmounting the barrier to entry, as it were, we've recorded the chats and everything.

So if you do want to join, just drop me a DM.

um and yeah we've grown to this is originally going to be like me and eight buddies just reading through the monograph and we've grown to a community of almost 100 scholars uh yeah following this uh like remotely with the recordings available and we're going to turn these recordings heavily edited and everything into pedagogical material a kind of like video based a companion to a free energy principle for a particular physics

So yeah, if anyone is interested, the group is kind of semi-loosely open, especially to people who are doing active research in the tradition.

So yeah, drop me a DM and I'll hook you up.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool.

Stephen, and then anyone else, if a last thought comes to mind.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, well, just to reiterate, yeah, it's really useful.

I like to see everyone nibbling at this from different directions.

It shows a lot the questions everyone's asking.

Because otherwise you're thinking, it's just me that's thinking this.

And sometimes it is, and then sometimes it's not.

So it's kind of good to know which is which.

Because sometimes it's not clear.

It's just a figment of my imagination.

And so the only other thing I thought might be cool to bring is that new paper that came out on reciprocal active inference that's just come out.

might be interesting at some point to think about, because that might open up another level of development from this paper.


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, very interesting paper by Matt Sims at Edinburgh, who I'm very excited about this stuff.

So Matt Sims developed an account of symbiosis that draws on the multi-scale integration framework that we've developed

He talks about bidirectional multiscale integration, so not just integration of the parts of one biological organism, but the integration of effectively a symbiotic union of organisms with different phenotypes.

The paper uses the, I think it's the bobtail squid that gets colonized by bacteria.

And so, yeah, it's a very, very interesting paper and I'd highly recommend it.


SPEAKER_09:
Cool, cool, very interesting.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I just wanted to reiterate what Steven just mentioned.

It's great to have this ongoing conversation and to hear how different people phrase the questions that I think we're all thinking.

So I'm really looking forward to next week's discussion and kind of seated with the question that Alejandra stated earlier.


SPEAKER_09:
Perfect.

Well, thank you all for participating.

The Google form for you to provide any feedback for the live participants is in the chat.

For people who are watching this live or in replay, please provide us your feedback so we can make this better on-ramp for Active Inference, the community, the ideas, and ultimately the projects too.

So it's just great stuff.

Another one in the books, 5.1 for Active, and I'm going to terminate the live stream.

Thanks so much for listening.

## V7yNq_KpHo8

SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference live stream.

This is Act-Inf Stream 5.2.

It is October 6th, 2020.

First time listeners or not, welcome to Team Calm.

We are an experiment in online team communication and learning related to Active Inference.

You can find us on Twitter at Inference Active.

You can email us at ActiveInference at gmail.com, on Keybase at our public team, or on YouTube.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us feedback, live participants as well as viewers, so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And also just as far as video etiquette goes, please mute if there's noise in your background and raise your hand so that we can use the stack to hear from everyone.

As mentioned, we are here in ACT InfoStream 5.2 and here's a little bit about how today is going to go.

First, we're gonna have our regular warmup section where we'll do some intros and we'll check in with a few questions.

Last time in Act Imp Stream 5.1, we did a pretty broad overview summary of the paper, went through the figures, the goals, the abstract.

And today in the follow-up discussion part two, we're gonna be going through, first off, any questions or comments that people want to address.

And then after we've exhausted that, or if we're excited just to get to the other topics, we'll go right ahead.

We will...

Return to the debate about internalism versus externalism, because that is in some ways what the broader scholastic tradition that the paper is involved in is about.

We'll talk about Markov blankets.

We'll talk about what it means to be internal and what it means to be generative.

We'll talk about changing one's mind.

We'll talk about free energy minimization.

We'll talk about some of the limits of cognition in science.

And then we'll hopefully return to the figures, especially figure six and mechanistic differences in different multi-scale systems.

So here we are in the introduction section.

For this intro section, please introduce yourself and your location.

Just say a quick hello and a short introduction if you would like, and then pass it to someone else.

I'll go first.

I'm Daniel Friedman.

I'm in Davis right now, and I will pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_07:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm in Toronto right now and very excited about being here today.

I'm going to pass it to Alex.


SPEAKER_05:
Hello, I'm Alex.

Today I'm in Moscow as well as usually.

Hello everybody.

And I pass it to Ivan.

Hi, my name is Ivan.

I'm from Moscow also.

And I pass it to Alejandra.


SPEAKER_02:
Hello, hello everybody.

My name is Alejandra.

And also as usual I'm here in Mexico.

And I pass it to Sasha.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, good morning, everybody.

I am, as usual, in Davis, California.

And I'm looking forward to this conversation.

And I pass it to Maxwell.


SPEAKER_01:
Hey, everyone.

I'm Maxwell Ramstad.

Happy to be joining this conversation from sunny Montreal in Canada.

And I'll pass it to Shannon.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi everyone, I'm Shannon and I'm currently in South Dakota.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome, does that get through everyone?

Yep, a nice small tight group today.

Thanks everyone for coming in.

So let's go through our warmup questions and we would love to hear from all of you on these.

The first warmup question is what got you excited for today's discussion?

What brought you to the followup discussion?

and people can raise their hand, all start.

What got me excited was that second phase of interacting with the paper, which is beyond just at a first pass what was said in the paper and what the figures represented to tie it to deeper questions and to deeper ideas.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, Stephen?

Yeah, what really excited me was a lot of stuff that came up last week.

So that was really useful and I got some new insights.

But I'd say I saw a potential way that it was moving towards this multi-method approach.

potential to bring together different ways of thinking and practices.

So I'm interested in how the kind of different levels sort of can come together in different ways and privilege different types of scales in ways which are actually quite practical and useful.

So that was really, really interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And we'll definitely talk about how the different scales come to bear.

If anyone else wants to raise their hand, otherwise I'll just go to the second discussion question, which is if at all, how have you updated your beliefs on multi-scale integration since the last conversation?

I think that was a question from Sasha.

So maybe I'll go to her while other people are raising their hand while she unmutes.


SPEAKER_04:
Um,

Yeah, that was a bit of a cheeky question.

But I think we got into a lot of interesting topics last week.

And really getting into the philosophy of science, that was really interesting for me.

And it's a topic I hope to explore, especially in thinking about different levels of

how to create the appropriate system for studying cognition and where to draw that boundary.

Something I'm interested for figuring out in my own work with studying neuroscience and development, and just really enjoyed hearing everyone's perspective as well.

So my update was that philosophy of science is really critical to the practicality of experimental design.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, there's in many of these papers and ideas, there's us experiencing the system.

We're apparently only experiencing our individual cognition, but then what does it really mean to be experiencing individual cognition?

Anyone else wanna have a thought on that?

And also I'll just put up the third question is what would be something that you'd like to clarify or explore in today's conversation?


SPEAKER_03:
so shannon i'm really curious about um this idea that the mind is skull bound while also giving cognition um to extended systems that like extend beyond the mind especially in like being in a neuroscience lab and like what i am interested in studying and explaining is how the brain is involved with some cognitive process while also understanding

and not minimizing the role that the body or the environment plays.


SPEAKER_00:
Agreed.

Within the Markov blanket of this conversation that we're having, there's some sort of distributed cognition at play, but who or what is experiencing that and what are the dynamics of that type of cognition?

Does anyone else want to have any thoughts on these questions or we can just start going through some of these quotes and ideas?

Okay, I'm just going to go into it.

So here we are in Multiscale Integration Beyond Internalism and Externalism, a 2019 paper.

Last week in 5.1, we went through it pretty broadly.

Today, we're going to follow up on some key quotations, some key ideas, go through the figures again in this sort of spiraling back at a higher level, wanting to understand what is on the table, what are the implications of what is being discussed.

The goals of the paper, just to rehearse them, were to make explicit this description of the boundaries of cognitive systems as being multiscale.

And so when we think that the boundaries of cognitive systems are nested and multiple, and the implication of this to the authors is that cognition has no fixed or essential boundaries,

And where that sort of took me as far as the slides go was what were the implications of taking multiscale integration seriously?

And how does free energy principle and free energy minimization fit into all of this?

So first, is there anything that people just want to raise as something to address or think about before we jump into some of these topics?

If not, just feel free to write it down and we'll return to it soon.

Okay.

For the first topic, yes, Steven, go ahead.


SPEAKER_07:
Just one thing that I think might be good to mention that came up is this idea of how we privilege certain levels and maybe then end up just stuck at that level, like a psychological level or a behavioral level or whatever.

So

There's an implication, I think, in this to think about the levels, which is kind of maybe some way a bit of an abstract thing when across all the levels and how do we actually privilege in some sort of intentional way the levels that are going to be sort of looked at as the kind of active inference engines that are most relevant.

So that's something that came up for me.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I would actually like to follow up and ask you, we talk about this privilege level of analysis and recall Dennis Noble's paper.

What does it mean to privilege one level of analysis?

Or is that something that is just a priori to be avoided?

Or do we want to privilege larger systems, smaller systems?

How do we give each player in the system its due respect?

And where does that fit in with this vocabulary of privileging one level of analysis?


SPEAKER_07:
I was wondering whether that's where that active, dynamic kind of structure that's at play might come in.

I was thinking that there's this sense that you've got kind of the overall kind of dynamics of the system, but there are key places where...

And there's something, I think Shannon mentioned this last week in terms of the certain levels which are most relevant in terms of how the dynamics are yielding some systemic kind of act, which is appropriate at the particular spatial temporal level.

um sort of speeds or distances which are relevant for the study or the experiment or the practice which is being looked at so i suppose in some ways you have to start to come back from the other directions at some point um assuming you're moving more and more towards practice and say okay what's the what what is it that the the kind of intentionality of the researchers


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And we'll return to this idea about, are we looking at the dynamics, at the causal structure of the system?

Are those the same thing?

Here, we're going to talk for a little bit about the big philosophical question, which is internalism versus externalism.

So I'll start with just a definition of the topic from encyclopedia.com.

And here it's about epistemology, but there's analogous dichotomies in other areas.

They write, internalism in epistemology is a thesis about the nature of epistemic normativity or the sort of normativity that is involved in the evaluation of cognition.

Specifically, internalists claim that the epistemically normative status of a belief is entirely determined by factors that are relevantly internal to the believer's perspective on things, perhaps skullbound, as Shannon said.

By contrast, externalists in epistemology deny this.

The externalist says that the epistemic status of a belief is not entirely determined by factors that are internal to the believer's perspective.

And that with the spy versus spy to represent that they're sort of playing off of each other.

They don't totally disagree, these two viewpoints.

We can see with this graphic from a 2010 paper by Linnaean Steiner.

they represented externalism and internalism.

And I just thought this was an interesting figure because it showed to what extent these two schools of thoughts basically agree.

They basically agree that there is an organism that is part of a coupling device, like the body, let's just say, and through actions,

there's action on the environment the environment provides sensations to the organism and that's the action perception loop so that's sort of what we agree on between these two sides where is there disagreement well the two main things on this figure where we can see disagreement are first off what the externalist sees as happening inside of the organism to a large extent is strategy

Whereas the internalist sees the organism as making representations about the world.

And then another difference that's reflected on this figure is that perception, the wavy line, is in the internalist's view inside of the organism.

It's skull bound.

It's happening downstream of the representation.

Whereas for the externalist, the perception is coming from the interaction between the organism's strategies and the environmental causality.

And that was something I was sort of just thinking, well, doesn't perception still happen inside, even if there's an important role for perceptions outside?

And so just looking at this graphic or just thinking about where you stand at this moment, would you say that you're an internalist and or an externalist?

Just looking at these graphics, does one of them seem more or less consonant with your stance on how ecologically embedded systems are in the world or

Does there seem to be something that's missing from one of these sides or the other?


SPEAKER_03:
If and or is a real choice and we can pick and, then definitely have you both.


SPEAKER_00:
What makes you want to take and in this divide?


SPEAKER_03:
I feel like I want to answer that question at the end of our discussion.


SPEAKER_00:
Perfect.

I might as well.

It's why I threw in the and and why the spy versus spy are shaking hands, because the whole topic and the discussion in some senses is we're moving beyond internalism and externalism.

This may or may not be a false dichotomy.

And then the question would be, well, why has this false dichotomy, if it is attracted so much attention or tension?

what is going to be the framework that is going to step beyond internalism and externalism and potentially provide a satisfying resolution to all of the similarities and the differences that these two models present with.

So again, the action perception loop doesn't seem like there's broad disagreement on those topics.

However, there seems to be a few key issues that are up for debate, such as whether perception happens

purely internally, or whether perception is related to feedback with the environment, and then whether what organisms are doing is best thought of as representational or as strategic.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_07:
I think also those diagrams, there is also that piece in the diagram where they kind of make out that they're directly

causality and the environment they've got a direct relationship to.

Because in some ways your actions, if we see that as really you've got access to your proprioceptive signals and your sensations are kind of your ongoing stream of data, that

That link to the environment, I'd say, is a lot less... I think both of these two approaches rely on there being quite an idea that my action is touching the environment, as opposed to my action being a kind of set of proprioceptive signals which I sort of am inferring something from, and my sensations are the environment.

You know, this idea that I see the world, as opposed to having to piece together a whole load of...

non-linear data over time so i suppose there is a kind of maybe a challenge to that part of the um of the two ways of looking at externalism and internalism that's been done in the past shannon i suppose um that's true too so you said like there's a sense in which i touch the world um stephen and i think phenomenologically there's a sense that i touch and i experience the world


SPEAKER_03:
But if I'm thinking about the brain, the thing that the neuron perceives is not the world.

It's the signals that have been translated into electrical and chemical impulses.

And that's where, like, I really want to know how the brain works.

I got to be internalist about it.

But if I want to know how I experience the world, then there's a lot more externalism that you can allow in.


SPEAKER_00:
Good points, and also we'll return later on in the conversation to what kind of experiments would be differentiating.

How will we reduce our uncertainty about the strengths and weaknesses of these two options?

Maxwell?


SPEAKER_01:
I just want to point out that our agenda in this paper was sort of to dispel the isms of internal and external ism, right?

So, I mean, the idea is sort of that, well, cognitive science for most of its, you know, from its inception to basically the heuristically like the late 80s was an internalist program.

And then externalist approaches started appearing in the late 80s and 90s, you know, that emphasize things like embodiment, you know, the fact that cognition is grounded in the operations of a body.

And then you saw the appearance of theses in philosophy like the extended mind thesis or the extended cognition thesis, which is a strong metaphysical claim that says, well, actually, the realizers of cognitive processes spill over into the environment.

So that if you're going to draw a boundary around the cognitive system, you have to include external components, environmental components as realizers of these processes.

And the kind of hard line externalist position is basically kind of the traditional inactivist position.

It's the equal partners principle, which essentially says cognition is always necessarily a loop between internal structures like the brain and action and external structures like the ones in the environment that we're interacting with.

and uh our view on that was that um any essentialist position about the boundaries of cognition which which is to say any position that says okay well we can define a necessary and sufficient set of conditions such that we can identify whether this or that you know is a bit of cognition and whether it's internal or external to some you know the organism's boundary that any essentialist position

of that sort, is going to be wrongheaded, that there's not kind of a one-size-fits-all way to cut up systems.

So basically we're making two kind of ontological claims about the boundaries of cognition, which is that they're multiple and that they're nested.

So they're multiple in the sense that depending on what you want to explain, then the relevant boundaries might be around a cluster of cells in the brain, or it might be the brain itself, or some region of the brain, or maybe it's the brain-body system.

So it depends.

And then the epistemological point, which is precisely that it depends on our explanatory interests.

So it may be that...

If you want to explain, for example, daydreaming or some other kind of phenomenon, well, you're mostly going to be appealing to brain processes.

But if you want to explain sport performance, then this loop thing is going to be the most important.

And importantly, the point of the article is that the free energy principle gives us reason to think that we shouldn't.

take these strong essentialist positions.

There's a way around them and a way of being more ecumenical and flexible about where we situate these boundaries.


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice.

I agree.

And hopefully that's where this discussion will take people is beyond the dogma towards the specifics of the situation.

And I also was thinking about like dreaming versus action.

Are these internalist versus externalist stances challenged by actionless experience like a dream or is a dream?

Are they going to couch that as some type of experience?

And you know what?

enough with that let's just look for a framework that will help us deal with the specifics of the situation so speaking of internal and external and how they're treated under the free energy principle let's talk a little bit about markov blankets so three kinds of markov blankets are shown on this slide

There's a quote in the paper that the Markov blankets are a result of the system's dynamics.

And two twin questions that I wanted to raise and think about were, what if we compare two systems that have the same components but different dynamics?

And the sort of inverse of that question, which is two systems that have different components but the same dynamics.

And so especially if we think about the Markov blankets,

boundary shielding internal states, so black box around some level of analysis, all we're able to see are the emitted states.

So the dynamics of the emitted states may be similar, even though there's two different underlying realities.

So two different computers, different hardware, but then they're able to run the same program at the same speed.

And then the other side of the question would be, okay, you can have the same computer with the same underlying componentry, but then it might be involved in multiple different kinds of dynamics.

So how does that fit with the Markov blanket?

What is the Markov blanket really tracking?

Is it tracking the inputs and the outputs of the objective system?

Is it tracking the inputs and the outputs of us measuring the system?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, so one thing to highlight just before we really get started is that I think too much emphasis has been placed on the literature, in part, I mean, in my own work also, on the Markov blanket on its own.

Markov blankets are very common and explanatorily uninteresting just on their own for the most part.

So I mean, a Markov blanket, you have a set of random variables.

You want to see whether this and that one are independent.

Well, the Markov blanket is the set of random variables that renders them independent in the sense that basically they're

that conditioned on the existence of this other set of variables than these two are statistically independent in terms of like their, yeah.

So that's cool, but there are Markov blankets everywhere, right?

So you can think of like the present as a Markov blanket between the past and the future, for example.

It's a very general thing.

In the context that we're talking here,

The Markov blankets get their explanatory purchase when you combine it with the other kind of moving parts of the free energy principle formalism, which are the non-equilibrium steady state slash generative model thing.

So basically the Markov blanket tells you which set of states kind of belong to the system and which don't.

And then the non-equilibrium steady state density tells you, well, what is the basically like the set of correlated values that these states can have such that the phenotype is maintained.

And it's the two together that really get you the explanatory power of the free energy principle.

Sort of like where the system is and what it is.

The where kind of answered by the Markov blanket thing.

and the what answered by the generative model aspect of it.

So the Markov blanket itself, in the free energy principle stuff, you get it from a sparsity constraints on the flow

So basically, this means, I know it sounds technical, but it basically means that all of the states of the system are flowing.

They're changing dynamically.

They're moving around in the state space.

The system is moving around in its state space.

And basically, when we say sparsity conditions on the flow, it's that some variables don't affect the change of other variables, so that the rate of change

of one variable with respect to some other set of variables is a relevant kind of way of measuring the influence of one set of variables on another.

And I mean, the general idea is if conditioned on some set of variables, the rate of change of one variable relative to the other is zero, then you can say that there's an independence statistically.

So the way that the blankets are constructed is by analyzing the dependencies structure of the flow and then saying, okay, well, the dynamics themselves seem to carve out these kind of independencies.

So it's a dynamical notion.

And I'm emphasizing that because the dynamics themselves are premised on the whole generative model aspect of it.

So it all kind of moves together.

And you don't get the free energy stuff just out of Markov blankets.


SPEAKER_00:
Shannon?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, following up on that, I think there's a way to rephrase these two questions in that the first question, comparing systems with the same components but different dynamics, is asking sort of how the same set of components, if you give them a different set of initial conditions, can exhibit completely different behaviors or come to embody different

phenotypes in a certain niche.

And the second question, what if they have different components, but they have the same dynamics, is a question of multiple realizability, where you could have the same sort of computation or something enacted with different components.

And these questions together, I think, highlight the importance of if you have this Markov blanket over time, this sort of like system of interest over time, the importance of the way that system is structured.

and the function between, we could say, the different nodes underneath the Markov blanket.

And that's more important than the actual physical stuff it's made out of, maybe.

And back to the first question, the role of the environment in affecting the internal states of that system.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, thank you, and well stated and tied back to these other questions about multiple realizations.

The follow-up question to that was just in which ways the blanket is tracking just the pure observations of the system versus the causal relationships.

And you gave a great example about how, depending on the initial conditions, that means that the conditional dependencies in the systems may be very different.

And so in those cases, the Markov blankets are different.

And in some senses, this is an implication of saying that the boundaries of cognition are context dependent because it shouldn't surprise us that the Markov blanket, and we will get to the generative model and internal states soon, but it shouldn't surprise us that the boundaries change because there's times where the cognitive process is happening in different causal ways or different spatial skills.

Steven.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I think also this might be where that challenge with the mind and the environment, because we talk about what mental processes or what environmental processes, but what's the constituents that are being put together in terms of like the morphology or the actual, you know, am I engaging my muscles in my hand, and that has, you know, the hand is...

constructed so it's not just my feeling of my phenotype about how I should act it's not like my knowing of my phenotype it's like my actual biological engineering is going to enable certain things to happen you know unlike a chimpanzee or something like that there's certain things I can just do so there's this middle bit which you know we're able to adapt and adjust through our cognition

and say what gets brought online between the environment and the sensorium.

So that's the bit that kind of really complicates things, but obviously seems to be really relevant.

I think sometimes it gets lost when it gets kind of more theoretical.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, let's look at this very provocative quote, which is, in this sense, cognitive science might be understood as the study of generative models and processes.

It is the business of modeling the correlational or causal structure of actions and observations of the organism.

The generative model, then, is not the vehicle of something like content or mutual information.

Instead, it is the tool that we use to study cognitive systems as an explanatory model, and indeed, perhaps more speculatively, the guide or path living systems entail and follow to stay alive as control systems.

So in both of these quotes, there is some pretty interesting notions from a cognitive science perspective.

And also it hints at this way that the Markov blanket or that the active inference idea, it not only is how organisms are in their environment.

And so that's referring to this path that living systems follow to stay alive.

In other words, that that's what the animals are doing or that's what the bacteria is doing.

But also it's the tool that we use to study cognitive systems.

And I thought it was pretty interesting that it was first and foremost and unambiguously presented as a tool that we use to study systems.

And then perhaps more speculatively, it was a guide that living systems follow to stay alive.

So, Maxwell, yeah, I'm curious just about that breakdown.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah to give you some context this this uh this paper multi-scale integration um the schrodinger answering schrodinger's question and a tale of two densities were all originally the same paper uh that we split up into different lumps uh with answer answering schrodinger's question being the more kind of theoretical mathematical statement and then these two other papers being kind of philosophical explorations of the consequences of all this

So over the past few months it's become clearer to me what's going on here.

And I have a paper on this now which has been published in Entropy with Ineshi Polito and Carl Friston.

It's called Is the Free Energy Principle a Formal Theory of Semantics?

And yes is the answer to that question.

And basically I've been playing around with the idea that there are kind of two levels of instrumentalism

uh that are at play here so instrumentalism broadly speaking in the philosophy of science is the view that well the work of science happens by leveraging scientific models and getting them to do some interesting explanatory work explaining the variance in our data and stuff like that so

An instrumentalist would claim that scientific models aren't literal descriptions of the universe but a kind of useful tool that we as scientists use to explain the main causal features of the phenomena around us.

So there's a first level then that you can be instrumentalist about the free energy principle.

And I think that on a good day when I wake up on the right side of the bed, I'm an instrumentalist about scientific models.

Science is about, I think, comparing models of data with theoretical and formal models, ultimately.

And these can be read in a very, very large way.

So on a bad day, I'm a realist, or I have a realist bent, and I really think that these models are getting at something like the true causal structure of reality.

But that's, I think, scientific hubris, maybe, or whatever.

But anyway, so there's this kind of meta level

this philosophy of science kind of instrumentalism level.

And I think that there's a debate there.

Some of my close friends and collaborators think that the FEP is finally a literal theory of how brains process information.

So it's not just a metaphor or an as-if thing, but it's really this is how it happened.

All this is independent.

from what the the theory the free energy principle itself says and so the more controversial claim but i think increasingly i think this is the only way to really interpret what the math does like coherently uh what the free energy principle is in a sense

is a statement about how organisms are able to exploit, use, or leverage the statistical structure of their bodies in motion to generate patterns of adaptive behavior.

So from that point of view, you know, regardless of what your position is at the meta level or the philosophy of science level, at the theoretical level, what the FEP is telling you is that organisms are exploiting a model effectively that they are,

a statistical model that they embody in order to generate patterns of adaptive behavior.

So that was the, that's the clarify.

Increasingly, I think that, you know, double instrumentalism, I'm all about this nested stuff, right?

So instrumentalism nested within instrumentalism is probably the right way to approach these questions.

But it definitely for sure,

At the theory level, the free energy principle is an instrumentalist theory of cognition, regardless of whether we're realist about the ontology that it might entail.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for that clarification and kind of reading between the citations there.

And I also really agree with that.

It's sort of like, well, we've tuned into the idea that it really is about our model of the world and about us in relationship with the world.

And now people just say, well, how is the world really?

And then the free energy principle saying, well, it's really about the feedback between the organism and the environment.

And then.

we still want something to pin down to that's really how it is.

But that's the instrumentalism of science is whether you use optimal foraging theory or an economic theory or some other theory, that doesn't change what the system is doing.

The bacteria doesn't know, doesn't care what version of which theoretical framework you're using or what papers you have or haven't read.

It's doing what it does.

And

The free energy principle is saying that what it does is, as you had just described, leveraging the bodies in motion, though also I have some questions about where thought fits into that.

And that's really it.

It's really us in feedback, understanding our environment to guide skillful action.

And you can't just cut the loop there and say, well, but then what is just what is really happening?

It's really what's happening.

And the real implications of that are, as you described.

So if there's no other comments on this slide, I'm going to go to this next few points about what is internal and what is generative.

So first was a very interesting quote in the latter part of the paper, and they wrote,

First, we take issue with the claim that under the free energy principle, the generative model is something internal to the organism.

So they're dissenting from the opinion that the generative model is something that is merely internal, i.e.

that the generative model comprises neuronal vehicles or any other vehicles, I guess like cars.

Rather, the generative model is a mathematical construct that explains how the quantities embodied by the system's architecture change to transcribe, that is, update beliefs about, the causes of the system's sensory observation.

What should be at stake in the debate between the internalists and externalists is the status of the guess that the organism embodies.

namely the posterior beliefs encoded by internal states, and whether this guess does or does not constitute the limits of cognition, understood as the avoidance of surprisal or informational homeostasis.

So my question here was, if the internal states are not generative models, or another way to say, if the generative model is not something that's just internal to the organism, what are the internal states?

And then the other side of that question is, well, then what or where is this generative model playing out?


SPEAKER_01:
So I can answer that.

I think it's a lot simpler than it might seem initially.

So in machine learning, if you have a bunch of variables, some of which are hidden, some of which are observable,

and you write a joint probability distribution over all of those variables, then that joint probability distribution or density is called a generative model.

So it's called generative because by representing all of the statistical relations between all of the different variables as this big joint density, you're effectively able to generate the outcomes or the data that you would expect

contingent on these causal relations actually holding between all of the different variables that you're talking about.

So just from a mathematical point of view, this joint density is never represented explicitly anywhere in the brain in the free energy active inference approaches.

Typically, this whole joint density, in all of these kind of more formal models, what you'll typically see is like,

one big probability distribution written on the left-hand side of an equation, p over all of the states that you're trying to look at.

Often these will be states and precisions and all these things.

And then is equal to some big product of likelihood and priors.

And so what's actually encoded in the brain has to do with these likelihoods and priors.

So the idea is that there is a generative model.

at play, but it's only at play in the dynamics.

The generative model is sort of like the wave of falling dominoes.

The wave itself is only present in the kind of motion or dynamics of the domino pile falling.

So what we're kind of proposing here, and we'll be discussing this a bit more in the next weeks with A Tale of Two Densities, the paper which is specifically about this, but

The idea here is what body states actually encode are posterior estimates.

So posterior estimates of the value of states.

Your body is basically your best ongoing guess as to what's causing your sensory states.

And yeah, the generative model itself

is the point of reference for the dynamics.

So if you think about it, what is this joint probability distribution thing?

Well, it's essentially a kind of surface

that the system is moving around over or equivalently that describes the probability of finding the system in a given state at random if you're just sampling it.

And what it's telling you is the allowable covariations between all of the values of the variables that make up the system such that the phenotype is maintained.

So speaking a bit loosely perhaps, this generative model thing

just is the phenotype of the organism in this kind of broad statistical sense of harnessing all of the possible uh you know combinations of states that are compatible with the continued existence of the organism um so i mean it's a bit it's a bit um it's a bit uh hard to grasp i'll admit uh but at least the mathematics of it kind of look like that


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for that explanation.

And it's why we're here is to really dive into some of these key issues.

I think just

Reflecting on the pieces that I'm taking away from this is one is that the free energy principle is describing how scientists investigate systems or investigators of any kind.

And then, as was put perhaps more speculatively, is what is actually happening in the system.

But in some sense, that's secondary because it's so important to be clear about how we're approaching the system.

So instead of saying, oh, well, it's an optimal forager.

It's like, no, I'm studying the ants foraging within an optimal foraging framework.

No one can take that away from me.

And then whether the ant is doing optimal foraging or some other thing, it's almost a secondary question because it's so critical to be clear about our perspective.

And then the second piece is this internal and external

uh debate or whatever it is tension between those two stances is to be clear about where the generative model and um is and what it is and isn't and also it's just a map in territory distinction so let's look at a few more quotes from this paper

Here's a quote.

The generative model is a statistical construct, aka that means by people, that transcribes the expected sensory causal regularities in the process generating sensory states.

The generative model is used to model the set of viable phenotypic statistical relations, such as preferences and action policies, that must be brought forth by the organism in active inference.

In short, a model of a viable state of being for the organism.

Through active inference, internal states are tuned, and this tuning changes its posterior belief, and hence the organism's best guess about what caused its sensation that usually include its own actions.

In other words, a generative model can be used to understand how organisms are able to track or infer their own behavior.

And one key part there is that the best guess doesn't mean the one that's closest to reality per se.

It means it's the most action oriented or evolutionarily relevant guess.

So the best guess for a loud noise isn't just doing inference on the location of the noise or on the exact type of object that caused it.

The best guess when you're doing inference on policy is actually about how the body should change its dynamics.

And then the question that I raised here is just how does a multi-scale generative model work in the brain or in a social group?

And can there be a generative model without action or behavior or external states being influenced so heavily?

Maybe these are things that we can return to later if no one has any comments now.


SPEAKER_07:
So yeah, Steven?

One thing I've been interested in is if you're looking at someone's generative model, what's the best place to look at it?

In a way, if I was to look at someone's physical states and how that's compatible with their existence in the environment, is that a good read on their generative model as much as looking in the brain?

If the states that I'm in constitute my generative model's best guess of how I should be in the world,

In a way, that is a window into what my organism level cognition is.

I don't know whether thinking is the right term.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh yeah, I agree with that.

Well, if you look at a lot of the active inference modeling that's based on the partially observable Markov decision process implementation,

For the most part, it's a behavioral modeling framework.

What you're trying to do when you're tuning your generative model is to get your behavioral profile to align with some data that you're generating.

Behavior on some task of some sort.

The connection to the neuro stuff is a bit more elaborate.

We rely on auxiliary hypotheses and other work that suggest that these precisions are being estimated here, these prediction errors are being generated here, and so on.

If you want to, you can use a fitted generative model to make predictions about the neural substrates that you would expect to be engaged in this or that task.

And that can help guide, you know, fMRI and EEG experimental design to kind of probe into like specific brain regions that you think might be involved.

So you get into this kind of circular experimental design thing if you want to do the brain aspect.

But actually these techniques are more easily used for behavioral modeling because you don't have to make all these assumptions about brain structure.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just one comment on there, and this was clarified by reading the SPM statistical parametric mapping textbook.

The generative models were used extensively to rather than just do descriptive statistics on the very complicated data structure of neuroimaging.

What was being done in the SPM approach was a generative model of brain states was being used as a generative model for the data.

And so, again, that's that instrumentalism of the scientific kind that just from the purely statistical, like, how am I going to write this paper perspective?

having a generative model or having the brain regions connected in a generative model that generates data given certain hypotheses about how brain regions are connected, that turns out to be a lot more tractable to study and it allows you to do model comparisons in a very, very direct way.

And then,

maybe the activity of what those brain regions are doing is itself making a generative model, a Cartesian theater or something like that.

It'd be wild and amazing if true, and also wild and amazing if the bold, the brain oxygen level dependent signal captured that.

But at the very least, and again, this is sort of retreating to the scientific instrumentalism, at the very least, it's a way that we can investigate the changes in the dynamics of those systems.

And so...


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, absolutely.

I mean, this is the duality of techniques that we use, right?

On the one hand, there's dynamical causal modeling, which as you're pointing out, Dan, doesn't assume that the process that you're modeling is itself an active inference process, although it could.

So, you know, this is the technique that we use in fMRI data analysis, for example, and it's also the technique that has been used recently by Carl Friston's group to model the spread of coronavirus.

Which, you know, you could think that, you know, maybe corona itself is an active inference type thing, but you don't need to make that assumption to use this modeling strategy and try to extract, you know, using what the corona studies do essentially.

is take a bunch of raw data, like a raw number of infected, a raw number of deaths from corona, and use that as data that you're essentially trying to then write a generative model of and fit the generative model to the time series effectively to kind of extract the causal structure of the disease process in this case that's leading to the data that we're observing.

Yeah, active inference modeling can be combined with this, but makes the assumption that the agents that we're modeling are all performing a kind of active inference, variational inference thing.


SPEAKER_07:
Nice.

Stephen?

I think this also links nicely.

I do a lot of spatial cognition and how, so we think about, oh, I see something.

When I see something within this direction, there's actually a recent paper I saw where people who've lost their hearing, who are deaf, basically,

the brain region for their vision, it actually maps out wider and has less resolution in the middle because they no longer can hear things coming in from their sides.

They can't perceive things by listening to something that comes into their auditory field.

So they have to expand out

their visual field and so this this this sense of like how we bring in our sensorium because we can hear all around us but only for a certain distance we can see a long way but only in a certain direction and it could some of those another paper i've heard about where people would touch their nose it could be because you're trying to think through smell it's like you know like you sniff out a problem

So you've got this kind of like the modality, like just when you try and feel your way into a problem and ground yourself, you don't ground yourself with your eyes, right?

You ground yourself with your bottom or whatever it is.

And you hear the field or you listen to the field or you see the future or you sniff out wrongdoing or you taste, there's a bad taste in my mouth about, so this is kind of interesting because

these these are kind of mechanisms that are kind of just pure sensorum but there's also this kind of um the way those sensorum relate spatially into the environment and couple um you know what sort of statistical parameters are they relating to so yeah i thought that's kind of fits in with what you're saying


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, thanks for that.

And just to give one last comment on this generative versus a descriptive model, what reality hands us, the CSV that it hands the scientist or the images that it hands us from our sensory observations,

We could go just from the data and just identify, keep on going upstream until we have a model of the world.

And that's sort of correlation all the way down.

You can say, well, it was big and red, and you can keep on carrying that correlation between bigness and redness, but it's always just going to be correlational.

And then the other approach would be to go this back and forth between the observations and then an actual generative model where let's just say big and red cause each other, or there's a hidden cause that causes big and red to exist.

And then through expectation maximization, EM algorithms or other approaches,

fitting that generative model gives us a lot of power.

And it's very computationally tractable to fit the causal relationships that could generate the observed data.

And so the expectation maximization algorithm is a good starting point for people who want to learn more about this in the scientific instrumentalist perspective for the next Alejandra.


SPEAKER_02:
So, yeah, I was I was thinking this

I don't know how to say, maybe it's correct to say a boundary between this autopoietic process, thinking in a cell, for example, when we can talk about a generative model and allostasis processes on the other side, like only homeostatic processes.

So when you can

like observe a cell and okay this autopoiesis processes are driven by a generative model or they are just like more reactive and homeostatic I don't know but I was all the week long I was thinking if

there is like a boundary or any distinction or just to make an inference about metabolic changes in order to maintain these desired states or just react and compensate them.

I don't know, but I'm quite confused when taking this autoprojected theory about living things and then thinking about generative models inside this theory.

So I don't know if I'm clear.


SPEAKER_01:
I thought that was pretty clear.

I mean, so I should, you know,

provide the caveat that most inactivists, I think, vehemently disagree with me about this.

But my hot take on this is that the free energy principle completely kind of subsumes autopoietic inactivism, meaning that everything that an autopoietic inactivist can do within their framework, we can do better.

And the reason for that is that, well, so autopoiesis, right, is self-production.

And my understanding, at least, of this for having, I consider myself a kind of reformed inactivist.

This was like my main thing for a while until I stumbled upon the free energy principle.

So inactivists kind of start from the idea of autopoiesis, autonomy, and then kind of work out like how it works.

and what you can say on the basis of autopoyesis.

So the free energy stuff is cool, I think, because it explains to you how the autopoyesis gets established to begin with.

I mean, I haven't written about this, but I kind of feel like

like what Active Inference is doing is putting the adaptive loop first, right?

Rather than just saying, hey, look, there's this Markov boundary, you know, like an inactivist would, hey, look, there's this autopoietic boundary that's kind of producing itself.

Like the Active Inference framework is asking, so what is the set of processes that have to be in play such that a boundary can be maintained over time?

And then the generative model is really just kind of, it's a probability density over all of the states that are kind of

it's secluded behind the Markov blanket and that basically tells you, okay, well, so what are the values of these, uh, states behind the blanket that are allowable?

So look at a very simple, uh, example of this is, uh, so let's consider my, the boundary of my skin, you know, as the kind of organismic boundary for a second.

Well, uh, one of my internal states is core body temperature and my generative model has a kind of normative density.

over this state which says 36.5 degrees Celsius with a very small variance.

And when I'm detecting a discrepancy from that kind of preferred data point, I initiate action to bring myself back to that preferred data point.

So it's getting cold now, so I might put on a parka if I'm trending in the kind of negative direction.

I mean, the point about allostasis and homeostasis is interesting.

I think it's increasingly been worked out by people like Andrew Corcoran and Jacob Howie.

But I mean, like, you know, homeostasis is all about what I just said, right?

So you have a preferred data vector, and you're trying to get yourself as close as possible to that data vector, where that data vector is often going to be something like, okay, well, my body temperature or whatever.

Allostasis is about the control of that data vector, especially in response to stress and environments that are basically frustrating your desire for certain kinds of data.

I actually have a paper that we've been preparing for like a year and something now with Irene Arnaldo and Casper Hesp and Andrew.

Precisely on this issue, the paper is about depression as an allostatic disorder.

So the idea that, you know, if you need to continuously be involved in an allostatic process where you're always away from your kind of default data distribution that you would prefer, then it leads to basically a kind of inflammatory condition where you're kind of accumulating a chronic inflammation effectively from having to stay far away from your preferred kind of homeostatic set point.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, just adding something about that, and thank you, Maxwell.

Actually, I was, well, I am now a reform and activist also.

And thank you for that paper, the two-tail densities.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you for reading it.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, but I don't know what you all think, but...

Is there still any space to reactive processes without inference?


SPEAKER_00:
Maybe I'll speak to the metabolism of angle on the reactive and on the predictive coding side.

Sorry, not predictive coding, just predictive modeling.


SPEAKER_01:
So we can think about like... And I just quickly... The one second response to this is like, well,

Inference here just means tuning statistical structure.

So it's nothing like, you know, that paper, A Tale of Two Densities, tries to make this point, I think.

The free energy formulation doesn't really, it's a bit counterintuitive, but it doesn't necessarily require you to explicitly compute and represent a prediction error in the way that predictive coding might, for example.

If you look at the math of it, the free energy only ever exists in the dynamics, and by that I mean,

the updates.

So you really just need a target data structure and some sensory data.

And that's enough to engage in active inference, if you're able to compute the difference between the two.

Yeah, and then it's just gradient descent.

If you have a mechanism that's in place that can track and keep a lid on that discrepancy, then you're engaging in active inference.

Like, it doesn't need to be, like, this explicit kind of computation.

So, you know, from that point of view, I'm always kind of shocked at the response of an activist to this kind of framework because I think it's everything that an activist would want, right?

Like, it doesn't involve explicit computation.

Whatever information, theoretic quantities are involved only exist in the dynamics.

I mean, you know...


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

And just that last closing point on the metabolism and also to tie it to semiotics.

So a sugar molecule touching the tongue, it's through a receptor which transmits through neural signaling that sweetness and that might elicit in a reactive way the secretion of insulin.

But also insulin gets secreted in advance of a meal as well as in a circadian rhythmic way.

pattern that is adaptive over evolutionary time.

And so there's this meaning making of the sensory inputs of the sweetness of sugar isn't necessarily related to an impending spike.

In fact, artificial sweeteners are example that the sweet taste or the activation of that receptor doesn't necessarily entail a subsequent increase, although in our evolved history it did.

And so there's space in that whole

uh mechanism with the tongue and with the blood sugar and the pancreas there's space for reactive integration of stimuli through semiotics as well as for the predictive secretion of insulin in advance of a meal um i'm gonna go to the next slide because we're coming along pretty nicely so here i just found some funny you know memes about changing your mind and mind over matter and stuff

And the questions I put on here was first with a quote and then two questions.

The quote was, under the free energy principle, the system's posterior belief is refined or tuned under the generative model through a process of variational approximate Bayesian inference, and it becomes a tight bound on the true posterior belief it aspires to.

And so this sort of aspirational belief

uh way of phrasing what systems are trying to do it's not just that it wants to uh change its body temperature to be healthy it aspires to it um i was wondering what people thought about how might these bayesian posterior beliefs be related to consciously held beliefs or thoughts and then where might variously things like affirmations meditation education or propaganda fit into this

So all of these involve sensory as well as thought processes.

How do we figure that these Bayesian beliefs, which may or may not be consciously held, how does that relate?

Why can't we just change our mind to understanding the free energy principle or change our mind to

be different and these memes sort of suggest that it is possible.

And there's entire industries built around telling people, if you can change your mind, you can change your life.

But what actually enables someone to change their mind so that they can change their life?

And how should we think about that in this multi-scale, uh, cognitive framework, Steven.


SPEAKER_07:
This actually ties quite nicely into some of the work around mental space psychology.

If you've got a metaphor, like a metaphor can be a construct in a way which is a bit like the body, but we have like a mental model of how things fit together.

And if that metaphor is still the same, I can update my beliefs fairly quickly, right?

I can, if I'm still in my kind of like scientific chemistry paradigm or whatever,

can update my beliefs the challenge is when I have to transform or update my paradigm and reintegrate into a new metaphor so you've got this this in the way like you saying here this so this this idea of being able to do approximate Bayesian inference

kind of is quite quick and quite easy to do if you're recalibrating posteriors and sensory data and that into you know like the sense that like we're all working together you know and we're all going to try and work this team together and then if it shifts to being like I'm the boss now I've never been a boss before suddenly everyone has to do what I need to tell them

now suddenly my whole mental model of what it means to be at work has shifted now that can be something then that i have to do like doctors you have to learn your practice you have to relearn what that means because you have to reconfigure and then you can start to work at speed again so i think this this is quite quite a nice way to tie that together


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, these are really just thoughts to raise.

We'll move on.

But just I wondered, okay, well, if the body is some, you know, if my arm is aspiring to be this length or aspiring to have, you know, this ratio of muscle to fat or something like that, where do our conscious beliefs fit into that?

And are those upstream of our phenotype?

Are they downstream?

Are they themselves a phenotype?

How do mental states influence our physical states and action?


SPEAKER_01:
I think it depends what you mean by conscious.


SPEAKER_00:
What do you mean by conscious?


SPEAKER_01:
Look, if by conscious you mean a form of reflexive access, then what you need there is a temporally or parametrically deep architecture.

So by that I mean, by temporally deep I mean that you don't want just a generative model that anticipates the next kind of data point that you'll be sensing, but you want the generative model that's capable of entertaining like temporally deep counterfactual like observations contingent on courses of action.

So you might think that if a system is able to

entertain possible counterfactual futures contingent on courses of action, then it would be more conscious than something that couldn't do that.

So our preferred approach recently is parametric depth.

We've been exploring this since a paper that actually was just accepted in neural computation called Deeply Felt Affect.

And so in that paper what we do is effectively induce a hierarchical model that is able to make inferences about its own inferences.

So by that I mean this model takes at a second layer of the generative model, it takes as its data for inference, like its observable states, the posterior state and precision estimations at the lower level.

So from that point of view, what these systems are able to do is have a rudimentary form of self-access, where they are able not just to make inferences about what's causing their data patterns, but inferences about their own inferences and how much they trust them.

So from that point of view, that might also get you slowly closer and closer to something like consciousness.

in the access consciousness sense of like, you know, having a kind of nested or reflexive access to states of your own being.

If you're talking about phenomenal consciousness, I think all bets are off.

I have no idea.

No idea whatsoever.

You know, hard problem.


SPEAKER_00:
That's a tough one.


SPEAKER_01:
It's a very hard problem.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Well, it's just things to raise.

Let's go on to Alejandro.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I was reading this image that if you can change your mind, you can change your life.

Maybe I can read this sentence the way around.

If you can change your life, you can change your mind.

In terms in this active engagement with

with the world.

So if you want to think differently, behave differently, it's not just a desire.

You have to do it.

So then considering that cognition is relational.

So all these Markov blankets and Markov blankets of Markov blankets.

So going up to your consciousness.

So by bodily interactions, I think is the only way you can

change your mind and be conscious about it.

So.


SPEAKER_00:
Sure, Sasha.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I like that restatement of that, that fun phrase, if you can change your life, then you can change your mind, because that just reminds me, I mean, the reason we have all these sayings is because it is really hard to enact behavioral change and

it shouldn't be easy to change your mind because then you wouldn't have learning and memory and you wouldn't have these patterns that your life depended on.

And so thinking about what it means to change your mind or update your priors about something, like if I want to have a different lifestyle or exercise more or something like that, it's not just as simple as deciding that, then you actually have to follow through.

And so how to make that loop easier, um, to complete going from changing your actions to then updating your beliefs.

It's kind of like taking, it's like starting to take the first step before you know, which direction you're moving in.


SPEAKER_00:
Shannon.


SPEAKER_03:
I think this also brings in, um, so like Vygotsky or Piaget's work where you have your cognition scaffolded by an external teacher role.

And like once you're developed, you're not a child anymore.

The scaffolding role comes through propaganda or education or affirmations that are put forth by whatever our sociocultural group is or whatever our social media algorithms are throwing at us.

And so in as much as changing your behavior or changing your life,

can change your mind, also changing the way that you interact with the particular, the particular regime of attention, like the particular social group that you engage with, or that you are nudged to engage with through interactions on social media, or even just regular news media, all sort of like nudge in less volitional ways, your like Bayesian posterior beliefs in terms of

like conscious higher level beliefs about the world.


SPEAKER_00:
Agreed.

Well said.

It's not enough just to say I'm the kind of person who runs every morning because if you're not running, then you're going to be not having your sensory input aligned with your even stated beliefs.

So it takes actually the action to make that connection.

Steven?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I think this is also like, I know if anyone's, you know, when you walk into a cathedral, it's like if you want someone to feel a sense of awe and start to take their consciousness up to the heavens, you know, walk into a 400 foot high cathedral and it will do a lot to you, you know?

And so it's the way that, and it's not necessarily anyone there saying you should believe in God or not straight away anyway, right?


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, let's go through these last few slides because we'll also try to get that figure in.

So just some brief notes on free energy minimization.

A quote from the paper was, under the free energy principle, cognition is what the recognition density or living system does, i.e.

changing to elude surprises and maintaining informational homeostasis by minimizing free energy.

and the way one studies cognition.

So there we're again returning to this double instrumentalism, and we're going to return to this again in our subsequent week's discussions on A Tale of Two Densities.

And the way one studies cognition, i.e.

what the system does, is by developing, simulating, and analyzing the possible generative models that explain how the recognition density of interest, the system of interest, changes so as to attain the minimal free energy.

The mechanics of belief is the only causally relevant aspect of the variational free energy.

The free energy may or may not exist.

What is at stake is the causal consequences of the action-guiding beliefs of organism and groups of organisms, which are harnessed and finessed in the generative model.

What matters is that organisms are organized such that they instantiate such a prior to guide their actions.

And it's not an accident that organism and organization and organ are all related.

And just to show some brief images from a very nice Active Inference tutorial.

Here we can see that there's a generative process on the top.

It's a forest, I guess.

And it is moving through true states.

But those true states are hidden.

And so that's whether or not it's real, that's what's happening.

And observations, the O, are being emitted.

And that's the partially observable Markov model, which we, again, will return to later.

And then what the organism is involved in are changing its own state through time of its generative model with all these caveats and richness that we've been discussing and the actions end up influencing the state or not.

And then that in the next time step provides new observations that update the model.

And then just to look for a second at where free energy fits into this so that like in each of our discussions, we can kind of bridge from the experiential components to the practice, to the scientific theory, and a little bit of the math.

What is being shown here is that if the organism wants to be minimizing its surprise,

And Maxwell, you can fill me in or correct here.

If the organism wants to be minimizing its surprise, which is on the Y axis, and the less surprising, the better, given a adaptive generative model of the world, what it can actually do instead of just on the left side, this function of expectation, that's the blue line.

The way to minimize this is actually to try minimizing the free energy.

And the free energy is a lot more tractable to compute.

And it turns out that it is strictly bounded in a way where by minimizing the free energy, you go quite a long way to minimizing your surprise because they're very closely related in a mathematical sense.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I mean, we have to keep in mind that what's going on here is that the organism is trying to sample the environment

such that the new data that it's receiving is consistent with its preferences about data.

So it's not just a retrospective kind of let's try to fit a model to this data.

It's about a kind of forward-looking kind of sampling strategy.

This is why we, in this other paper that we'll be discussing next week, we argue that this whole framework is inactive fundamentally.

Basically, you can cast any action whatsoever in terms of trying to bring about a preferred data structure.

If you want to wax a little philosophical, you can even relate this to a phenomenology.

I said I have no idea how this active inference stuff relates to phenomenology, but my suspicion

this is pure speculation, but my suspicion is that phenomenal properties kind of correlate with the observable states.

So that it's really like the patterns of observation that you're receiving at any time kind of feel like something.

And then there's like an interpretation of that feeling, which is more like the access dimension.

So that might go some way towards kind of resolving some of these issues.

But yeah, from that point of view, like,

the organism is trying to get to the phenomenology that it prefers, which I think is kind of amenable to, you know, some, some cool, like properly phenomenological kind of accounts of what's going on.

I mean, you know, Deleuze makes this point in, I forget which one of these, but you know, like what is desire, right?

Well, desire is the desire for a certain constellation of things, right?

It's not just like for a thing, at least in Deleuze's thing, like it's,

It's like, you know, you're, you're looking for like, you're looking to inactive inferences, you're, you're looking to sample a data structure that's sort of consistent with the way of being that you are, you know?


SPEAKER_00:
Uh, yeah.

Yeah.

And if you, uh, people want different things and yes, agreed.

It's a constellation, not just obtaining that singular object, Steven.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I could ask you a quick question, Maxwell.

I was wondering, is there, like, a shift from, like, active inference dynamics to, as a kind of a way of thinking, to active inference as sense-making?

Like, does sense... Like, is it active inference all the way up and sense-making all the way at the organism level, or is there a transition when you'd use... It depends.


SPEAKER_01:
Again, it depends whether you mean this more kind of explicit sense-making or this more... If by sense-making you just mean, like,

in like interacting intelligently and by that i mean like adaptively appropriately or whatever with an environment then it's all the way up and all the way down in effect like cells and you know cells in a body and people at a at a dinner table are trying to do the same kind of thing um

I think for the more kind of reflexive, explicit forms of sense-making that you're concerned with in your practice, you would need some kind of layered system.

So sense-making in that sense has more to do with our narrative stuff that was discussed a few weeks ago.

It has more to do with creating these kind of overarching inferential structures that make sense of your phenomenal flow effectively.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, actually that makes sense in the sense that I've – one thing that bugs me at the higher levels – well, not higher levels, but these – is people just use the word sense-making.

Like they're using the media at the moment to talk about wicked problems and all of this.

But what does sense-making mean when it's not –

an actual thing that someone's doing so like you either have to say like narrative sense making okay i'm taking narratives and making sense of it i'm you know tends to just be this word now that's become trendy but it oh yeah and in fact some inactivists are even pushing back on it to say that well it doesn't really mean very much uh dan huto and eric nian have these really nice critiques of like the sense making paradigm sasha


SPEAKER_04:
My follow-up question to that is, what isn't sense-making?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, again, it depends, I guess, on how we want to define it.

basically active inference describes more specifically the behavior of systems that are actually driven in some non-trivial way by uh like the beliefs that they encode about an external environment and you might see this as a continuum thing but i mean there's a sense in which like if a rock is trying to predict its environment and act in a way that you know minimizes this

divergence between well it's not a very good model right i mean it doesn't do very much uh so i mean this might be a graded thing in the sense that like you know a uh like things that are not sense making are things that don't seem to reflect this kind of intelligent you know adaptation to the constraints of an environment like a rock right uh

But for people like Stephen who mean something very specific and I think more psychological and meaningful and loaded, if that's what we mean by sense-making, then the vast majority of what we would call sense-making under the other definition doesn't fall under it.

So you really need a very specific kind of system that's able to engage in a very specific form of inference.

Unfortunately, I'm going to have to leave at this point.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Maxwell.

See you soon.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you very much, everyone.

This was very fun.

Bye.


SPEAKER_07:
Also, there's this sense of sense-breaking or sense-finding.

So it could be that sense-making is okay.

And it works, makes sense at the shorter timescales.

Participatory sense-making is like this ongoing knowing how to act.

But then when you get to these higher levels, like sense-making really is more like you've made, there's retrospective sense-making,

which is really what ends up being what people think about sense-making at scale, is how do I make sense of how I should have acted?

But if you can get someone to, that normally is it because, so that either means someone's just doing something habitual or tacit knowledge where they're in the flow and you're trying to unpack the sense-making that allowed them to do that, but that's not accessible because you're so in the flow, so you need to have some form of sense-breaking

And then there's a sense finding, which I would say is more like active inference, because you're more consciously trying to repurpose your posterior beliefs and your sensory data to try and assemble some sort of understanding of what's even going on.

It might be that point of stuckness.

You know, they talk about stuckness.

So stuckness is...

Once you're trying to get to sense-making, but while you're stuck,

you may need to go off and do a bit of foraging.

So it's interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Let's just go through these last few thoughts and then we'll just go to figure six because we had talked last time about seeing it.

So on this slide, we are going to be asking, are there limits on the kind of cognition that we can study as humans because of our own individual cognitive processes and where does collective cognition play into this?

Which systems are we in a position to understand and how would we know?

How would we do metacognition as individuals or groups about what approaches for which systems will be valuable?

And then in the future experiments and in the implications of, okay, we've moved beyond internalism and externalism, all these other isms, what is that going to mean for our practice as scientists or as investigators of cognitive systems?

And what would be the implications of knowing?

I'm just going to raise them just so we can get them on there, but maybe for another time or in the closing thoughts.

And then there was this idea in the paper, the relevant boundaries of cognition depend on the level being characterized and the explanatory interests that guide investigation.

So we can return to this general question, where are the relevant boundaries for cognition and how would we know if we're too internal or too external?

And then in the paper they wrote, in other words, drawing the bounds of cognition means defining the recognition density of the system of interest and identifying a generative model that explains changes in that system that follow variational Bayesian inference.

And I believe it was Sasha who asked, isn't this the same argument that is used for holism or reductionism?

For example, they'll say something like, we'll know when we've gotten to too large of a scale of analysis or too small of a scale of analysis because our model will break or it will be inadequate or intractable.

So how do we get beyond that paradigm of we'll know it when we see it or can we ever understand?

get beyond the paradigm of we'll know it when we see it guided by a certain framework because we are in feedback with our models so just things to think about and then i think let's just briefly look at figure six and then have some closing thoughts so figure one was about markov blankets figure two went into the action perception loop and introduced some of the equations of fep those were unpacked a bit in figure 2b

Figure 3 was operational closure in graphs.

Figure 4 was a schematic illustration of autocatalysis, which is like autopoiesis for metabolism.

Figure 5 was that fractal Markov blanket showing that as you zoom into the broccoli, you see that it's Markov all the way down.

And here we are in figure six.

So if anyone wants to have any comments on six because we had said that we were going to approach it in this discussion, they can just raise their hand.

But the way I would walk through this figure first is by reading the caption.

And what the caption suggested was that it's going to be something like a developmental morphogenesis scenario.

So these are not naive cells.

It's really important to take that evolutionary perspective.

The organism is an arrangement that's a developmental outcome that isn't just an arbitrary developmental state.

It's one that has lasted through many generations, been fine-tuned acutely.

so these aren't just naive little cells wandering around spontaneously um coming to this arrangement that's shown in figure f um it's uh rather a very carefully selected set of expectations about which extracellular target signals like diffusible morphogens

the cell expects to see.

And so it knows that if it just pursues its expectation of the target signal extracellularly, it will be taking part of a larger developmental outcome that is evolutionarily adapted.

So the cell doesn't need to have a cognitive awareness of that, but we can think about this like an anterior to posterior gradient of some diffusible morphogen.

And what's happening, each of these traces on figure A and B and C are through time on the X axis showing like what one cell ends up experiencing, whether it's its expectation of a morphogen.

Again, that's the sensory input in this model or its action reflected by its ability to move.

Then in figure D, we see the free energy of the system first slightly rise, but then immediately start converging down, down, down, down, down, which reflects overall that there's an increased precision in the ensemble, in the aggregate of these cells as they sort of jostle into place and come into an arrangement that minimizes their surprise about what extracellular target signal they should be perceiving.

And what we see is that even though there's no higher level coordination per se, the agents end up converging on this solution that reflects the target morphology.

In this case, it looks like, I don't know, kind of a upside down light bulb or something.

Not sure what shape that would be.

But you can see how each of these different colored cells is able to be uniquely determining where its position is.

Like the green cell, it can be thinking something like, I want to be close to blue, but far from yellow and totally far from red.

The blue cell might be thinking something like, I want to have an intermediate level of the green and the yellow signal.

And then the red cells might be thinking something like, I want to have mostly red signal and then in decreasing order, yellow, blue, green.

and then depending on what the instantaneous perception is of those diffusible morphogens the cells can either uh update their generative model of the world through movement that's the morphogenesis component or by changing their generative model which isn't actually happening like there's no learning and adaptation within this model but over evolutionary time

it will end up being the case that developmental trajectories that robustly enable high fitness morphologies to arise will be selected for.

So that's sort of my short take on figure six.

Any comments or thoughts on that?

Cool, just because we're basically out of time, I'll just say thanks everyone for participating, and we'll have a closing thought as well.

We're gonna provide a follow-up form for our live participants.

I'll put that in the chat in a second.

We request feedback, suggestion, and questions from all of our viewers and our participants.

And we just hope that people stay in communication with us and keep watching.

Next week and the following week, we're going to be talking about A Tale of Two Densities, which is the paper that we mentioned a few times today.

And yeah, it's going to be a great discussion next two weeks as well.

So if anyone has any closing thoughts on the discussion, while I post the link in here, they're free to go ahead.

If any thoughts, otherwise that was a great discussion.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Yeah.

Thank you for the discussion.


SPEAKER_00:
That was great.

Awesome.

Thank you.

In that case, I am going to terminate the live stream.

Thanks everyone for participating and for watching.

We'll see you in the next two weeks for number six, a tale of two.
