## 0pMxBM3ahwQ

Hello and welcome. This is ActInf Guest Stream number 32.1. It's January 10th, 2023. We're here
with Adam Peace and we will be hearing a presentation followed by a discussion. So
Adam, thank you very much for joining today. Looking forward to this and off to you.
Okay. Thanks very much for having me. Looking forward to presenting a few bits of initial
research as well as some background on long-term ongoing research into understanding language and
trying to mimic some, just some elements of human thought. Everything I do is open source,
so I've got some links for you there. I also have a pretty active YouTube channel,
although it's been a little quiet lately. So there's a lot of material here that I won't be
able to go into in depth. And so eager to answer questions when we get to the question period.
And also would encourage folks to take a look at that channel where there's longer video format
presentations about a whole host of topics that we'll probably touch on today. So I have a large
ontology. I'll explain in a minute what I mean by an ontology that's called SUMO. And I'm also going to
reference some work that Facebook has done called their baby corpus. So that's the background for the
cartoons that I'm showing you. The main topic that I want to cover today is the notion of common sense
auto-formalization. My objective is to be able to make statements in human natural language, just in
English at the moment, ask questions also in natural language, and get answers. But get answers with
explanation, something that modern question answering systems that we hear about each day in the popular
press are generally not capable of doing. You might get an answer, but you don't know why. And knowing
why and understanding an explanation is very important. So we're not talking about just information
retrieval. We're not talking about Google, where you ask a question and you get a list of documents in
which there might be an answer, or even Google's occasional capabilities for very specific sorts of
questions, where they give you an answer, but they'll never tell you why. It's more like, you know,
you ask what's the weather today, you get a nice concise link to the weather, but you won't get an
explanation for why the weather is what it is. So what do I mean by ontology? Are you meaning to share,
we see the first slide? You're still only seeing the first slide. Okay, I'm on slide three. So let's go
back to, I'm not sure why that's no one showing up. But, uh, good. Just wanted to, looks good now.
Common sense. Yeah, we'll stick with this format then instead of the slide presentation format.
Thank you. Looks good. Okay. So here's what I just talked about. Um, so let me, uh, give you my
definition for what is an ontology. Cause this is a word that at a certain point in recent history,
maybe about a decade or two ago, got overloaded so much now that just about anything is called an
ontology. And so for me to distinguish ontology from things we already had words for like semantic
network or schema, um, I consider an ontology to be essentially a dictionary for computers to read.
And that also requires a bit of unpacking. What is a dictionary for computers to read? Well,
for me, it means minimally, uh, we've got to have terms, a set of terms that, that label things in our
world. But most importantly, we have to have a set of definitions that are stated in a computable
language. So just stating things in English or French, uh, that are definitions for words. Well,
that's a dictionary. It's not an ontology. Um, and if we don't have definitions in a, some sort of
mathematical language, a programming language of some sort, uh, then our machines are only going to
have the barest abilities to manipulate or do things with those natural language definitions. So I think
they have to be in a formal language to nail down meanings that we have shared meaning. So we have shared
meaning between people that, that, uh, agree to use a particular ontology. And maybe more importantly,
we have shared meaning between people and computers so that the same constraints, the same inferences
that people would be able to make, uh, with these terms, uh, the computer is also able to make because
of these mathematically expressed definitions. So that's what I've spent the last 22 years trying to
build up. Um, and this is work that, uh, draws on linguistics, philosophy, and computer science,
as well as, uh, logic as a sub-discipline of, of, um, probably all of those three.
And one reason I'm doing this nowadays, uh, artificial intelligence has become almost synonymous with
machine learning. So I need to, to explain a little bit, well, why am I doing this? This is sort of old
fashioned AI of writing down lots of rules. Why do we still need to do this? Well, I'm a big fan of
Daniel Kahneman's work. And this is just one justification of many, uh, but hopefully because
it's very well articulated, uh, in his work. Um, I, hopefully this can be at least the start of a
justification for some of you who might be unfamiliar, uh, with the, this symbolic approach
that used to be the primary approach in artificial intelligence. Uh, I think that he makes a good case
that humans have two modes of thought. We have, uh, an instinctive, intuitive, sensory pattern
matching kind of process that's good for face or voice recognition, or making a very snap judgment
about what to do in a particular situation, uh, that is, you know, learned from the presentation of
many, many similar situations. And that sort of mode of thought fits very well with statistically
based machine learning, neural networks, deep neural networks, and so forth. That's an important part of
intelligence. And it's led to a lot of important, uh, commercial activities. Uh, but there is another
mode of intelligence that, uh, Professor Kahneman, uh, I think illustrates quite clearly that is a slower,
more deliberative, deductive approach, uh, where people can explain what they do as opposed to just
give a reaction. Um, and it seems like in large parts of the AI community, people are starting to
recognize that, yes, there is still this, this set of things that we require our computers to do that
they're not doing very well, uh, with the current neural, uh, neural, uh, neural approach, um, um,
this, uh, numeric approach, uh, that we need another mode of, of tool set for. And so we're starting to
see this keyword neuro symbolic approach of trying to balance, uh, statistical machine learning approaches
with some sort of explicit representation in a symbolic form. Uh, and it's this latter bit that
I've been doing a lot of work with. And I think it's the combination of these two main approaches, uh,
that's going to lead us to some more exciting capability. That's just my, uh, assessment of
the state of the field. Um, but there is some emerging evidence that, that this in fact is the
case that we have, uh, uh, a potential with integrating these two approaches to handle a
broader range of things that would look a lot more like human intelligence.
ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
the formal meaning of things that we use in computer science, databases, spreadsheets,
and so forth. Anytime you have a spreadsheet, you usually have a set of columns across the top of
your spreadsheet that has some labels. And it's very unusual for people to have any sort of
explicit definitions of what those labels actually mean. It's usually just assumed that people,
by looking at those labels, you know, if you're in the same community, or you can ask for an
explanation that gives you a good sense of what are, what's the intended semantics of that particular
column based on that particular label. And what I've found is that, you know, it might work for
a spreadsheet where you've got a few dozen columns and you're working closely with some longtime
colleagues. But as soon as you get to a larger organization with a larger set of symbols,
labels, where people may be working at different locations, maybe they've never even met each other,
where there's interactions occurring over the space of years in large multinational corporations,
that people's initial assumptions about how clear their labels are, are usually completely wrong.
And so people wind up using data in dramatically different ways, inconsistent with its original intent,
precisely because nobody's taken the time to actually define things. And even in the rare cases
of organizations that do have data dictionaries that define their terms, the intended meaning of their
terms, they tend to define them in very informal ways, using natural language definitions, which means
then that the machines can do very little to help ensure that people's intended specification of
semantics is consistent across a large body of terms. You might be able to have a human being keep a
data dictionary of 100 terms consistent and well organized over time for a long period of time.
But once you get to thousands or tens of thousands of terms, it's well beyond human capacity to keep such a
product consistent, you need automation. And unless you have definitions that are explicit,
and in a computable language, the computer can do very little to help keep those definitions consistent.
So that's one of the big byproducts of all of this work so far. And I use techniques like automated
theorem proving that I don't have time to talk about now, but we'd love to talk about it in detail for
anyone who's interested to keep these definitions consistent. So I have a logical approach for the
semantics of terms, lexical semantics, the semantics of the words we use, and this extends also to computer
science constructs like labels for tables or columns or database elements and so forth.
And this is useful anywhere, pretty much anyone has a spreadsheet, anyone has a database.
This is something that people don't realize they could make use of people seem to accept that
they're going to need to have a lot of human to human to communication to explain the meanings of terms.
And there's just another way, right? And that's what I've developed. And that's what I'm basing this work on
language understanding on. There's a common belief that, oh, this is just too hard, right? That we should be able to
come up with these things easily, there's too much of them, meanings change, and so forth. Once you take the
perspective that there is a need for precise semantics for our labels and that this precise semantics
is something like definition in a dictionary, but in a formal language, then it's not just a sort of a
graph or a list of relationships or likelihoods or probabilities. It starts to be hard to imagine then
how a machine would just come up with this sort of thing automatically. And of course, we have another
venue in which we take this sort of harder approach of programming and don't expect machines to just do
everything automatically. And that's programming, right? We have many, many millions of programmers
in the world now. They're expensive. It is a time-consuming process to program things,
but we invest in this because there simply isn't another way to do it.
And we make this enterprise of programming feasible through a couple of points.
One is having very rich languages so we can say everything that we want to say. So we don't want
to be restricted in the sort of programs we can write. Similarly, we need to make sure we're not
restricted in the sorts of definitions that we can write. And the way that we make that practical is
through reuse. You know, your modern programmer, if you deliver some software, you're writing maybe 1%
of the program, 1% of the code that's delivered. Most of what you deliver is going to be a set of large
libraries and reusable components, operating system, database, web server, and any number of other things,
Java collection classes, Numpy libraries, if you're doing Python. The way in which modern software development is practical is through reuse.
And so that's the other thing that I've been working to provide is this thing called SUMO, which is a library of definitions that can be reused that take this
problem that many people would otherwise consider to be completely intractable, manual creation of knowledge, and makes it eminently practical because you're actually reusing most of your semantics by virtue of using this library.
All right, so this SUMO, like SUMO wrestler suggested upper merged ontology started in the year 2000. It started as just an upper ontology. So the the acronym is a bit of a misnomer, a bit of an anachronism, if you will, right now, that it's really a comprehensive ontology, not just an upper ontology, because it's grown to be about 20,000 terms, 80,000 handwritten statements in an expressive higher order mathematical
logic. Includes links to vast fact bases like the Yago system, lots of translations from its authored format into some of the standard representations used in the automated theorem proving community.
And as I mentioned this, this is the acronym is the acronym that you're using the acronym that you're using.
And this is the acronym that you're using.
And this is the acronym that you're using.
And this is the acronym that you're using.
So it's used in the automated theorem proving community.
And as I mentioned, it's all open source and online and to every version has been open source.
There's nothing that's held back for commercial reasons.
Let me mention word net.
So another common misconception in ontology is that we have to use words and follow the definitions of words.
And as we should all know, words are ambiguous and words are polysemous.
word can have multiple meanings. So we've created a very clear division, but also a relationship
between the senses, the concepts that we have in the world that have formal definitions and
the labels that we as humans put on those concepts to communicate them to each other.
And this also makes it easy to ensure that our ontology is not tied to any particular one
language. Because as any one of us who's multilingual knows, an English word and a Tagalog word
can have the same underlying semantics, the same underlying real world referent,
but we use different labels. And so we need to make sure that we can have vocabularies that are mapped
to our common single formal ontology that tries to explain and define concepts in our world,
and not let sort of language and labels and intuitions about those labels creep into our
formal definition. So we reused Princeton's WordNet, which is a project that's been going on for about
30 years now, I think. And it has also projections into multiple languages, Polish WordNet, Tagalog WordNet,
for example. Here is, there's continuing work on that from, which I'm very excited because I started
the Tagalog WordNet back in the 2000s at De La Salle University. And so it's great to see that
that sort of effort continuing. There's word nets for Arabic and Chinese and many other languages.
And so we keep those labels in English, those dictionaries, human dictionaries, distinct,
but related to the formal inventory of mathematically expressed concepts. And so back in the early 2000s,
we took an effort to go through all 117,000 SIN sets in WordNet, all 117,000 linguistically labeled concepts,
and map them all to SUMO one at a time by hand. It's just an enormous effort where we couldn't have
really done it automatically. It required human inspection. We invested that effort, and it's
since paid off for the linguistic work that we do with this ontology.
Why do we need both? Well, the formal definitions are things that just aren't in WordNet or any other
dictionary. You might have a word for earlier and a natural language definition for what it means for
some events to be earlier than another, but we need a precise mathematical, logical definition of what
earlier means. And so SUMO has this and many, many other axioms that individually are trivial,
but together add up to creating a certain understanding about the world that without it,
machines just don't have. We need a machine to know that if one event is earlier than another,
that the end point of this first event is before the beginning point of the second event.
So we've got a formal mathematical definition of earlier, which you just don't have in a dictionary.
This allows machine to do logic inference, automated inference, and give you conclusions and explain
those conclusions. Not a criticism of WordNet, just they're different products with different needs,
and we need both. Also, I get a lot of questions about what kind of logic do we need? Do we really need a
very complicated, expressive logic? It's very popular nowadays for people to use taxonomies or
knowledge graphs. Well, knowledge graphs are essentially semantic networks. It's a knowledge
representation that was created back really in the 1960s. And so it does surprise me that it's kind of,
you know, what's old is new again in artificial intelligence somehow, and that knowledge graphs are a
big thing now. But it's a knowledge representation technology that leaves out a lot of stuff that we would
need to say about the real world in order to define the terms that we use. So natural language definitions aren't enough,
and we believe that defining our terms or concepts is good, which particular language do we choose? And I've had people
often say, you know, usually really without any backup, oh, those are the rare cases. Well, I got frustrated
with that. So I did a paper recently, well, now almost two years old, about trying to quantify how often do we
use constructs in language that require more than just a graph of relationships. And so I came up with some
statistics. I don't, I'm not going to go into this paper in great detail, but if you're interested, I'd love to
follow up with you. And I came up with that in two, looking at two large corpora, brown corpus is kind of
old and kind of small by modern standards, but I also used the corpus of contemporary American English, took a
random sample of sentences, created an automated system for looking at some various features that require
in language, a translation into using an expressive logic, such as modal expressions, can, may, should,
might, expressions of authorship, you know, said, wrote, epistemic, knows, believes. These are words in
language that trigger the need for a more expressive representation. We could also, I could give you a lot
of detail on why that's directly entailed. This is not just a, you know, this is not just my opinion,
trying to advocate a more expressive logic. These are very sort of strict things that are well known in
linguistics, but at least now it's well quantified that about 50% of statements taken from a random
sample of a large corpus do actually require these more expressive semantics. So I think I've made a strong
case that we can't just get away with graphs unless we want to leave out about half of the things that
people say to each other. And that tells me that, that we really need this as more expressive logic.
Okay. So, so that's all the preamble. What does, that was the, the library of semantics of meaning
that I already have. And how can I use that now to try to create a system? And this is research,
right? And it's relatively experimental, even at the moment that the attempt is to try to create a
system where the machine can translate automatically from English sentences into a formal precise semantics,
using these terms out of the ontology that themselves are precisely defined.
So I have at the one, at the starting point, English statements or questions. I translate these things
to logic. I want to be able to send them to a powerful theorem prover. That's at least first-order
logic plus equality, but preferably higher order logic. So I can handle some of these modal expressions.
There are a few such provers. And I want it to engage in its process of doing theorem proving,
not only with the statements and the question that a particular user has provided at one time,
but also this rich background that describes the world so that the machine is not just doing,
you know, a sort of simple matching, even with these powerful tools, but it's really taking into account
background knowledge, world knowledge in the same way that a person would. And then when it's done,
when it's got an answer, I want it to be able to explain what it does. And theorem provers have this
capability already. It's built in. They were designed to provide proofs because a lot of the work in
theorem proving is for theorem proving in advanced mathematics. So there's a quiet but significant
community of mathematicians and computer scientists that are using automated theorem proving to prove
novel theorems in mathematics. And because they're in mathematics, they have a very strict standard of
what constitutes real work. You have to show a proof just like almost all of us probably experienced
in high school geometry of proving one triangle is the same as another through maybe the side angle side
of the process. Machines can now do this and much more significant and complicated and sophisticated
sorts of proofs and provide detailed breakdown of how it reached its conclusion. And I take this as to
being something that's required. If you ask another person, what's the answer to question X? Okay, they
give you Y as an answer, but then you want to know, yeah, what's the details? How did you come to that
conclusion? It's not just enough to say, well, I told you so, so believe me. Sometimes you might get away with
that, but not all the time, especially not for anything that's that's complicated. And so our machine should be able to
do that as well. So I've done a number of forays into this grand goal over the course of my career, I started out
with something called controlled English to logic translation, where I had a hand built grammar of a small subset of
English that was designed to be unambiguous. It was all written in prologue. And I was able to create
expressions using Sumo terms in its logic, which was mostly first order logic back then in the early 2000s.
And it was, you know, somewhat successful, but it was a fairly restricted subset of English. And so the
parser would break and say syntax error all too often. And that was kind of frustrating. It was sort of like, well,
what one experiences today with something like Alexa or Google, where you ask a question says,
I'm sorry, I don't understand. Right. And so people wind up self self governing their their utterances to
adapt to the machine. And people were able to do that with my health system. But it's still kind of
frustrating. I'd like to be able to handle text that was written not for that particular system,
and not dumbed down on the fly by a human, but rather any arbitrary sort of text.
So then I started working with Stanford's core NLP system and using dependency parse
transformations and trying to turn dependency parses into logic. I did have some success with that.
But I found that even as good as machine learning based statistical parsers are, there's still a lot
of cases where they break down. In fact, they they give a lot of metrics that look very encouraging,
usually on a per word or per symbol basis. And they'll say or were 97% correct on a unlabeled attachment
score is one that's used in dependency parsing community. And that sounds like a very high
percentage. But your average sentence in English is depending on who you talk to, what, how you how
you collect the statistics about 24 words. Well, if you look at 97% raised to the 24th power,
then you get a problem and you get actually less than 50% of your sentences are going to be parsed
correctly. And again, that's unlabeled attachment score for dependency parses. That merely means that
two words are found to have the same dependency relation without a commitment to what exactly that
relation is. Well, you need the labeled attachment score, which of course is lower, and you need it to
be correct for all of these words to have really a coherent understanding of a sentence if you're going to do
any sort of automatic translation. So although the the systems are good, and they've certainly gotten
better from 2015, I mean, Stanford Stanza is is yet another, you know, few percentage points better than
Core NLP was in terms of its dependency parsing, but it's still not reliable enough, not consistent,
not stable enough for me to use that as a basis for translation. And then there was all the problem of,
well, how do I actually take that, that output, and reliably create logic from it. And that meant
at that time, I was doing a hand built rule base, and that just didn't work in the limit, it was
encouraging, I think there's potential if you had enough people working on it, a bit more research,
but it wasn't the way in which I thought I could reach success. So I'm doing something different now. So
I'm, I'm doing what I guess is more prevalent now in machine learning that instead of doing a pipeline of
machine learning operations, trying to do everything all at once with extraordinarily large corpora,
where I am trying to train a system to do auto formalization of language to go straight from
language to logic without any intermediate approach like dependency parsing. And this is based on some of the
success with my colleague, Yosef Urban, who's been doing this for sort of work for mathematics.
So one of the challenges of using theorem provers, automated theorem provers for mathematics is that
as formal as mathematics is, it's not really quite formal enough. In a mathematics textbook, there's still
a lot of text. And there's still a lot of things that aren't themselves precisely defined. And there's
also a lot of stuff there in mathematics that's not in a common and computable format. So for a long time,
there's been this problem of how do we take mathematical textbooks and turn them into
extraordinarily detailed formalizations that an automated theorem prover can handle in first order
logic plus equality or some other kind of mathematical logic. So Yosef has had considerable success at this.
And we decided to team up on trying to do an even this even harder problem of just looking at unrestricted
text, not just mathematics. And they've been using Google's neural machine translation system, which is
built on top of TensorFlow. We're at the moment using kind of a relatively old version of that we tried a
newer version, it turned out to actually be slower for our purposes. But we need to do a lot more
experimentation and make this work more popular. So people tell us where we're going wrong. And maybe
there's some better machine learning libraries that we could use for this. So this is the architecture.
Now I want to tell you a bit more about how we actually come up with this set of natural language
logic pairs. Because like other work of this sort, the libraries of pairs, of your input out pairs that
you're trying to train has to be really, really big, you know, orders of magnitude bigger than any sort of
pipeline approach, because you're trying to tackle the whole problem end to end, and there's a lot more
variability, your statistical significance for the appearance of any given feature correlated with any
other given feature is, is really low. He has a very long tail in language of things that are not seen too
often. So your corpus has to be very big. How do we get that corpus? We certainly not feasible to
translate a lot of English by hand into logic. So how do we get this thing to begin with?
So we were aware of this project done at Facebook called the baby corpus, in part because Tomáš Mikalov
has returned to his home country of the Czech Republic and now works with Josef Urban at CTU Prague.
So we had a benefit of getting some of his perspective on this work. It was basically an effort to try to
teach machines how to do simple inferences. And we'll look at some of those simple inferences in a
moment. And in order to do that, they tried to generate a very large synthetic data set of natural,
simple natural language sentences, and simple natural language inferences that they wanted the machines to be
able to train up to handle. Ultimately, they used really only a few sort of rules or patterns. I think
Tomáš has said there's something like 20 different patterns. I've looked at the code, it's written in Lua.
It wouldn't be hard to rewrite it in a sort of more common language, I think. It's not particularly
complicated code, not a huge code base, a lot of simple patterns. It's a great idea, but I think we
can do better at it given the resources that Sumo provides for generation as well as understanding and
anchoring meaning. Right? So they had a lot of their knowledge representation, such as it is, was things like,
you know, you have a bedroom, a thing, a location, actors existing in this world. It sort of harks back to the
blocks world of Patrick Henry Winston. I think it was Winston. I hope I've got that reference right. Now, back in the
70s, there's this notion that we could do, there's a pro, a system called Shurdlu, I think it was, that did operations in a world of
blocks. So a constrained world, there were actors, there were a few things that could be manipulated,
and the system was able to understand very simple utterances. Well, they've kind of turned this on its
head, created a knowledge representation for a certain world, and then tried to generate a lot of
sentences from it to create this synthetic model of things that a machine should be able to do inferences
about. And so here's some of the content of their questions. So Fred is either in the school or the park
or the park. So this is the first sentence. So this is the first sentence. So this is the first sentence
of the course. If Mary went back to the office, yes, she's in the office. Bill is either in the
kitchen or the park. Another confusion sentence. Fred moved to the cinema. Is Fred in the park?
Well, no, he's not in the park. But the park has been seen as a token earlier, and so they wanted to
make sure that the automated learning system isn't just trying to find proximity, which is a good thing
to include in their data set. So lots of stuff like this, and more complicated things. Also, I've just
presented really some of the most simple examples, but all generated from a very simple knowledge model,
concepts that weren't really defined, and a massive presentation of mind-numbingly tiny variations in a wide variety of sentences.
So we started out thinking, well, let's just cover the stuff that's in the baby corpus so we understand what they were doing.
And the big advantage that we thought we could bring to this is we don't have to learn logic. In a way, they had a simple corpus
that was trying to accomplish something that's very hard, which was to teach machines just through massive examples
how to do logical inferences or a certain subset of logical inferences. We have an easier problem. If we use a theorem prover,
we don't have to teach the system to do logical inference. We already have that. We just need to get the knowledge
representation from English into logic and then let the theorem provers do their thing.
So again, it's a very simple world. They had objects, locations, actors, states, actions, a few other decorations.
And so we tried to figure out really what they meant in a way that was hard because they didn't have a distinction
between instances and classes. So we can talk about in sumo relationship that in an action, one thing is an object
transferred from one location to another. They had this notion of being gettable, which is really a modal.
And so we had to figure out what did they mean? They didn't really mean a modal. They meant, yeah,
some something that can be transferred. Then there has to be some kind of transferred example. We wound
up interpreting a lot of their symbols, not as classes. So the notion of an apple is a class,
but the apple that gets transferred in a particular sentence is an instance. So this difference between
existential and universal quantification. So we'd create a term like apple one is a kind of apple is
an instance of an apple, right? And that's a gettable thing. And it's located in the particular area.
So I don't have a lot of time to go into knowledge representation, but if you want a full course
on sumo, I can do that at some point. I know there's a lot of videos online also. So maybe I'll skip
through a little bit of this. We wanted to make sure we covered all of their stuff. They referred
to things like chocolate and milk and garden and container and box. And we actually had all this in
sumo. So getting back to this notion of, well, if you had to define all this stuff from scratch,
should be tempted just like the Facebook guys did to just use the labels and assume everything,
everybody means the same thing. But we didn't have to do that. We already had these terms precisely
defined in sumo and we're able just to reuse them. So we did a big table. This is just a portion of that
table of all the different things that they referred to that we already had, or in some, a few cases,
didn't have, and we needed to add them. But even adding the new concepts and their definitions was easy
because the new concepts had definitions that were based on, in turn, other terms we already had.
So we just had to combine them in the right ways.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: You know, we didn't take for granted that we were just using the first meaning
of things. For example, they have the word pajamas in some of their database. Well, pajamas have a couple
of meanings in the dictionary. Yeah. I wasn't all that familiar with the second meaning, but it does exist.
And so we want to make sure we're using the right meaning. So we also did mappings to WordNet
of the terms we defined so that we had disambiguation potential for our natural language.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: There were a number of things because of this small and artificial world. They
had inferences like if you're hungry, then essentially you go to the kitchen and eat something that's in the
kitchen. That doesn't really hold in the real world, obviously. We're not in this fantasy
constrained world that hunger immediately entails you go to the kitchen and eat an apple.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: But so we had to create some kind of some bogus rules in Sumo that were very
specific just to this corpus to try to replicate the inferences that they were doing. So here's the
rule that gives the right answer for this corpus. It gets a little complicated to state it, but we can
state it in Sumo that if you have a cognitive agent that's hungry and that's at a particular time,
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: Then there's a translocation event that is desired by that agent and that
translocation has a destination of the kitchen where there's a getting of an apple. Okay. A rule that
that doesn't belong to be in Sumo on any permanent basis, but is what's used to cover the semantics of
this particular corpus. Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: And we looked at things like being bored and tired,
which they had. They all say, if you're bored and tired, you go to sleep. Okay. That's
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: I wish that that were true for all of us hardworking engineers that we had that
option. We don't at all times, but that was what covered the semantics of the corpus. So we had to do
similar things for bored and tired. Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: They don't really have weights and measures and units
in the baby ontology. Sumo, of course, has a detailed ontology of weights and measures of units,
all the system international measures. Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: And we had to figure out how we were going to
translate these hacks that were in this corpus of, you know, things have a numerical size one,
two, or three, something like that. Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: How are we going to represent that? So we
figured out a similar hack for covering that. Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: All right. So, you know, we did this
exploration to make sure that we could cover one of these sample worlds. But what we really want to do
is generate a much larger corpus with a more interesting, more varied set of things that are
referred to in the real world. Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: So we wanted to do a synthetic text generation
as our first step so that we kind of seed the system long term. Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: We know that we need
to go beyond that synthetic test. Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: We're not there yet. We're just still in this in the
process of creating this very large set of synthetic sentences because we can start with an idea or a
knowledge representation about what we want to express in the world and generate logic, syntactically
and semantically valid logic expressions from that. Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: Well, at the same time,
because we've created the state of the world artificially in a program, we can then also create
a sentence that models that state of the world. Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: So we go kind of both directions,
both to logic and language from a very ad hoc sort of expression in some Java code about what's true in the real world.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: And that allows us to do a lot of variation, but it's never going to cover the
full expressivity of natural language, but we think it will cover enough that it gives us a head start
where we can then start saying, well, where does our automatic language to logic system break down?
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: What are the sentences where it fails, where it generates something that's not even
syntactically correct, maybe, or certain or violates constraints that we know from Sumo about how the world works.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: And then try to add those as new patterns to our generation system, so we can find one sentence
that causes a problem, we look at the area the the core issue of what causes the problem.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: And look at you know maybe the things that are variable the sentence,
so we might have a sentence that's problematic that has some sub subject and an object.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: Where the subjects and the objects have a wide varieties that could have things
that could be substituted in.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: That we can turn into sort of a template to try to cover another
pattern, if you will, in natural language and one of our possibilities, I think, will be to look at
frame net.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: That is exactly such a large inventory of of these things that you know i've
i've wanted to do a projection of frame net into sumo for for several decades now.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: Did some early work with.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: The team there and we published some some work about that in the mid 2000s.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: But we didn't do a comprehensive inventory of all of their different frames, and so I think there's a good project there to do a.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: More detailed exploration of all the frames and frame net and translating them to sumo because the frames and frame that don't have a precise logical semantics, which is one of the challenges.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: I think that people have found with using that resource it's not anchored in the same way.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: That needs to be, I think, to be used more productively so so there's I think an interesting project there that would have a very practical outcome.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: But for now i'm just going to talk about the synthetic text is because we're not even into that phase yet synthetic text is is the tough stuff we just started this work sort of mid fall.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: So that kind of gives you a perspective on where we are, this is going to be a long term thing.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: So I tried to collect all of the things that I thought I could detail both linguistically and in sumo so things like.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: Propositional attitudes modals tenses names and roles and basic forms of transitive intransitive di transitive verbs in the subject verb object basic grammar of English.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: Try to say what's some of these things are so i'm going to give you an example it's it's a real example of stuff we can generate and it looks kind of funny.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: And i'll tell you why it looks funny and what we what we can do to fix it and it's other examples like it.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: You know, giving you words and all of this extremely early research, even though I think it's very promising i'm going to tell you what's wrong so far in the examples.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: Some stuff that that look kind of funny so you know an Internet user traps a crustacean that's a pretty funny sentence it's syntactically valid.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: And I think you can imagine an interpretation of that sentence that's legitimate in the real world okay i'm an Internet user and I go down to the beach and I catch a crab.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: You can imagine that actually happening but i'm not sure you'd ever find that sentence uttered by a person.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: We think we can do better constraining ultimately our language generation through using large language models.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: It should be in principle fairly easy to do so that we we generate stuff that's just a little bit more reasonable little more common a little more expected.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: But this is what we've got right now, because we're just creating these templates and we substitute in all of the the legitimate possibilities were legitimate is just.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: You know, does it meet syntactic and type constraints specified by sumo.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: And so it's possible for an interview that user traffic or station, so we generate this sort of thing amongst many other possibilities.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: And at the same time we generate the logic expression that you see on the left i'm sorry i'm i'm throwing code at you and I don't have.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: The time here to go into the full syntax of this expression.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: But the moment, this is just first order logic so it's an existential quantifier saying there exists an Internet user.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: trapping or an ambush is the term that's used in sumo again remember labels and definitions are different, so we used a particular software.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: identifier of ambush but its definition fits with what you would expect of trapping okay and just the word that we happen to be using in English is trapping.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: The software programming language identifier we're using in the sumo library is ambush okay so you shouldn't expect those to be identical because we have different labels for things.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: That we may have used consistently in terms of their formal semantics, but their labels may vary.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: So we have an agent that does something that agent is the Internet user the object of the action is the crustacean and the.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: yeah yeah the object of the action is something and that something is crustacean right so very simple sentence very simple logic formalization and so we generate tons of sentences like this for.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: Different objects and different agents and different actions, this is your most most simple subject verb object sentence and we have lots of different objects that can play roles different agents that can play roles and different processes that are already defined in sumo.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: So we just go through the entire inventory and we also probabilistically generate them we look at.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: Each of these symbols in sumo has a connection to word net and word net has word frequencies for each of those those concepts so by looking into word net we can see which concepts formally defined concepts and sumo are more likely to occur.
Paul Sivitzko, Ph.D.: ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
likely see it paired with trapping and or a crustacean and so it's these pairwise
selectional restrictions that we don't have right now which is why you get these funny combinations
we can generate times so we can have the internet user traps a crustacean or trapped
a crustacean or will trap or is trapping and its formal temporal logic expression
one thing you often find in simpler knowledge expressions is verbs used as predicates without
tense so you might have in a knowledge graph internet user a relation trapping or traps or some
sort and then crustacean right this would be a more typical expression in a graph and that doesn't
really capture what the entire sentence is saying it says that there is a temporal qualification to
what this what is happening in the sentence is happening now right and so there's a begin fun
of this activity and an end function of this activity and now is between those two things you have a
dyktik as we say in linguistics right something that's being referred to that gives semantics to
the sentence that's only but meaningful in the context of the speaker and the listener here there
now etc there's a lot of these things and we've got to be able to handle that in order to capture the
semantics of a sentence so it's not enough to say there's a trapping relation between the internet user
and the crustacean we really have to go to a temporal modal logic beyond first order logic with equality
to capture this information and capture it in a way that's going to work not just now for this one
isolated case but for all possible cases of these sort of temporal expressions it's also common for
people that that don't have a background in modal logic to sort of assume that there's some kind of
a fudge for this in a graph representation there isn't right and this is why logicians work on this
stuff it's hard getting it right has taken many many decades of effort and so you can fudge it but
essentially somewhere down the line you're going to get completely wrong conclusions nonsensical
conclusions because you don't have the same strength of semantics in your representation
that's why we need this difficult and expressive logic
we have negation negation is another big problem for graphs right you've got to be able to negate an
arbitrary conjunction or disjunction of other statements to do that you've got to have a
construct that is beyond a particular relation that is is a sort of a contextualized relation it can handle
a whole expression logic already gives you this and getting negation right is is really a necessity
in logic or in any other representation you're trying to create so like sometimes people try to
say well i can do that in my graph or i can do that in my description logic and well maybe you can for this
one point case but essentially if you're doing this in your ad hoc representation that's not a formal
expressive logic you're going to wind up syntactically recreating what logicians have already done and
done many years prior and you're going to sort of discover these things on a point by point basis instead
of just getting them right from the start so encourage people to to use a representation that can handle the
full complexity of the semantics of english and only a higher order logic will give you that
um so here's the case where the internet user doesn't trap a crustacean i'm negating this entire
complex existentially quantified expression that includes a temporal modal logic expression within it
uh what if i have you know an agent patrick desires that the internet user trap a crustacean
pretty common to see in news texts you know uh kevin mccarthy said he believes that
the next vote for speaker will be successful um you know bolsonaro desires that he be the leader
of the country again these are very common expressions in natural language they're not
infrequent and they're difficult and they require this sort of expressive logic and that's the sort
of thing that we're handling we're able to generate this stuff and have a representation
that handles it and then maybe if we're lucky have a theorem prover that can handle it higher
order logic theorem proving is still difficult and somewhat experimental and so that's a parallel
line of research but you know we're not sort of hand waving away this problem we're not imagining
it doesn't exist or imagining that we can really handle all this complexity and language without
this this additional set of of computational support that we believe is you know in fact really required
uh so here just making the logic and the sentence more and more difficult the plumber knows that
patrick desires that the internet user traps a crustacean pretty artificial sounding sentence
admittedly but not all such constructs for sentences are that that rare right you do get in a news report
um the new york times reported that uh the speaker desires that this bill pass without further amendment
that would not be a particularly unusual sentence and yet it follows exactly this pattern
so one of the things that we need to do and if anyone is at all intrigued by this work and thinking
well how can i uh contribute which would be wonderful uh here is the great way to do that one thing that
is that we need that needs to be added to sumo and yet is also fairly well constrained in terms of the
the complexity of the underlying axioms that need to be expressed so it's possible to make these fairly
formulaic and in fact the use that we make of them inside my java code that generates logic language
pairs is very formulaic and we'll look for only uh axioms that that are of a very particular restricted
form in order to do its restriction of which sentences get generated we have this notion of
capability a capability relation in sumo so it says that uh some kind of thing is capable of
performing some kind of role in some kind of action so ears are capable of hearing guns are
capable of shooting and we have to talk about things that might happen in order to restrict the
sentences that we generate we'd like to be able to say that john uh you know john it can't be eating
a boat dock we might generate something like that now but we want to be able to restrict eating to have
a boat dock and we have a lot of processes and we have a lot of objects in sumo and so creating an
inventory of these different capability expressions would eliminate i think a lot of the kind of funny
sounding sentences we generate now that said i think it's not catastrophic that we have some of
these funny sentences because remember that we're ultimately trying to go from organically occurring
natural language text in the wild in order into arbitrary logic expression so the fact that we have
other sentences that kind of have a similar form but don't really make a lot of common sense may not be a big
issue because as long as we have enough examples of things that are reasonable that do cover the
vocabulary we care about that do have reasonable selectional restrictions that that'll still able
us enable us to translate the good stuff that occurs the sensible sentences into sensible logic
expressions and the fact that we have a corpus of translations where the translation is reasonable but
the core sentence is kind of bogus may just be background noise we may be able to get away with
that but even if that proves not to be a problem it still would be better for us to have in sumo these
capability expressions just to add to our knowledge of how the world works so if anybody is intrigued by
this i'd love to help you get started because i think it would be not too hard to do and would be a great
value to the project so we have a lot of as i've said i've said a couple times now that we have a lot
of processes we have a lot of objects well what do i mean by a lot well here's uh just a segment of the
natural language comments on a portion of the hierarchy starting from the top here are all the
process types in sumo we have 1300 of them at last count and here are a number of them
so in a lot of sentences we don't restrict what processes can hold for a given sentence and we'd
like to have again these selectional restrictions based on capability expressions for the type of
objects that can participate in the types of processes so that we don't get silly stuff
for each of these processes we have mappings to verbs and wordnet so that's what allows us to
to cycle to iterate through all the process types and still generate a sentence not using the labels
in sumo but rather using the labels the legitimate words in the wordnet dictionary so for example for
ambush it's mapped to a particular numbered sinset a collection of synonyms collection of synonymous words
in wordnet that linguistically identifies a sense in english and so we have ambush that's mapped to sinset
blah blah blah 926. it has a certain definition has a certain set of synonyms emboscade ambush lying in
wait and a trap and that's why we saw trapping earlier the internet user traps a crustacean that
was exactly this equivalent symbol uh sinset for ambush um we have lots of case roles so the way these are
the ways in which entities can participate in events uh there are some simple systems including some
simple systems in linguistics um if you look at uh i think verbnet has some of this uh set of
restrictions so agent patient instrument resource these are very common um and so you'll also see uh agent
zero agent one sometimes as labels in semi-formal linguistics talking about the roles that entities
play in activities uh and so occasionally i've gotten this uh question which i think is funny it's
like well why isn't it enough to have just agent patient and instrument well yes that does cover at a
high level maybe exhaustively uh the roles that things can play i mean uh james pustyofsky also has this
set of qualia relations this is a common uh i think approach in linguistics to try to explain language
through a small number of covering predicates or abstractions and while that might be fine for
abstract linguistics in practice there's a lot more that we can say about the world about how things
interact in events that happen and so we've come up with 67 of them and i think this is you know many
orders of magnitude too small but it's a good start uh it's the stuff that we've found that's that's been
useful uh over the years so invading virus catalyst catalyst broker enjoys reagent all of these relations
many of them are sub relations of things like agent and patient and instrument and resource but they're
more specific they they entail uh different additional knowledge when they're used and it's knowledge which
fits with our knowledge of the real world we have lots of objects so here's just the corpuscular objects
things that are not substances that have parts and we have 930 of them a lot of them are content bearing
objects or things that may have writing or symbols on them that are are common in our world as well as
organic objects like organisms there's a lot of these and they all play different roles in different
activities uh here are some of the roles that uh human beings or agents can play you know you can have
a certain profession you can be a plumber or a programmer and you can switch freely from one to the other this
you know past weekend i made my toilet breaks and i have to be a plumber today i'm a programmer uh maybe
tonight i will be teaching a course and so i'll be a lecturer um these different roles are free and
flexible and large and they also uh are temporarily qualified right you can play different roles at
different times so it's not enough to say as wordnet unfortunately does as a linguistic product
that a subtype of human is plumber well you can be a plumber one time and not be a plumber another
time and that doesn't mean you cease to be a human it's a bad relation to have formally although it's
a reasonable uh relation to have linguistically because you can do the substitution test that
linguists do of substituting uh say a super class for a subclass and it works in a lot of sentences
but it doesn't work formally it doesn't work in logic so we need to separate out these roles and say
that they're transient temporally qualified rules that people can have
so we can generate against bogus stuff like robert kills a boat dock doesn't really make any sense it
makes sense syntactically but we need these capability restrictions to handle them and and a
lot of times we do have restrictions like the rule below here um but that it's just i i can't afford to
do theorem proving while i'm doing generation if i need to generate a one terabyte corpus of language
logic pairs i can't prove the truth of every sentence this would take you know many years if
just to do one run of the generation system i've got to find a way to optimize that and the way to
optimize it is just to look at capability expressions even though the the following rule that i'm showing up
here says that the kill a killing has to have an object that's an organism and a boat dock is not an
organism so it's this would be trapped if i could do theorem proving for everything i generate but i just
don't have time so i need to use this more restrictive form that i can turn into a sort of a
lookup table and and make run much faster okay so i need this following expression that uh if there's
a capability of killing the uh killing event uh only the patient has to be an organism if it's the patient
or the object of the killing event it must be an organism i also have the the question of how much
is too much you know right now i am generally able to generate say a terabyte uh corpus in the span of
a couple of hours and then train on it uh training takes about 20 hours on a multi gpu fairly beefy server
how much is too much i don't have a sense of that how much is it too little um you know we're getting
good fidelity you know we break things up in the standard uh uh train test uh split um but uh and we get
good metrics you know we get a perplexity score that's down around 1.01 1.02 uh it's one reasonable
measure for the fidelity of your deep neural network training approach um but is that good enough i i don't
know yet we just need to do a lot more experiments so we have about a hundred names that we use we have
a corpus of of common human names we have about these 300 roles we have lots of different propositional
attitudes each of which could be negated we have modals like can may should that are also formally
expressed in our modal logic those in turn could be negated we have 400 different sorts of roles like
plumber and teacher 1300 processes those in fast could be negated and we have past present future
and then the progressive tense for each of those all of those possibilities we've got 930 direct
corpuscular objects and then we've got substances which i haven't listed on here we've got lots of
substances like water or gasoline uh 67 case rules and again 930 of those same corpuscular objects
they can be indirect objects uh and then i've also added a bunch of politeness expressions like can
i may i should uh do the following so a lot of these modal expressions can can be become politeness so
please may i etc so we can handle stuff in uh chatbot or conversational kind of stuff that's that's uh
very commonly seen so i did an inventory of stuff that a lot of the chatbots use for their sentence
patterns to make sure we cover that but a lot of these combinations are nonsense so i've got to
somehow pare it down uh if not if it's not a problem in terms of creating a lot of junk that can
otherwise get ignored when i'm translating a sentence at the very least it slows down training and so as i
make the corpus larger i i have to pare down the nonsense just so that my training phase is is possible
because i don't have the resource of open ai to spend three million dollars a month on running
their you know chat gpt for the world right i've got to run on one server that my friend in prog has
access to um so there's lots more that i can still do uh units and measures i've only begun starting to
do that i've got a little bit of that so i can say you know uh you know bob puts uh three three birds in
his wagon uh or three uh pounds of steak in his jar something of that sort uh because we've got a whole
set of i think there are about 60 different system international uh units and sumo has them all and
then of course your values can be within all sorts of different ranges we've got logical combinations
of sentences that i could generate so bob goes to the store and bob buys cookies
uh we can temporarily qualify all of these things i've got a little bit of that already so you know
bob goes to the store on tuesday bob goes to the store on january 27th of 2003.
we have a bit of an issue that a lot of these case rules require different prepositions
so i don't have those working correctly i need to actually do a whole set of patterns so a little
fragment of frame net if you will for uh different action types and which particular prepositions are
historically used so you get in the car you get on the boat you go to the station i don't handle all
of those correctly things we can do like with more than one agent right now agents are always singular
in my examples we can certainly have jack and jill go up the hill and not just jack
i do have now just implemented quotes for said so we can handle common this common form for news reports
or novels or what have you lots more things that could be done to make this a more comprehensive
corpus long before i you know run out of stuff to do i i can cover a lot larger portion or subset of of
english um so here's some just some detail on how we run the model um i've just got a script it's not
too hard it just takes a long time so future work once i get done exhausting the set of things i can
think of that i can do then we need to start seeing where it fails on natural texts a big thing to do is
to use either word devec or some large language model maybe as a way to pare down the number of nonsensical
combinations along with my preferred approach of having a lot more capability sentences which will then add to
the understanding the competence of this core model regardless of whether we're trying to do language
understanding or some other kind of project and i really want to do a comprehensive test on the
the baby corpus to just see if i can do better if i'm not learning and teaching a machine learning
system how to do inference but using a system that already knows how to do inference i think i should be
able to get better scores but that remains an empirical question if i can do that i think maybe then
people pay more attention to this work so it would be a nice demo okay that's that's it uh so thanks
for learning about this early work as well as the more mature model that it's based on that's already
being applied commercially uh and lo would love it if i got somebody on this call so excited that you
wanted to do some work together excellent thank you for the presentation adam you can unshare or leave it up
and we will begin with dave providing some initial comments and questions yes one uh idea can you
hear me now i can great one idea that occurred to me several points during your presentation was
if you put part of the train a part of the pruning inside the model by creating persistent agents
in the trents with goals and beliefs bob isn't just a transient pattern of activations but bob is
something that stays around for a while and perhaps bob's desires evolve more
slowly than bob's beliefs including bob's beliefs about carol and carol's relevance and whether carol
believes correct things about what he's interested in right now have you gotten around to something as
as charming as that.
Well, that's what the baby folks did, right?
They've got this model, world model, and they generate sentences
and variations of those sentences based on that world model.
And we could certainly re-implement what they've, the simple system
that they've done in Lua in a more complicated blocks world, if you will,
that uses all the entities and objects that are in Sumo.
That's something I'd like to do.
I can only
do that.
Okay, reconnecting here.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.




Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.

Thank you.
not maybe not in your case but certainly in many cases with people that are doing numeric probabilities
is that the numeric probabilities force a total order essentially and you've got this appearance
of of precision where 73 is more likely than 56 but in reality if that comes from anything less
than statistically rigorous empirical data then it's just sort of a confidence factor like was
used in a lot of old-style expert systems that that doesn't give you reliable results so you know
none of those criticisms may actually apply to your situation i don't have enough detail about what
you're doing but i would ask you to consider those points awesome i'll give a thought on that and then
dave happy to hear from it so for any given model architecture symbolically represented like a
symbolic regression or a bayesian graph constraining on that model structure which in the variational
inference world we just call q it's just the variational distribution the one that we are
getting to choose the family that we're parameterizing it from so it's like our designer symbolic model and
why the data come in so then free energy which is the imperative for minimization whether it's the
real-time variational free energy happening right now or it's the planned or anticipated expected free energy
uh in either of those cases for a given generative model given q distribution and given set of data
you might have a very high confidence in something that was very inadequate and so in that way it's like
there are distributions of scatter plots that can confuse a least squares regression or you get some
sort of misleading model outcome and it may even be invisible you may be able to look at diagnostics of the
linear regression and tell that some sort of error or aberration is happening but you also may
not like a kind of unknown unknowns question and in the case of cognitive modeling
these state spaces can be very large and they're often trained with sparse data so this problem of
overfitting and conditional and dynamic relationships so that something can be like true and trained upon for
100 video frames and then something changes and then there's a non-linear change in what can happen next
or how things unfold through time so that's kind of like the complexity of action and perhaps could
you speak to how action is represented or treated or how the concept of action selection and planning
and strategy and implementation impact how did these features develop in sumo through time
i think there was more to that question it sounds like daniel's maybe has still having some connectivity
that was it just how did the concept of action evolve through time
how does the concept yeah um let's see uh there was a lot packed into your question i'm not sure i i grasped
most of it but let let me let me just maybe make a i'll give myself a related question
which is uh how do we handle the fact that sometimes in machine learning systems the mathematics
has such linearities that we get nonsensical conclusions right i think that's a fairly common
problem so i think that the interaction between these two models of the world the statistically
machine learning derived model and the symbolic model is really important so that our machines don't
go off the rails as it were i'm using a term called cognitive guardrails and i think this applies well to
people you know people have instinctive reactions to many things and we have at the same time a
deliberative cognitive mind that constrains those reactions we might react emotionally and react badly
to something that sort of triggers us in some way but then we have another process in our head that says
well you know we're in a social situation and so no i don't want to punch this person that's offended me
even though i might be tempted to do so if we have a self-driving car that sees an object in front of
it my initial reaction might to be to plow through it but the cost to doing so might be very high so
maybe i want to swerve or break gradually and having this interaction between these two models i think can
address some of this problem that we see uh with non-linearities of modern machine learning systems
that do you know work really well in a lot of common cases and then sometimes just veer off into
infinity as it were and do something completely ridiculous
yes i i appreciate that response i think it's exactly like you described with uh overfitting to the
meaning and going off the rails from a cognitive perspective is there's like the known unknown
so where you're very instance you know example especially there's uh university of wyoming i think
did a nice paper maybe quite a while back now probably at least five years back that
you would say yes it's a cat or a dog because it was just training on sort of a coincidental
feature of pixels that maybe approximated the fur of the animal and so it couldn't recognize a you know
it recognized a test pattern as being a cat and it couldn't recognize a simple cartoon drawing as
a cat because it never seen anything like that and wasn't looking at the essential features of the
world and so machines are really great at finding correlations but that doesn't mean they're the
right correlations i think that's at the root of a lot of things that we call uh over training or
overfitting but we never know really whether it's it's fit correctly or overfit i mean there's sure
there's some some numeric measures that at times can tell you okay we're we're bouncing out of this
local minimum and and our our fidelity has gone down numerically but we don't know what that really
means in respect to the common sense larger world that is represented by something that's much larger
than any given test set that we might be training on so i think that having a sort of completely
different representation of the world can help guard against some of this and so i thought of using
machine learning and symbolic systems together where the symbolic system
addresses problems in the input data right by because in faulty input data erroneous input data
is is always a big problem how do we know we're training on the right stuff how do we know that
if we're training on a uh a system to diagnose uh check fraud for example or a credit card fraud
that we don't have uh some bogus data that's crept in here there that might have a spurious correlation
we've got say zeroed out fields or a field of 99 it's really is a don't care field but it's in the data
and there's no easy way for us to discover it if we've got terabytes of data wouldn't it be nice to have
a common sense system that could act like an intern a human intern working at warp speed looking over
all of our input data to make sure we've uh uh not included any inputs that are at odds with what we
know about the real world and then on the output side making a few uh uh inferences in our symbolic
system could help the overall computational system not make really dumb conclusions like oh let we
don't know what that thing is so let's run over it might be the conclusion that that a statistical system
has but we'd like to have our our combined agent uh be able to trap things like that in the same way
that a person wouldn't presumably punch somebody else who's offended him because they know that
that that's both illegal and immoral thanks dave do you want to add or ask something yeah a couple of
the other approaches that sometimes simplify exactly these same kind of problems that that daniel and adam
have both been cutting through uh one is fuzzy logic uh sometimes a fuzzy solution and a probabilistic
solution agree numerically but in other situations they don't and in many of those cases the fuzzy answer
turns out to be way back when lofty zodic satisfying and reacting to situations and it wasn't until he started
calling the logic fuzzy that people were beating on and he was just coming up with great results
another um approach that that that's been impressing me uh is uh david deutsch and chiara marletto's
work in constructor theory where they start by asking what can be done and what can't be done and
what does it mean to do something what does it mean to be able to construct um
um they generalize the notion of uh catalyst for instance as as a general concept in in systems theory
and um they just identified a lot of things that people spend a lot of brain power on as just simply
being nonsensical you can't construct that therefore you're wasting your time if you try to work out how it
could be done would be done with the consequences where if it could be done it just can't be so go
on to something interesting
well i'm not i'm not familiar with the latter work but i am a bit familiar with fuzzy logic and maybe i
should just mention that you know this has been another thing where people that are uh familiar with
fuzzy logic wonder how you could do this in a non-fuzzy logic um and
the the challenge then comes uh down to again uh people that aren't familiar with logics beyond first
order um a lot of things we might say about like you know john john is tall okay um and maybe john
how do we how do we compute whether john is tall and we have this problem of well if in a traditional
logic system there who would have the problem that okay if he's above six feet he's tall if he's below
six feet he's tall therefore if he's you know five feet eleven and seven eighths inches he's not tall
and of course we all know from a common sense point standpoint that's ridiculous and so we'd want to
use fuzzy logic but in fact um what we should be able to say is uh that he's tall with respect to a
particular group right and if we can make these more complex statements generally involving uh sets of
things and conditionals that are you know beyond uh first order logic we can express these things
perfectly well um in in a this more expressive logic we don't always have to go to fuzzy logic because one
of the challenges that i think with you have with fuzzy logic is again a lot of the people that did work in
this sort of world back you know like almost 30 years ago um think i came up with things that were
uh functioning well empirically as sort of hacks um because they didn't have uh data about you know
what is the actual statistical value curve of tallness it was just somebody's guess about what the curve of
tallness membership should be for example so i i'd like uh the the notion of fuzzy logic intuitively i'm
not sure that i care for it so much on on a theoretical basis and on a practical basis there's simply another
way to do it very interesting dave want to add anything yeah now this is um if we have time for this this is
a much deeper question about the way the sumo rules are written is do we have time to go in in a lot of depth in this venue
depth not necessarily breadth not necessarily a big answer but okay i'll just ask this uh reading through
the the rules a number of rules have conditions that very specifically ask in the first participant
of a relation if the following holds then the following logic applies if a different set of conditions
on the paid recipient of action the indirect object or direct object of a process holds then you can apply
the following logic and you know i look at that and i say wait a minute these are split these different
rules are splitting off very different kind of real world situations within the same sumo class
well there's got to be two things have to be true in order to do that in order to have find these
differentiating rules within a single class first you call those by the same name in whatever natural
languages you were thinking in when you wrote the rules and second the formal literally the abstract
algebra of these various cases have to all be analogous they all have to be isomorphic
and my name for that situation is you're covering analogical cases in the same sumo class
and in that sense the sumo class itself is an analogy it's an analogy among these various cases
which in different domains of application
is it's an analogy that's not a sumo class that's not a sumo class that's not a sumo class
or can a sumo class actually be a higher or analogy
it's hard for me to know because i mean there's no analogical reasoning happening so i'm not sure
you're talking about analogies and there's no natural language happening once you're in the formal system
so i'm not sure why you mentioned natural language i think we'd have to look at a very specific example
and then you know we could we could run it on run run that example on a theorem prover and you'd see
exactly how things behave it's not something about you know classes per se um you know you just mentioned
how how do rules work in a logic right you've got preconditions uh for the antecedent of a rule and
you've got the consequent of a rule and yes indeed the the the symbols in that formal system have to
match that's that's how logic works right i'll get some specific examples when email them to you
okay sounds great in our last minutes here and also apologies for the internet disrupt um this is
part of our long-term journey learning about this and applying it to active inference so
we're going to keep this thread alive and be able to bring some more informed uh areas of intersection
and application but one that i wanted to mention was to return to your type one type two thinking and
the way that there's a faster reflexive or habitual statistical type one inference and then a slower
type two what you refer to as deliberate and deductive that involves symbolic logic and in
chapter five of the active inference textbook there's a schematic of a dopaminergic neural circuit
in the central and peripheral nervous system where there's a dopamine related parameter computationally
that's like a dial in the model that is controlling the balance between replicating actions according to
the prior like just the habit so it's some distribution of capacities affordances and then if there's three
options it's 0.8 0.1 0.1 so then under the most habitual setting like what we might even call
non-agentic or subconscious then that vector of affordances is recapitulated in action selection
and then in a different dopaminergic regime there is increasingly fine scale and potentially overfit
application of the free energy and that can reflect like a symbolically informed deep generative model
of the world which captures semantics of the world like nested time scales and temporal priority effects so
it's interesting that the this area while deep hierarchical generative models often are described as if
they have semantic value however that is usually just sort of specified or only explored in a few limited cases
so integrating and working at that mapping between the top-down symbolic and the bottom-up data driven
is going to be a really important interesting area so as a closing round or question what do you see in the ecosystem
and or what directions if you didn't state them earlier you're working on this year
well yeah the generative ai stuff certainly got a huge amount of press um it's it's fascinating as an intellectual exercise
certainly and and it's fascinating to have uh uh systems that can complete sentences and write stories and
you know always have an answer to a question but as we're seeing with a lot of newer things that are
that are being uh written as follow-ups to all the excitement that people are showing how well these
these systems will give you an answer but it's often a complete hallucination
um right uh so one recently of saying well you know hillary clinton was the 43rd president um well it
came up with that somehow by merging together various texts that other people have written
but it doesn't make sense together it's not true right um and so i i think these systems are
interesting in the way that a a parrot can have a very limited conversation you know you can teach
your parrot how to say polly want a cracker and say thank you and you give it a cracker that
doesn't mean it actually understands anything about what it's doing it's just a stimulus response
um now first there is a philosophical question if the stimulus response uh pairing is complicated
enough well isn't aren't human beings also just collections of stimulus and response so
that that may be true but i don't think we're at that level of complexity yet for our machines
and i think some of the things that we can get these generative models to do that are so obviously
nonsensical human are good evidence that uh they're they're certainly not uh sentient and they're not
even smart and they're certainly not very reliable if we have uh very challenging or high or high
criticality tasks to worry about i think they'll be useful in the same way that google search is useful
uh it doesn't always get the right answer it will universally get many wrong answers but it's
a very powerful and useful tool when you have a human being available to filter out all the nonsense
and just uh use that as a filter for what they'd otherwise have to do you know it's not feasible for
a human being to answer a question by reading all the books in the library but if google can give you 10 books
10 books and 10 pages in those 10 books where your answer may be found it's done you a great service
even though it's given you you know winnie-le-pooh along with the handbook of analytical or organic
chemistry or something where your your uh actual answer is found so in that same way chat gbt might
be very useful in breaking your writer's block to help write the summary for a proposal or a student essay
but you certainly don't want to have it write the whole essay for you and hand it in because
you'll probably fail so i'm not quite as worried about uh high school or college essays as some
commentators have have been i think it'll be a useful partner and that's about all and we've
got to understand these limitations and ideally pair it with a symbolic system that really knows
something about the real world so that they can work together awesome dave first and then adam
what are your closing thoughts or reflections
i've enjoyed this very much uh we've got lots of work to to plow forward and do i'm glad there's going
to be common work that uh um we can become affordances for one another on thank you gentlemen
well thank you dave for the you know good questions good comments and and daniel as well
and and for setting this up um i guess i would encourage you know what i've maybe encouraged in
the past is a lot of the things that that we've talked about in these several conversations we've
had are are general right uh you know we're saying what's an overarching direction for the field or
something and i think that if we got down into some real specific examples and actually doing some
representation together then a lot of these uh more philosophical notions would go away and we'd get
down to doing something that has has practical utility that's why i also encourage uh actually
having you know if people do say some of the sumo exercises together because i think dave some of the
questions that you're having over you know what what is a rule how is it working um i can answer all
those questions and give you some very precise experience that would give you a real actual
understanding of how logic works and how sumo works uh if we took the time together to go through those
exercises do some work with the theorem prover and it would clear up i think a lot of uh maybe
misunderstandings or misconceptions and and give us a real path to do something concrete together
because although the talking is is great fun um it's the the doing and writing a practical
computational system that hopefully we all want to get to yes say let us descend into the particular
yes that's great i love it great ending the stream
yes
you
you
you
you

you
you

you
you

you
you
you