## yC-hgjv3ANk

SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Hello and welcome everyone to ACT-INF Lab live stream number 39.0.

It's February 25th, 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on the slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

If you want to learn more about .coms, which is the organizational unit that puts on all these live streams and many other products or any of the other activities in the Actinf lab, go to actininference.org.

All right.

Well.

Today, in Act-Inf Stream number 39.0, the goal is to learn and discuss this really awesome paper called Morphogenesis as Bayesian Inference.

A Variational Approach to Pattern Formation and Control in Complex Biological Systems.

It's by Franz Kuchling, Karl Fristen, Georgi Georgiev, and Michael Levin from 2020.

And just like all the .Zero videos, and indeed all our videos, it's just an introduction to some of these ideas.

It's not a review or a final word.

That being said, we're going to go over the aims, claims, abstract, roadmap, keyword, etc.

of the paper.

And then with a focus on the first parts of the paper and less so on the formalism and more on the big ideas, we're going to go over the paper and the figures.

that will put us in a good position cognitively or morphologically we might even say for the discussions in the coming weeks 39.1 and 39.2 when we'll get to unpack this so if you would like to it'd be awesome to have you participate live or if it's past 39.2 you can still ask questions all right we'll start with introductions and warm-ups we can each

say hi, and maybe one thing that was exciting or interesting about the paper, which I'll reserve for after you, but I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California, and Dean, thanks a ton for joining.


SPEAKER_01:
thanks Natalie I'm Dean I'm here in Calgary and what really got me excited about this was the idea that they talked a little bit later closer to the end we may not even talk about it today is the role that epigenetics might play in terms of how cells behave and and what sorts of things we might be able to turn in terms of

simply what we see in biological form into some sort of static statistical prediction device so i'm really excited about that awesome yeah it's a complex paper about complex systems so we'll see what we can get done today but


SPEAKER_00:
I'm really excited to bring active inference into this domain, at least as far as our discussions go into the morphological and the morphogenetic areas.

And it's just bringing like another lens, another way that we can apply active inference as a filter, another set of phenomena that we're bringing into this active inference realm.

so we'll just go right into the big question so i'll read this and then feel free to give a thought the big question or at least one way to put one of the questions is how can we find an integrative path between math and morphogenesis morphogenesis means form like physical form morpho and genesis meaning how it arises so how does physical form arise and how is that related to math

And to kind of unpack that, here's some quotes.

The molecular mechanisms, which are like signaling pathways of all different kinds, underlying development and regeneration in biological organisms have undergone a tremendous amount of knowledge gain in the last several years due to genomics and biotechnology advances.

So that's kind of the one side with the biological.

And then from the mathematical and the formal, the emerging field of the free energy principle in pattern formation, not always morphogenetic patterns, but could be cognitive patterns, rhythmic patterns, provides an essential quantitative formalism for understanding cellular decision-making in the context of embryogenesis, regeneration, and cancer suppression.

So if that's the if,

Then how might the mathematical formalism reveal new understandings about developmental change in evolution and for designing new interventions in regenerative medicine settings?

So what did you think about that?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I just love any time that two things that seem disparate or distant are brought together, because I think all sorts of good things can happen.

And I'm going to do a little shout out.

That's kind of what I would like to see if we can organize in August with a couple of other papers that don't start out necessarily appearing to be close or proximal, but by bringing them together, all kinds of interesting things can happen.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Okay, to the main aims and claims of the paper.

So the paper is in Physics of Life Reviews 2020, and we already mentioned the title and the authors.

Just to select a few aims that the authors represent, and then a couple of key claims that are relevant for the paper.

So as far as aims go, one of their aims is to introduce an overarching concept that can predict the emergence of form and the robust maintenance of complex anatomy.

Another aim is to

derive the mathematics behind Bayesian inference and use simulations to show, simulations that are consistent and within the Bayesian framework, to show that the formalism can reproduce experimental top-down manipulations of complex morphogenesis.

And then just a few of their claims, more of which we'll be unpacking in the coming minutes.

Classic, i.e.

dynamical systems and analytical mechanics,

Approaches such as last least action principles are difficult to use when characterizing open, far from equilibrium systems that predominate in biology.

So that's kind of a big challenge that's come up again and again, which is we might have really great equations for a pendulum, maybe even a pendulum with friction, but how about an active pendulum that's doing strategy and trying to run away from you?

A bit harder to put those same equations on.

The Bayesian inference framework treats cells as information processing agents, where the driving force behind morphogenesis is the maximization of a cell's model evidence, which is to say it's reduction of uncertainty relative to a generative model, which is what we're gonna be unpacking.

And we had previously read this about how they're applying free energy principle to morphogenesis

when it goes well, like during embryogenesis and results in a zygote becoming like an adult life form, as well as all of the ways that it's maintained during that stationarity of healthy life and including cases where it might be relevant to even think about making interventions like medical settings.

So those are a few of the aims and claims.

Anything to add on it?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just real quick.

It's really interesting that they said top-down, and then we're going to see some slides where there's a top-top and a down-down.

So stick around, because there's actually going to be something kind of interesting happening here.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

How about you read the first half of the top half of this abstract slide?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, sure.

Recent advances in molecular biology, such as gene editing, bioelectric recording and manipulation, and live cell microscopy, using fluorescent reporters, especially with the advent of light-controlled protein activation through optogenetics, have provided the tools to measure and manipulate molecular signaling pathways.

with unprecedented spatial temporal precision.

This has produced ever increasing detail about the molecular mechanisms underlying development and regeneration in biological organisms.

However, an overarching concept that can predict the emergence of form and the robust maintenance of complex anatomy is largely missing in the field.

Classic, i.e.

dynamic systems and analytical mechanics, approaches such as least action principles are difficult to use when characterizing open, far from equilibrium systems that predominate in biology.

Similar issues arise in neuroscience when trying to understand neuronal dynamics from first principles.

So they're basically covering their basis here by making sure that we understand this is open systems.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Increases in tools in biological systems like genomics, microscopy, optogenetics are helping us reduce our uncertainty about the what, but without a bit more information about the how and the why, etc.

That's the overarching concept that's largely missing.

So we can grind up the cells and sequence the genome.

We can extract the RNA and we can even tell what the ratio of different RNA molecules is.

But it turns out that that type of information alone doesn't help us understand why two related species or the same species in two different contexts or the same genome in two different tissues or the same tissue in two different environments has such different morphology.

Okay, and then the second half.

In this neurobiology setting, a variational free energy principle has emerged based upon a formulation of self-organization in terms of active Bayesian inference.

The free energy principle has recently been applied to biological self-organization beyond the neurosciences.

For biological processes that underwrite development or regeneration, the Bayesian inference framework treats cells as information processing agents, where the driving force behind morphogenesis is the maximization of a cell's model evidence.

This is realized by the appropriate expression of receptors and other signals that correspond to the cell's internal, i.e.

generative, model of what type of receptors and other signals it should express.

emerging field of the free energy principle in pattern formation provides an essential quantitative formalism for understanding cellular decision making in the context of embryogenesis regeneration and cancer suppression okay and then if you read the first um two parts here on the second slide yeah no problem in this paper we derive the mathematics behind bayesian inference as understood in this framework and use simulations to show that formalism can reproduce


SPEAKER_01:
Interesting.

Experimental top-down manipulations of complex morphogenesis.

First, we illustrate the first principle approach to morphogenesis through simulated alterations of anterior-posterior axial polarity.

The induction of two heads or two tails, ah, spoiler alert, as a planarian regeneration.


SPEAKER_00:
Don't you hate it when the abstract spoils the paper?

Then we consider aberrant signaling and functional behavior of a single cell within a cellular ensemble as a first step in carcinogenesis, the formation of cancer, as false beliefs about what a cell should sense and do.

Inference, perception, action, inference.

we further show that simple modifications of the inference process can cause and rescue mis-patterning of developmental and regenerative events without changing the implicit generative model of a cell as specified, for example, by its DNA.

This formalism offers a new roadmap for understanding developmental change in evolution and for designing new interventions in regenerative medicine settings.

Speaking of the new roadmap, let's look at the roadmap.

Kind of cool that they actually say that it is providing a roadmap.

So we've talked about guides.

We've talked about roadmaps.

Where do you see all of that before we look at the section titles?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, where a guide, I think, basically gives sort of gives you

The parameters, I think a roadmap is a lot more specific in terms of the sequencing, but that's just my interpretation of it.

I think other people can interpret roadmap differently in terms of sort of the relational aspect of how the different parts come together.

And we've talked about that in other live streams, but I don't want to get bogged down in this part right now because I think we got a lot of stuff to cover here.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yeah.

So the paper begins with an introduction to Bayesian inference.

Section two is mathematical foundations that are building on Bayesian inference.

So going from kind of Bayes' theorem to several dynamical systems representations, some of which we've discussed before, others which will push it into a little bit of a new area.

Then the key

contribution and the focus of the paper is modeling morphogenesis and so instead of just presenting bays and then variational bays and then free energy minimization on a bacterium like we saw axel constant do in live stream number 34 we're going to take that momentum and move it towards

application of modeling in morphogenesis and that's where we'll talk about like what model they construct and how it relates to some of the formalisms that were brought up earlier and then there's a discussion and conclusion section which we won't go too much into today in the dot zero but it's going to be awesome to go into it in the dot one and dot two because there's a ton of awesome content and material

So here's the keywords that were listed and we won't go into most of them just to say that they're gonna come up in this discussion.

We have free energy principle, Bayesian inference, morphogenesis and developmental biology regeneration.

Kind of got some mathematical stuff we've seen before.

We have a triad of developmental biology, which broadly understood includes embryogenesis, as well as aging and cancer and all these other developmental things that happen during biology and top-down modeling.

And maybe we'll see what that means coming up.

Okay, well, to get right into it,

Section one is an introduction to Bayesian inference.

So here's a nice picture by Sasha and here are the opening lines of the paper.

They wrote, and then feel free to give a thought.

Evolutionary change results from mutations in DNA and selection acting on functional bodies.

Thus, it is essential to understand how the hardware encoded by the genome enables the behavioral plasticity of cells that can cooperate to build and repair complex anatomies.

Indeed, most problems of biomedicine, repair of birth defects, regeneration of traumatic injury, tumor reprogramming, et cetera, could be addressed if prediction and control could be gained over the processes by which cells implement dynamic pattern homeostasis.

fundamental knowledge gap and opportunity of the next decades in the biosciences is to complement bottom-up molecular understanding of mechanisms with a top-down computational theory of cellular decision making and info taxes movement towards information so dean what do you think what should we study and why and how is this related to active and fep


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, well, my background in genetics is near zero.

But what I did come away from with that last bullet in particular was one of the things that I beat like a dead animal, which is that you need a minimum of two.

And I think that the bottom-up sort of building blocks aspect of it with the top down, how do we get a better grip on what the signals are that are passing between all of those bricks was really interesting.

And so carrying on through,

I kind of wanted to open that up and see what that marriage looked like.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So speaking as someone who started in the science journey with genetics, pretty much,

It always was so interesting how genetics would frame itself as if the bottom-up information flow could just simply replace theory.

We'll sequence so many genomes, we won't need to speculate about evolution, or we'll have your genome, so we won't even need to ask about what medicine is best.

And that's kind of this bottom-up molecular understanding, which is vital, it's essential, it's important, it's changing a lot, but it's this bottom-up

subunit description, the what and the where of the subunits and how they touch and all of that.

And that is always met implicitly and increasingly explicitly with a top-down theory of cellular decision-making and infotaxis.

And so we're always kind of meeting in the middle with empirical wet lab biology, revealing these mechanisms and these findings.

and we're meeting that as researchers doing model-based science with what are being called here top-down modeling, top-down computational theories.

Okay, that's just how they open up and also set a challenge for the coming decades.

It's their expectation of the next few decades.

Then they provide a math roadmap, which is an awesome paragraph.

So they write, we lay out the mathematical foundations of a type of Bayesian modeling that they're going to use to simulate pattern formation.

So red, Bayesian modeling.

Orange, we start by identifying a Lyapunov function that can be used to analyze and solve any dynamic system using the fundamental theorem of vector calculus, i.e.

the Helmholtz decomposition.

So we're using Bayesian modeling and layering in what we'll talk about soon, the Lyapunov function.

green.

We use it to characterize the generalized flow of systemic states of the whole system in terms of conversions to a non-equilibrium steady state, a NES.

Next layer, blue.

We then introduce the notion of a Markov blanket that separates the external and internal states of the system.

And finally, purple.

We can then replace the Lyapunov function

with a variational free energy function to solve for the evolution of internal and active states, that's of the particle, and thereby characterize self-organization in far from equilibrium systems that can be partitioned into a cell and an external milieu.

That's the math that they go through.

That's the math rainbow.

Then sections after that apply this formalism to illustrate morphogenesis and neoplasia, which is the growth of new forms, neoplasia, using simulations.

And what's so cool is this trajectory from 400 to 700 nanometers, from the base,

through the vector calculus and flow states to the finding or the figuring out of a Markov blanket and then the usage of the Markov partitioning legitimated by the orange and the green steps to find a heuristic way to go about solving what was

needing to be addressed right in the beginning.

We've seen some variants of this trajectory multiple times.

And then in this paper, they study morphogenesis.

And so then they model morphogenesis.

But save for a couple of words, a different paper could have said, we do the Bayes thing, the Lyapunov thing, the Helmholtz, the Ness, the Markov, and then we're back to doing far from equilibrium strategy in online teams.

And then we applied it to online teams.

And so let's keep in mind, like the paper can be long.

There are a lot of equations, but where is this broader trajectory that's helping us fine tune our regime of attention and update our generative model about what we are doing here and how it's different than other approaches.

And then where is the part that's actually studying morphogenesis?

Just things to keep in mind.

Okay.

Anything to add on this?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, correct me if I'm wrong on this, but I think what we're doing is essentially taking, as you said, we can look at a variety of things.

We can look at the physical nature of ants.

We can look at cells.

We can look at online teams.

Whatever we're looking at, what they basically said is there is a parallel way of looking at the formalisms of

that exist in those contexts with that type of content.

That's essentially what this said to me.

There's a way of bumping it up into that sort of statistical mathematical realm.

And now we're going to walk you through what that is.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

Okay.

So into the Bay, the Bay's area where I grew up.

Down by the Bay.

sitting by the dock of the bays all right oh i thought it's gonna say where the water well where the watermelons grow carry on base theorem rests on three basic axioms of probability theory and is used to relate the conditional probability of an unobservable event a okay so the vertical bar means conditioned upon or given and so what we really want to know is like the probability of something that we cannot observe

conditioned on what we did observe B. So you're never observing the lightning strike, you're observing photons on your receptor, and then you want to know about whether there was lightning in that cloud over a few miles away.

So we want to know the conditional probability of an unobservable event A, that's this left-hand side.

We want to relate that to an observable quantity B, that's what the data are,

And that's going to be calculated using the Bayes theorem as the probability of the data given the unobservable state, which is called a prior.

So that's like had to do with cats and meowing or in a previous example, or it has to do with like, if there were lightning, yes or no, what would be the likelihood of me observing photons?

multiplied by the probability of those unobservable states happening, which is of course a prior about them, but it could be set with empirical data, divided by how likely the data are, which is called P of B, the marginal likelihood or evidence.

Okay, so P of A given B is called the posterior because it's like after you've done your inference, you want the correct posterior, which is like updated beliefs about how likely the thing that you care about A is given what has come in.

Priors are like prior to this round of inference.

What are your beliefs about how likely A is?

And then the evidence coming in is B.

Okay, and the likelihood is how likely the data are under the prior distribution.

So that's Bayes' theorem, and we've talked about it multiple times, and I'm sure there's other awesome videos and courses that can explain it even better.

How are they using it here?

describe the dynamics of an ensemble of information processing agent like cells as a process of bayesian belief updating we need to relate the stochastic differential equations governing newtonian motion and biochemical activity to the probabilistic quantities above long sentence but

it's kind of saying we need to connect these variables, which are informational, they're probabilistic, they're statistical, to movement in space.

Movement in a Newtonian coordinate system, because we need these variables to measure spatial movement so we can study morphogenesis.

This is fairly straightforward to do if we...

associate biophysical states with the parameters of a probability density and ensure their dynamics perform a gradient flow on a quantity called variational free energy.

Variational free energy is a quantity in Bayesian statistics that, when minimized, ensures the parameterized density

converges to the posterior belief as we will see below so yes this is our first slide on bayes theorem and we did just kind of go from the total description of the variables and what is bayes theorem at a first pass to this introduction of the variational free energy so

It can be accordioned out and unpacked a lot more.

But what variational free energy is doing is helping us tractably converge to the appropriate posterior belief.

And that's its role here.

Okay.

Anything to add on this one, Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I'll ask you a question.

So if you were to talk to this to somebody for the first time, not people who've probably listened to other of our live streams, would you say that it would be dangerous to say that we're taking something that's kind of ratio-based and now using that to try to build a model of what our predictions are going to be based on?

Is that fair to say?


SPEAKER_00:
I believe so.

It's like one way to approach that.

I hope this would be accessible.

The ratio based part is on the right hand side.

And one could say, depending on like how much data you're getting and what you're trying to estimate, it could be very hard to go from observations to inference on hidden states.

pretty fair conclusion.

So what we could do would be construct a smooth approximatable model so that when we slide to the bottom of our model, just like the ball sliding down the hill, we would actually be doing the same thing as fitting this effectively.

So instead of like number crunching and putting everything into this equation and running the calculation, we're going to construct a bowl

which is the variational free energy that we can do gradient descent on that is going to converge to a really good solution.


SPEAKER_01:
Do we construct it or do they kind of tell us that we should assume it if we want to make it tractable?

Assume the bowl.


SPEAKER_00:
When we pick up this instrument, we're making variational free energy bowls.

Yeah, okay, good.

And we've seen this before.

In live streams 26, 32, and 34, we did some variance on moving from Bayes theorem and exact Bayes to variational inference, which uses this variational free energy value.

So those are a few times that we've seen this discussed before.

In neuroscience, the minimization of variational free energy is referred to as active inference.

We will see that when the basic condition for an inference type description of a system

namely the existence of a Markov blanket separating external and internal states, is satisfied, agents such as biological cells form into organized conglomerations based on their generative model of how their blanket states influence and are influenced by external states in the external milieu.

So the connection between Bayes' theorem and Markov blankets is the unobservables are external states.

The observables are blanket states.

It's a pretty fair model, whether it also provides like strong guarantees on optimal perception or optional action.

That's another discussion, but at the very least, it's a fair framing that external states are unobserved.

If you could observe them, they'd be observables.

Then they'd be more like B than A. So we're talking about a situation where we have some A's and we have some B's, and we're going to think about that in terms of a blanket formalism.

The dynamics of a system with a Markov blanket that self-organizes to non-equilibrium steady states can be described as a gradient flow on this computable variational free energy bound.

So we can set up the blanket and it turns out that we don't have to do the ratio number crunch.

We can do the bowl gliding down.

That's the beginning part on just Bayes that takes us from Bayes theorem to introducing variational free energy and doing gradient descent on variational free energy so that one can effectively essentially perform Bayesian inference.

Cool?

Perfect.

Okay.

Section two, mathematical foundations.

All right.

So section 2.1, stability and convergence in coupled dynamical systems.

And subsection 1, the Helmholtz decomposition.

So they write, the Helmholtz decomposition states that any sufficiently smooth, i.e.

possessing continuous derivatives, vector field F can be decomposed into an irrotational curl-free, so kind of straight up and down, putting the ruler and finding the slope of a hill, and

solenoidal divergence free vector field the divergence free solenoidal is like putting the ruler at ground level and then being able to make an iso contour around a hill because an irrotational vector field has only a scalar potential and the solenoidal vector field has only a vector potential we can express the vector field as

insert formalism two.

And just so people know, the upside-down triangle is called del or nabla, which means harp due to the shape.

So del phi is the irrotational vector field.

Del A is the solenoidal field.

We talked about this mostly in...

number 26 and 32, where we talked about the partition or the decomposition into a solenoidal and a gradient, as well as this housekeeping term, which was everyone's favorite housekeeping term.

So we're not having a housekeeping term here, but we're keeping in mind that it's not implausible that it's still there.

It's just that there was a whole paper coming out after this morphogenesis paper that talked about the housekeeping, et cetera.

So again, it wouldn't be surprising if a future morphogenesis paper or project

did have this housekeeping term, but 32 was actually a later paper.

So that might be a more advanced place or updated place to check out how the partition, I'm sorry, the Helmholtz decomposition works.

And here was a image from 26, just showing how you could have like a kind of hill

And in physics, you could have hill climbing and trying to get to the top, or sometimes it's easier to think about that as like the flip and the ball rolling to the bottom of the hill.

So whether it's the optimistic biologists talking about going up to the fitness peak, or whether it's the pessimistic physicists talking about going to the bottom of the energy well, it's the same idea that there's a particle on a landscape

And there's been a ton of work on passive particles.

That's not to say immobile particles, but particles that roll and get trapped.

And then once they're trapped, they stay, or they jiggle stochastically.

We're studying active particles.

And so that's where action selection comes into play.

Landscapes of energy with balls rolling down them, but they're kind of like jumping beans where they also have a few tricks that they can play.

Okay, anything to add here?


SPEAKER_01:
Just a reminder to people that that's a density that we're looking at, not a vacuum.

I know most people, like if I was to talk to younger people and they started imagining a ball rolling down a hill, they wouldn't necessarily confirm that it's an actual density that we're looking at.

So just reinforce that.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah like the bottom right here it's kind of like you're looking down at an ink drop and that's where it's densest is where it's darkest and then that is like a landscape where where it's darkest is highest right okay

Section 212, Lyopinib functions.

Okay, so Lyopinib functions have been used extensively in dynamical systems theory and engineering to characterize the stability of fixed points of a dynamical system.

Lyopinib functions are generally defined for smooth systems through the following conditions.

So L is going to be the Lyopinib function and X is going to be a point.

So a fixed point is going to be x star and a non-fixed point is going to be just regular x. So x star, the special points where if you are there, you're perfectly balanced.

So this is saying that at fixed points, the Lyapunov function evaluates as zero and it's not zero if it's not a fixed point.

And

the Lyapunov function change in L with respect to time.

It's below zero for all x. Equation 3a requires the Lyapunov function to be minimal for fixed points x star, representing local minima,

and b denotes conversions to these fixed points over time so what does it mean to have a lyopin value of zero above zero or below zero so if you're at zero just like it said with the fixed points that means that it's not moving at all a lyopin of exponent below zero means that things are converging towards

Lyopinib bigger than zero means diverging away.

Specifically, what it means is two points that are really, really close to each other.

Do they stay exactly the same distance away?

That's zero.

A negative lyopinib means that two points close to each other will converge.

So that's a convergence attractor.

And then positive lyopinib exponents, lyopinib values, mean that two points that are placed very close to each other will diverge away from each other.

I hope I have not oversimplified or made unforced errors about Lyapunov functions because it's obviously a really technical area.

and they write following 16 we can generalize this local lyapunov function of stability so zero equal fixed point positive equals divergence negative equals conversions to a global lyapunov function that plays the role of a potential function of any dynamical system and we won't go into it but it is the citation to this real she

paper from 2013, and they do some pretty interesting math.

So if somebody is more familiar with this, it would be awesome to hear about.

But what this is doing is it's taking the same dynamical systems perspective that we've been thinking about, about things changing through time, and then overlaying on that landscape

a stability landscape.

And so if we think about this hill on the top right, again, hopefully not being wrong or misleading here, at the very top of the hill,

it's like a fixed point it's an unstable fixed point but if one were perfectly balanced there we could just say um it could get knocked off by stochastic things which will come back later but it's perfectly balanced it's like a fixed point two points that were very close to each other on a hill two balls placed right next to each other would start to diverge as they rolled down the hill so that would be like a slight divergence

And so that is what the Lyapunov function as potential function is allowing.

It's allowing us to take the landscape of ball rolling, where gravity is the potential function.

The higher up, the more potential you have, and then it rolls down because of the dissipation of potential energy.

And they're going to...

show that any dynamics with lyapunov function so any smooth differentiable etc landscape has a corresponding physical realization a friction force a lorentz force and a potential function so we can think about this lyapunov function being related to potential functions like something that draws the system back that's where the negative lyapunov comes into play okay dean


SPEAKER_01:
Just a quick thing, Daniel.

When we were setting up the slides, between those two bullets, they talked about something called a saddle point.

Did you understand what a saddle point was previous to reading this?

Or do you know what a saddle point is now?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

I'm just pulling up the paper in the window.

Okay.

So people can see it.

Okay.

So yeah, the stability.

Okay.

So it's the following sentence.

So we can generalize the Lyapunov function to a global function that plays the role of a potential function of any system.

This follows by generalizing condition A to allow for saddle points.

So a saddle point is when the landscape is shaped like a saddle and there's like, so if it were on top of a hill, the curvature is negative with respect to all directions.

In a saddle point, the curvature is negative with respect to one of the dimensions, but it's positive with respect to another dimension.


SPEAKER_01:
And so it's like... Just like a saddle.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Why do they call it that?


SPEAKER_00:
And so...

The ball on the top of the hill is like an infinite multifurcator.

Like a little jiggle, it could go any direction because it's unstable in every direction.

Saddle points induce a symmetry where that ball is never going to roll up the hill.

It's going to fall to one side of the saddle or the other side of the saddle.

And one of those could be like a certain attractor and the other one could be like another elevation basically.

Though I don't know the details of how the saddle point is related to some of this Lyapunov stuff.

Okay.

All right.

So following 16, so this is, they're showing that the Lyapunov is equivalent to a potential function.

In physics, a potential function, psi, can be constructed to describe the flow of or forces acting on a particle through a potential energy gradient.

So the potential energy function, F, is del psi.

So here's just one way to state the big idea of equations five through nine, which are not discussed here.

So the idea is create a potential function.

And when you think of potential function, think it's like kinetic energy based upon elevation, but it's not for gravity and elevation.

It's like balls falling down tall buildings, but for not gravity, for something that's related to dynamical conversions.

So if you were like at the bottom of the bowl, you'd only have a little bit of potential energy.

the potential function would be low.

If you are really far up the wall, you'd have a high potential function.

You'd have a long way to fall.

That is going to be reflected by a balance of forces, namely in a tractor force, which is the combination of the Lorenz force and the potential energy induced force.

And then there's the dissipative force, and that's the frictional force due to dissipative random fluctuations.

So that's like the Velcro ball on the Velcro bowl.

the friction is so high that it still is being kept on the side or it's rolling down very slowly or something like that.

Combining these definitions, we can express the total balance, total force as a balance of the forces defined above resulting in.

And so just like if it was two colliding vectors and then we were going to express the outcome resultant as like the total forces being applied on something, it's like that, but it's not about the physical forces and the gravity.

It's like more about

these forces abstractly.

And so equation 10 is expressing this balance of forces on x using a gradient landscape.

So there's that del psi, and here's the combination of forces being expressed as del psi.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
So they use the word tensor here, and when I was reading this, I didn't see it.

I mean, okay, so if we're having a tug-of-war on a rope, it might appear to the outsider, the outside observer, that there's a balance.

But really what I read into this, and maybe I'm wrong, was that there's a tension between these two forces, between the attractor force and the dissipative force.

Am I misinterpreting that?


SPEAKER_00:
Someone has a different answer.

It would be awesome to hear it.

A tensor is like a generalization of a matrix.

It's like a matrix through time.

I don't think that it is directly related to tensile or tensegrity.

Okay.

That being said, you're right that there is

a tension between these forces or there can be and then they like tension can reflect like a compromised position like if you have a rope with tension on it then the ending of the rope is going to be like some compromise between the various forces and so we're thinking about like the various forces

And then we're expressing it as like this matrix through time.

That's what makes it a tensor, not the fact that the forces are in tension or opposition with each other.

Yeah.

I hope that's accurate.

Okay.

And then they follow 16 again and transform that expression in 10 into a more standard form using the diffusion tensor gamma and a tensor Q.

This is like a rewriting that helps them get to this format where f of x is describing the flow of states.

So that's the change in states through time.

And it's like a vector field.

And it is going to be q minus gamma.

So tensor minus diffusion.

Both of that, so that multiplied by that landscape.

So that's kind of like the decomposition.

But if someone could explain this more, let's hear it.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And my simple words, this is where I, I keep bringing up the idea that maybe when we're looking at these things through an active inference lens, we're not just looking through a frame.

we're also looking through and they talk about filters later on.

So, so like, how do we, how do we make sure that we're including both and the, and sort of the tension between both of those views working together and being in tension with one another.

So, yeah, this is very, this is very formal, but I think it kind of reinforces that there there's what's inside the, the,

the partitions and then what's going on within them as well.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So it's describing the flow of states resulting from these conservative and dissipative forces.

So if Q and gamma were the same, then the flow would be zero.

If one is larger than the other, then it's going to be dominated by that component with respect to being multiplied by this landscape.

So we'll return to it many times.

Okay.

Variational free energy.

What did you want to add on this slide?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I don't know that there's any... I mean, most people already know what we're talking about in terms of variation of free energy.

What they're doing is introducing it in terms of, so now where does the model of a biological entity, where is that sourced from?

And it's this sort of idea of these...

these things like posterior beliefs, the foundation or the idea that we don't walk into a situation completely blind.

We have some sort of prior and we're modeling situations where internal states can be interpreted and framed as a generative model.

So it's not, they're focusing on the model aspect of this as opposed to the generative processing side.

They're going to talk about what the external milieu is and where the generative process is here shortly


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

So good point to pause the video and read this because we're not going to read it out here.

But you're absolutely right.

They're focusing on the generative model of the agent of the cell, not

doing that analysis on the niche, for example.

Section 2.2.1.

Okay, so this is a fun part.

We can describe dynamics in generalized coordinates of motion denoted with a tilde.

where X tilde is defined as X tilde equals X. That's like the absolute state of X. And then X with a dot is the first derivative of X. That's called velocity.

X with two dots is, or a two double prime, depending on the notation, is the acceleration.

what people don't always know is that there are higher derivatives and they also have names.

So the third derivative is the jerk, and then the fourth, fifth, and sixth are the snap, crackle, and pop.

So that's just kind of funny, but the generalized coordinates of motion, which came up in number 26, have to do with doing prediction on not just, you know,

how high or low something is, or like on the number line left and right.

That would be like if X were just one number.

But even if it's just one number that we're tracking, like body temperature, for example, we might be interested in kind of unpacking that into this generalized coordinate where we wanna know body temperature and how fast it's changing and how fast that is changing.

And so one can imagine that once a zero has been achieved,

the higher derivatives are also zero.

If it's zero through time, the higher derivatives are also zero.

If it's zero instantaneously, that's not always the case.

But if it's zero through time, then it's kind of like you've cashed out the derivatives.

The derivative of zero just stays at zero.

And so it's like, if the position is unchanging, the velocity is zero, end.

If the position is five miles an hour going in the same direction,

velocity is constant but the acceleration is zero so keep on carrying that out to how fast things are changing how fast they change etc etc um and then they're going to take that x tilde how x tilde changes with time x tilde dot equals the flow on tilde plus

a variance so a noise or fluctuation a random fluctuation term this is the form of the langfine equation generalized coordinates of motion plus a random fluctuation term um any of the mathematical colleagues would be awesome to hear how this is related to the wiener assumptions etc but we're going to continue so

Using the Helmholtz decomposition, we can now express steady state flow in terms of a divergence-free component and a curl-free descent on a scalar Lyapunov function, L of x tilde, to obtain F of x tilde equals, there's the Q minus gamma that we saw a few slides ago, multiplied by now the L. So here we had F of x, not generalized coordinates of motion,

Q minus gamma del psi of X. That was the potential function.

Now, because the potential function and Lyapunov are related to each other, we're looking at the generalized coordinates of motion using the same Q minus gamma Helmholtz decomposition, but multiplying it now by Lyapunov exponent, or I'm sorry, the Lyapunov function on X tilde.

It's the solution at non-equilibrium steady state and is exactly the same solution for the flow of particles in the classical treatment above.

Crucially, we can now see the Lopunov function is the negative log probability of finding the system in any generalized state.

The Lyapunov of X tilde is the negative natural log of how surprised one should be, P of X tilde.

This is known as self-information of a state in information theory, surprisal or surprise.

In Bayesian statistics, it is the negative log evidence.

So the change in the generalized coordinates of motion, F of X tilde, breathe, is an irrotational solenoidal decomposition,

that's the left part of the right-hand side, multiplied by a Lyapunov function, which also has the interpretation of surprisal.

So if you were exactly resting, so to speak, you'd be totally unsurprised.

In summary, any weakly mixing dynamical system at non-equilibrium steady state will evince, give us evidence for, or look like it is, a flow that can be decomposed into a gradient flow on surprise and an accompanying solenoidal flow.

Because we can associate the Lyapunov function in 18 with a free energy, the system is effectively minimizing the

free energy in its conversions to a set of attracting states which have a high probability of being occupied so it's a little circular it's like we're finding ourselves where we expect to find ourself

And so if we just said, well, how surprised are we?

And let's gradient descend towards not being surprised.

Just at a first approximation.

We would find ourselves in regions of low surprise.

And we would be surprised to find ourselves in regions of high surprise.

Hmm.


SPEAKER_01:
Is it circular or is it kind of the byproduct of a recursive process?

Again, I'm asking, I'm not questioning.


SPEAKER_00:
It's a great question.

In like a really meta way, all of math is circular once the axioms have been stated because like the equal sign is there.

So we're just, you could add one to both sides and it would still be equal.

So is that circular?


SPEAKER_01:
Right.


SPEAKER_00:
um it's useful and that's what matters for this paper okay yeah um we're not going to talk about it too much but in a dot one we absolutely will and that's this least action principles in two two two um and they even give the example we love to see for example in colonies ants find the path of least action to harvest food and bring it to the colony

citation needed slash let's see that.

But conceptually, no problem.

This example considers their paths as flow channels or trajectories, finding the least average action for each instance of foraging given available resources.

So what does least action principle mean?

does least action mean and what is it necessary or sufficient for because certainly foraging is not the least biochemical expenditure of energy that's like the sort of naive interpretation of least action meaning just stay where you are but we're thinking about a usage of least action

that impels this ant to forage in an adaptive way, such that even when its foraging trip is hard and the seed is heavy and it gets like lost or something, that is still a realization of a least action on something.

It's still a ball rolling down a hill as efficiently as it can in a space.

So it's a nuanced topic that it will be great to discuss because they also write, minimization of action in an open system leads to structure formation.

So that'd be a good thing to unpack.

Okay, carrying on.

In dissipative random dynamical systems, action is not minimized for each element of the system, but on average over an ensemble of elements or repeated trajectories of the same element.

since self-organizing open systems are not conservative their structured flow is quintessentially dissipative good to think about that and hear many perspectives and questions on it classically for a conservative system the lagrangian is defined as l

This is L, not the operative.

Now it's Lagrangian.

Equals T minus V. So T is the kinetic energy of the particles and V is the potential energy.

And so that's how the trajectory of system states could be solved for a conservative system where the total energy is going to be conserved.

But there...

opening up into this dissipative and open scenario where this is not going to cut it um a little bit more detail on least action which we're not going to go into okay continuing on two two three markov blanket okay

A robust literature is developing about around the ability of cells and other a neural non neural systems measuring aspects of their environment via specific sensors.

They introduce here the Markov partition as this general case of separation of states into four categories.

E, external states, sensory states S, active states A, internal states I. And so the little E is like, it's a realization of big E. That's the bigger space.

And then X tilde comes back and the generalized coordinates are going to be a realization of values of those partitioned states.

So we've talked about the Markov blanket before, but now we're interested in the generalized flow on the blanket partition states.

So here's what the Markov blanket looks like.

And

We'll talk more about it in the dot one and dot two.

What do the arrows mean and why are sense and action connected?

What part of the cell are we looking at?

Is it a part of the cell?

Is it a model of a cell?

All these things that have come up before, but just to say that's their figure one and table one gives the math formalisms.

Okay, anything to add on Markov before we continue?


SPEAKER_01:
No, because we'll unpack.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So this is where they apply the Markov blanket.

So M is describing the Markov partition that defines the underlying random dynamical system such the cell.

So that is like the model.

It's the partition, Markov partition of the cell.

So inserting C into A and B is going to give

There's A is actions and I is internal states.

So the top equation is basically saying the flow on action is a function of sense action and internal, and then it has a right-hand side.

So the flow on action, the performance of action is, and then there's that gamma minus Q,

but now they have a subscript A because it's those about the action landscape, multiplied by del triangle on action tilde, generalized action, and then a self-surprisal, looking like the self-surprise of sense, action, and internal conditioned on M partition.

And the bottom equation in 30B is basically the same, but it's the flow on internal states.

f sub i on generalized states of sense action and i and that same gamma minus q del self-surprise condition on model so we're seeing some patterns come up and even if um it's like confusing and we all definitely are confused by it to some extent we're starting to see like some patterns why does it matter to focus so much on a and i the action

and the internal states, because those are like the ones we control.

We know we don't control external states directly.

Maybe we can intervene so that they change differently, but we know we don't control them.

We also don't directly control sense states.

We're getting dealt this hand every second by the niche

generative process and so we can take action so that we can expect different sensory outcomes but even then we wouldn't be controlling sensory outcomes and so a lot of active inference comes down to doing inference on internal model internal states generative model learning and action action selection flows on action um

This bounds the surprise on the particular states, which is the internal and the blanket states, through control of the autonomous states, which is just the action and internal states, the states we control.

Because of the sparsity of the blanket, not every node is connected to every node.

there might be a factorized and tractable form to bound our surprise about the particular states in general it would be very difficult problem to solve however we can replace the lagrangian that's the one here that was like going to be used for conservative systems but it didn't really apply

with a variational free energy functional or of a probabilistic model of how a system thinks it should behave or how we think the system should think it should behave.

So it's hard to solve these generally, but in practice, there are heuristics such that these are approximatable.

Section 2.4 goes like one layer deeper into KL divergence in the VFE, but we're not going to go into it.

Okay, we're just going to keep on plowing through.

Two, three is Bayesian filtering and self-organization.

We're not going to talk about it now, but the big questions here are like, how does Bayesian statistics relate to identity?

And what is self-evidencing?

And there's probably a lot of other good questions we could ask.

Like, why does Bayesian filtering and self-organization come here?

All right.

Modeling morphogenesis.

So now we actually get to the contribution of the paper, which is the modeling of morphogenesis.

So they're going to illustrate self-organization to Ness using the variational principles above.

by trying to explain the behavior of a model of pattern regulation by consideration of information processing and error minimization with respect to a specific target morphology.

In this setting, the game changes subtly but profoundly.

It's a Dean line if I ever read one.

Above, which is what we've reviewed, the dynamics of any random dynamical system equipped with a Markov blanket can be formulated in terms of a gradient flow on variational free energy.

That was just here, the flow on action and the flow on internal states.

Here, we turn this formulation on its head by specifying a generative model and implicit VFE function and simulate self-organization by solving the equations of motion in equation 34.

So they're going to specify the form of the attracting set, V, the generative model, and then they're going to let it ride.

So we have to specify-

They specify the external dynamics as the generative process, that's the niche, and the generative model of that process, which is being described by the flow of internal states.

Okay, so we're gonna look at the figures and then we're not going to even like go into the details.

So let's just look at the figures and see what they're doing.

So here's some empirical biology happening in the lab of Mike Levin and others.

So in A,

It turns out that when you dissect out the center of a flatworm, a planarian, those cells will remodel into a new worm.

So cutting out the middle and it reforms into this new flatworm and red is the head and then like blue is the tail.

So there's a self-organization of this target morphology, even from an initially clumpy cell.

what they're going to do in B is showing like the final fixed point of these different cells.

So here we have like four different cell types.

There's like the red neural or head cells, then yellow cells, green cells, and blue cell.

And then basically like this, like three, two, one, one, and then the bottom one, it's this one.

Maybe they changed the green and the blue

Like I think these two should be green and the bottom should be blue, but minor point, but it's an attractor on this target morphology.

And then C is describing a little bit about how it happens, which is that cells are constantly comparing their sense signal concentration, like of a gradients of some morphogen to expectations by minimizing their free energy functional.

so it's like what kind of a cell type am i and what should i be expecting right flip side what should i be surprised by because to say what i expect is the other side of the coin of what one is surprised by okay so they're modeling this empirical scenario where a flatworm can regenerate its form from just a clump of cells here and that

if we think about the location of these cells as being like a steady state attractor, like we want to have this body form last, then if all the cells just get in line like that, everything's going to work out.

All right.

How do we take this first jump that we made from the empirical biology to the state space framing,

Here it is in XY state space.

And now take the next jump, one more mathematical.

Here on the right side is that XY positioning of each cell.

this is reflected by the position in x and y of the cells so like negative nine and zero so that's like this top red one zero is the midline so it's like y and x and here like negative five it's a little lower and then like negative four and four it's like one is on they're on the same y elevation

but then one is four to the left and one is four to the right.

And so this E star of X is the position.

So it's a matrix of position because there's like eight cells and two location variables per cell.

So it's like a two by eight matrix and it changes through time.

So it's a tensor.

The E star C is the external signals.

And so in this steady state attractor, all three red cells are getting like signal one, here it's a binary signal.

There are four signals, but they only have an on or an off state.

In reality, there's many, many more signals than four, and there's a lot more nuance than just on or off, but it's a toy example.

All three red cells are getting the exact same signaling milieu of 1100.

So factor A and B are diffusing near me, but not C and D. The yellow cells are experiencing

those two diffuses and one other one the blue cells are experiencing the first and the fourth and then the green one is another and so this is like the attractor state for a stable location and signaling expression

So converging to this spatially makes your body look like that.

But the way that you get a beach ready planarian body like that is actually by reducing your surprise on signal expression.

Okay.

So here's them running it through time.

So it's a time-lapse movie montage of simulations of morphogenesis.

And so here it is converging towards on the right side, the morphology that's been discussed here.

And so the cells start out with undifferentiated.

They know what they're sensing.

They don't know what kind of cell they are and they don't know where they are.

And then they sharpen their expectations about what kind of cell they are.

while also moving into a different spatial niche, but they're not tracking their location.

Like I'm at three comma two, where are you?

It's like, this is what I'm biochemically sensing.

And so it's a relational morphology that doesn't need the blueprint in the nucleus.

So it's a lot like an ant colony.

There's not the nest architecture blueprint in the brain.

There's the process for stigmergy.

And then they show that with some other changes in the generative process, positive squared gradient in the generative process, they get double head formation, which some modulations have been shown to empirically result in in the lab.

And they can also make it so it gets double tail formation.

So it's just recapitulating this basic example and then showing that like modifying the external field changes the morphology that gets attracted to.

So those are the key pieces.

That's modeling morphogenesis as Bayesian inference, reducing surprise with a variational free energy flow on action and internal states.

Action states...

internal states.

Okay.

We're not gonna go into it here, definitely for the dot one and dot two.

So 3.1 is the construction of the model.

They then unpack that signal matrix, the combination of the signals.

And then

they give even more information about modeling signals.

And they also imbue it here with like this stemminess, which helps the cells start out with, I believe, a weaker prior about what kind of cell they are, which translates to where they should be.

In figure five, they do a targeted intervention in their studying of anomalous cell behavior

And so basically they start off with these cells that have initially unspecified state and they converge in A, the panels on A, by 32 time points, they're converged to the target morphology.

But in B, they show that if one of the cells that gets hit with a white arrow here has a perturbed signaling response, it fails to correctly infer its place in the ensemble.

So B could be like a genetic mutation or a targeted modification of the signaling.

And it's like that third red cell never forms.

And then in C, the same aberrant cell from B initially is rescued by an increased signaling sensitivity of other cells, leading another cell, green arrow, to switch position with the aberrant cell, pink arrow.


SPEAKER_01:
pretty cool okay yeah I wanted to come up with an analogy that would actually work that it would explain this like if you're out geocaching one afternoon and then all of a sudden some something was able to turn all the lights off and then the person that was geocaching beside you change their behavior but I couldn't even come up with a valid analogy to try to explain this how about um we're playing American football


SPEAKER_00:
And so there's a plan and everyone's trying to reduce their uncertainty about how the plan is playing out from their perspective.

And so if all goes to plan, we're all going to deploy into the exact right positions.

But then somebody doesn't move.

If each nestmate on the football team has low sensitivity, then they're going to continue in their own expected trajectory as if nothing had happened.

That's kind of like what we see in B. It's like a partial rollout.

Whereas this is changing the environment, mixing our metaphors, et cetera, so that a high sensitivity teammate

fills in for that critical position so that the attractor state of the strategy can still be morphologically realized, even though there still is that one individual who's not moving.

But they're not interfering with the strategy's attraction.

But we'll come up with probably some other and better ways to talk about it.

okay and then they um just mention that this is something that can be modeled and it's in spm and also on franz kuchling's um github so maybe we will um look at the code and then just to say that we're not going to go into it at all today but all of section 4 is super interesting they review some of the mathematical assumptions and limitations of the model

there's a really fascinating discussion about variational principles and open systems.

And so just to read, we have shown that the variational free energy minimization in active inference is related to the variational principle of least action.

It is worth pointing out where these two approaches diverge.

Two instruments in a wood diverged.

then it's all about that divergence and the contrasting and so i think there's going to be a lot to unpack there and then they have some closing remarks on the applicability in biological systems and some of the predictive capacities of the simulations um in terms of like you could make a simulation of a healthy functioning tissue and then have predictive capacity

about asking counterfactuals.

Well, what if this happened?

What might I expect?

So that is a lot of info.

So thanks to everybody who's been watching and again, hope that especially with some of these technical parts that we were able to represent it with high integrity.

So you won't have the last word, but what would you say in closing as we move from the dot zero into the one, two and beyond?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, first of all, you went through a heck of a lot of stuff in a very short period of time.

So that's quite the gradient flow right there.

So that's impressive.

I don't think much in terms of, I mean, this is a classic example of where you have to unpack

as opposed to lots of the other papers that are maybe more philosophically based where you provision, like you pack a bunch of stuff and then you kind of go off on a bit of a journey.

And I think in the point one and the point two, we may still be doing a little bit more unpacking just because of the

the density of this kind of information, but that doesn't, I mean, you want to be able to do both.

So I think being able to cover this and hopefully we got it right, like I did my best to try to understand it and I think you did a good job of explaining it.

So we'll see who shows up in the point one and two, whether the point one and two are more unpacking or maybe

starting to actually think of ways that we can employ this you already mentioned that we could we can apply it to digital teams but whether or not people have the confidence to be able to take this and apply it like they've done to morphogenesis maybe that's part of that conversation cool yeah i'll be looking forward to


SPEAKER_00:
going through with multiple concurrent regimes of attention some of the formalisms that we either um disgraced or skipped in this discussion and then keeping it open to think about morphogenesis like where has morphogenesis been in numbers one through 38.

why haven't we been talking about morphogenesis and if not morphogenesis then what else have we been focusing on um how does it relate to embodiment and to spatial and physical aspects of cognition there's so many interesting angles and uh i'm sure we'll have a lot to discuss so dean thanks a ton for all the help on the slides and for this discussion um hope to see you in the coming weeks


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Thanks, Daniel.

Take care.

Peace.

See you later.

## R4C_DgP_khY

SPEAKER_07:
All right.


SPEAKER_06:
Hello and welcome to ACT-INF Lab live stream number 39.1.

It's March 2nd, 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We're a participatory lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

Please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow good video etiquette for live streams.

To learn more about ActInfLab, go to activeinference.org.

We're here in ActInfStream number 39.1 and we are learning and discussing this paper.

Morphogenesis as Bayesian Inference, A Variational Approach to Pattern Formation and Control in Complex Biological Systems by Kuchling, Friston, Georgiev, and Levin from 2020.

And we had a fun dot zero and time probably all individually going through the paper.

Pretty much in 39.1, we'll just kind of go over introductions and then can go to a blank page and just see where especially Stephen and Blue want to raise any questions and also anyone can ask in the live chat.

Okay, so we'll just do introduction.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and I'll pass it to Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
I'm Blue, I'm a researcher in New Mexico, and I will pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Stephen Sillett, I'm based in Toronto.

I'm sort of an action researcher and practitioner in community development and participatory theatre, and I will pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Good morning, I'm Dean, I'm here in Calgary.

and not much to say other than I'm kind of looking forward to hearing what Blue and Steven have to add to this rather big math question and how that fits with morphology.

So back to you, Dan.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.

Well, if anyone wants to start with a specific question,

question or figure or we can review just sort of the main points of the paper like let's look at the roadmap so what section would people like to enter in or have a question or idea related to or we can just go yeah dean


SPEAKER_03:
So you wanted to talk about this, and I wanted to talk about this, and it was this whole section on the least action principle, which I think we both find quite interesting because, yeah, why?

And it led me to the question of, is there something efficient about search

over somebody sort of passing along and sharing.

So I'm kind of curious what people think of that in terms of the math and the morphology.


SPEAKER_06:
All right.

Based action, math, morphology.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

I don't know if we could unpack a little bit more what Dean was saying there.

I'm interested in some of the implications of that work around looking at the math and morphology as it scales from these, what you might call smaller scales than we can normally perceive.

Often what's going on with morphogenesis is not something we can be consciously aware of a lot of the time.

However, who we are is built upon

morphogenesis.

So I'm very curious around how some of these first principles can be thought of as rolling out.

So when we talk about lease action as being one way of approaching it, where people often think about energy and efficiency of energy processes as being the route that everything will take, the more informational Bayesian inference

and learning that is implied by this.

Without sort of distracting from the paper, I'm curious about people's thoughts about what sort of implications that has for thinking about these bottom-up ways of knowing.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay, Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
So I have some questions going back even to before least action in the paper, talking about generalized flow.

And it's really interesting just in light of the paper that's coming up in number 40, but here,

you know, we see that this is like a spatial, like we're talking about spatial motion here, or like the foundation for the way that they model morphogenesis is, you know, positions of particles through space, right?

Like, and time.

And I just wonder, like we have a time evolution here, and we're talking about motion in space,

but could we do the reverse and talk about like a space evolution in terms of time?

Like in terms of like, can we invert space and time here?

So that's just, it's something that I was curious about if it's possible or mathematically illegal or why am I even thinking like that?

I don't know.

And another question that I had, you guys were really talking about,

you know, in the generalized flow, we talked about the equations of motions, coordinates of motion, and the derivatives.

And something that I saw in the paper, specifically at equation 15, that I've not seen before is p with a dot.

And it was not defined in the paper p with a dot, but I'm assuming it's the first derivative of p. And I just thought that that was interesting.

So it's the probability density, but is it the derivative of the probability density with respect to x with a tilde?

Or is it just p dot because x has a tilde?

Anyway, that's my question there.


SPEAKER_06:
All right.

Wow.

Well, we have a lot kind of on the table.

I think the think blue appended with generalized flow is a good entry point because this is sort of what the systems state evolution is.

And in live stream number 26 with Bayesian mechanics, we also talked about the generalized coordinates of motion with relationship with control.

So it's kind of like a thermometer cybernetic model

If you only have the position of the temperature, there are certain strategies that can be applied given that modeling just simply the temperature.

And then if you are modeling progressively higher and higher levels of how the system changes, it's kind of like a Taylor series.

It equates to basically a better depth of control.

And then part of the hard part is that because over the time course that action is being planned for,

even hypothetically changes in like the unknown consequences of one's action complicate the estimation of different policies so this is just not like a total perfect way to roll out the system and understand how it's going to happen but it gives like approximation terms to higher and higher levels of the system changing and so that's the um

and all of the levels of analysis are being linked to each other by being derivatives of each other so then some stationarity like is capped out at some point so the derivative becomes zero and then that's like a heuristically approximatable um depth of that model

So that's just like one note of what is being estimated on.

So it's like temperature and it's higher order components in some either analytical kind of infinite generalized way, or just more practically with some smaller realization.

And then the dot is like a derivative, pretty sure two blue, like it's like a prime, like prime prime for double derivative, two dots for two derivatives.

then morphogenesis is like position of particles um here it's like the cell body or the cell nuclei or the center of gravity of something and then those are spatially moving so that's the lowest level of this chain of the integrator chain with the generalized coordinates of motion so that's how it's from a bayesian mechanics

getting to morphogenesis with just how particles are moving in space.

But instead of just modeling like their X and their Y, it's like X and Y and the higher level derivatives.

So that's the developmental motion of particles.

Just to summarize that part before,

space and time okay any thoughts on that because the generalized flow is definitely where whatever least action is is going to be based in um okay so then let's just look at that formulas

Here is the derivatives.

Okay, anything on this, yeah?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, yeah, yeah.

So if you're going to look at the formalism, did you pull it up here?

Yeah.

Yeah, generalized.

There you go.

So go ahead, and then I'll interject where... Yeah, here's 2.2.1.


SPEAKER_06:
X tilde is the total blur of all the dots on top.

So yeah, go for blue.


SPEAKER_04:
So just here, the...

My question more is the noise and fluctuation term.

And is that just like Brownian motion or I don't know.

So yeah.

Like what is the, where's the Omega random fluctuation?

Like, is it just, I don't know, random in, in terms of Brownian motion or is there some other random fluctuation positionally?

Like do things wiggle?


SPEAKER_06:
Definitely someone who knows more about stochastic processes, and I know several people listen who do, could help with this, like in a math stream on a little bit of the stochastic aspect here.

But I think at a first pass, there's situations where what is modeled as noise

versus what is modeled as signal have differential ratios.

So there's times where like the regression is very, the F, even if it's a regression, another function is like very tight and then the noise is modeled as low versus one where just the location of X is just dominated by the noise term.

But I'm sure it's way more than that too.

Steven or Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I was just going to, you know, often when we see, I'm just thinking broadly in terms of the modelling approach as an active inference, often it brings in temperature as a way to sort of bring in the kind of noise fluctuations into models, whereas here it's directly seen as a noise fluctuation term.

So I think that's...

Maybe, again, because we're going down to even more first principles here, it's getting down to stochastic dynamics, which isn't necessarily even thought of as temperature, but as something more foundational.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.

Yeah, Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
So temperature is like, yeah, right.

Like with increasing temperature, like random motion would increase.

So that does make sense to me.

So another point out of this section, or maybe if anybody else has a point here, going down into the next like set of equations.

unless anybody else has something else.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, just to summarize that it's kind of like the temperature parameter is understood sometimes to play this role of mediating the difference between the particles motion being driven by

some sort of directed motion um like change in position through time not at stationarity of position which is like kind of the observable in that chain that directed motion versus thermal slash brownian and then um

that might be kind of where these statistical assumptions come into play so it's like variance estimation but temperature is just one kind of variance with the motion of particles but and it has a it has a physical interpretation and i mean it's not an insignificant piece i don't know

We could explore more where temperature specifically comes into play, but Stephen, I think you're getting at the right thing that this is not temperature bound, but it does relate to that sort of situation.

Okay, Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
So I don't know if you want to go down to equations 15 and 16, probably where my next question or comment is.

Do you have them in there or no?


SPEAKER_06:
Oh, copied in right now.


UNKNOWN:
Cool.


SPEAKER_06:
Go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
So it says equation 15, I think that's x tilde dot, yes, p x tilde, is a probability current, which I thought that that was cool because I've never really heard of that term of probability current, like how probability changes over time or how...

the probability density changes over time.

Like what is a probability current?

Like that was just, it's an interesting, I don't know, like term that I hadn't heard before.

And then in the second equation 16,

It says that this is a partial differential equation that describes the time evolution of the probability density under dissipative and conservative forces.

So where the term on the left is the dissipative forces and the term on the right is the conservative forces.

And I felt like that that was interesting, especially relating back to the dot zero video where you guys were talking about a tensor and Dean was talking about tension.

And I think that there's is like an interesting tension here between like conserving and dissipating.

And it just makes me wonder how

how like, like is death when like the dissipative, like term is winning?

Like, is that like what causes like a system or I mean, I know that the the term, you know, winning or term being greater doesn't cause a system to die, or when the system is decomposing, if that can be represented here in terms of these dissipative and conservative forces in the process of an organism dying or ceasing to exist.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Sorry, I have way more questions than insights.


SPEAKER_06:
Nice, nice.

Let's look at 15 and 16 a little bit.

So yes, probability current, it's kind of in this dynamical systems framing.

It's being bridged with formalisms that are like more like a current, like a flow on a dynamical landscape.

There's that sort of angle, but then they're...

And maybe there's also more of a fluid flow component.

Blue?

It's a .. Sorry.


SPEAKER_04:
I was muted.

So it's funny.

When I look up a probability current, also foreshadowing the dot 0, it says, in quantum mechanics, the probability current, sometimes called probability flux, is a mathematical quantity describing the flow of probability.

Um, so, so it's interesting that it's related to quantum mechanics and in terms of these, like, instead of these classical physics, um, things that we've kind of been looking at or dealing with so far.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

So this 14 is.

Okay, this might be only a partial element or example, hopefully one that is useful.

So this is x tilde with a dot.

So that's x tilde, all the coordinates of motion, and then x with a dot means derivative of.

So this left parameter with a tilde and a dot is how the generalized coordinates are changing through time.

So that's kind of what is being modeled.

the data that are being, whether they're an observable or an unobserved estimated state in a Bayesian graph.

So whether it's an O or an S, that plus all of its derivatives, and then that is being partitioned into one big complex function, F, modeling it,

low and then this noise omega tilde over both are over tilde so the these are both over like each of these higher derivatives also have an associated noise term and then it says yeah okay steven


SPEAKER_00:
In some ways, there could be an analogy.

I'm not saying it's the same, but there seems to be a mirroring of the enthalpic term and entropic term that you get in Gibbs free energy, where one is where the energy is bound within...

the molecules at play, and then the other term, this entropic term where it's kind of dissipating.

So it's another, because these things are translatable, just like mass and energy are translatable, and they're known to ultimately be conserved.

um they can only be the overall mass energy of a system is always conserved but it could be translated between normally we don't think about that because it only happens in nuclear reactions but if you're thinking informationally it's still and this and i see they talk about this idea of probability mass so that there's almost an ability to think about that

conservation of energy in a form which has mass, which has form, as opposed to when things have dissipated as light where it doesn't have mass anymore.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay, Bloop.


SPEAKER_04:
So I think where they're talking about the conservation of probability mass, I think that they mean the conservation of the total probability there.

So the probability mass function, right?

So I think it's that, which relates to, it's the conservation of mass, but it's also the conservation of information.

using that conservation of probability.

Like the probability of all of the possible things happening has to add up to 100%.

Like that probability is never gonna change.

And so I think that that is there.


SPEAKER_06:
That it has to add up to one, like a fraction or 100%, has the realist and instrumentalist take.

The realist take is something has to happen.

And then the instrumentalist take is,

if we model it this way we're going to be able to use statistics but if it was like well the chance of getting heads is 60 and the chance of getting tails is 60 in this next flip it would open up the space in a different way um it it's it's kind of outside the bounds of the model you could have a model where both happen but still there's it's a different thing you know can you model things that can't happen in the real world or

If it's not a good measuring stick for statistics, which is kind of like that one, something must happen.

We have to model something happening.

We have to model a data set row being added.

Otherwise, what is happening if it were like one every 1.2 rows?

So, and then here, yeah, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
In relation to the point you just made, I'm just curious if these functions can be used in multiple particles.

Say, for instance, the idea is the probability of a coin being flipped is 50-50, for instance, or a rigged coin could be 60-40 in one way.

However...

the probability if there's noise on how rigged something is so for instance you've got you've got a coin and it's flipping between being rigged 60 40 50 50 40 30. so there's kind of a there's a random fluctuation in that behavior which may be contextually contingent that in itself wouldn't be in the one equation but if you had multiple particles

they could start to behave not just as one predictable thing.

They themselves could have to change in probability approaches.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks, Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
So I think specifically as related to here, and I think that this is derived.

I don't really know.

I don't really do these derivations.

It's definitely not my area of expertise, but I think

in terms of the conservation of mass, like we're not creating or destroying matter, the conservation of the probability mass, it just says that all the particles, if you're looking at, it doesn't matter if it's one particle or a thousand particles, the particles are somewhere, right?

Like, so the particles are not nowhere, like the particles are somewhere, right?

So, so it's that kind of concept or that's like the idea that, you know, all the probability has to add up to one, like there is 100% chance that you will find the particle of interest somewhere.

I mean, you're right.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.

Yeah, blue, good section to pull out important, some important bridge equations.

So we have the signal to noise.

Now when the signal that we're modeling, the instrumentalist take, we're modeling how much the cow weighs, defined as the one that comes to walk over to me when I call for it or something like that.

That could be dominated by different functions or could be driven by different noise on different time scales.

So the signal sort of directed motion component or modelable component of the motion through time is the purple.

And here is like some

flow with the upside down triangle that we talked a little bit about in dot zero, but it would of course be good to hear from someone who knows more about this flow operator object.

Signal is like the movement on a probability distribution on those states changing.

And then the noise is the dissipative component


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen?

It appears as well that by breaking it into dissipative and conservative components, it's serving a similar role to separating into complexity and accuracy.

It's giving a way to break apart the dissipation where the

because you're not actually talking about a final target, but more like things just doing what they do in some ways and having a very kind of physics fundamental process.

I think that's proven to be useful because it's also, again, something which can be translated into different types of math, different types of physics.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay, so let's connect it to the morphogenesis.

So what do they do in the paper?

They're modeling the motion of cells.

So why does it matter?

This whole discussion that we're having about how to get from the motion of generalized coordinates, if you're the modeler, you get to define that and get to set the parameter between this

If you're the experimentalist, then you're inferring this kind of like a regression.

Like if this was a regression term and a noise term on the regression, then there's some function that helps you fit a certain solution to the one linear regression that fits it best.

So it's like kind of in that same genre here.

So if we take the realist take,

on that it's like how the actual system is defined as or inferred to be as from experimental data and then flowing the probability density on that of our inference on that whether we're getting that from the data or whether we're defining that system formally so that modeling we could help from the authors or someone else like

it engages some new future.

It's like a bridge to some other set of equations.

So that's where it would be good to learn more, like what is actually enabled here, but it enables a new vista that separates, that enables this separation.

so we can talk about instead of this like potentially extremely open-ended and non-linear change on the system can be bounded within a statistical inference zero to one inference framework that is more amenable to certain kinds of analysis

so that would help model cell location and all of that but i think there's still a lot more to learn there and um unpack okay dean yes so i want to just sort of step back for a second here because i want to go we started out talking about so one of what are the implications for least action


SPEAKER_03:
So the act part, and then we sort of stepped into the idea of what came before the action.

Well, it was these flow states.

Now I kind of want to go back to the action part.

Under that section 222, the second paragraph says that the least action principle can predict the emergence of forms.

So what Daniel was mentioning there, that sort of the morphogenesis.

In terms of the flow or paths of least action in biological systems, for example, in colonies,

Ants find the paths of least action to harvest food and bring it to the colony.

The example considers their paths as flow channels or trajectories finding the least average action for each instance of foraging given available resources.

So this gets me thinking about, well, what do we mean by least action as opposed to, say, most action?

And that...

general way the general way that things tend to follow like if you thought of an analogy of of uh maybe a 19th century war where armies would line up facing one another uh parallel to one another this is speaking more like a flow state more like you find in nature where the

The molecules, we talked about it here, are sort of flowing and following down the side of a bowl to the least potential energy.

And so now my question is, okay, so why does nature tend to flow with the advantage of least action, whereas people with instruments don't necessarily...

or follow one another unless they're mirroring some other form or some other shape.

So it's interesting to me because I think by nature we are quite adaptable, but when we start making non-living things as instruments to necessarily take the nature away, the life away, we're maybe not as quite as adaptable.

So

I'm trying to step back and now pull us back into this idea of, so what advantage is there in this physics view of least action?

There must be something advantageous there in nature.

So what is it?

I'm not the geneticist, so I don't know what the signal milieu is that makes that so.

So I want to tap your guys'...


SPEAKER_00:
and gals's expertise on this because i don't have it all right thanks dean stephen so following on what dean's saying there i think with um in the traditional sense we tend to take what we call equilibrium dynamic approaches so for instance the arm we the armies are lined up like dean said

Then there's a battle, and then there's the final state.

So we talk about the initial conditions, which is equilibrium, everyone lined up, and the final state.

And then the bit in the middle,

We sort of talk into our shirt or our shoulder or whatever, cough a few times, and somehow it happened.

And in some ways, with the biological approach, it's like it's in that, because all that bit in the middle is where the flow is happening.

So essentially speaking, and biology doesn't have those initial conditions in the sort of traditional sense of pure equilibrium, it's always in this non-equilibrium state.

or at least a large component is in a non-equilibrium state.

So this is an interesting thing as it's flowing down towards the least energy.

it never reaches it.

So we might, you know, I think that's it always.

So for instance, in the chemical reactions, you set, you take your pure reactants, you mix them together, you stir it up, you do the reaction.

And then once you've got your product, which could be a precipitate, for instance, which, you know, it could be a ton of the precipitate, it then gets filtered, it gets washed, it gets dried.

it gets measured for how pure it is and now it's in this kind of stable product form you know um so i think yes this this this question about what does it mean to flow um is really important thanks steven all right dean well what this what this flowing and following thing


SPEAKER_03:
kind of says is that that that the desire line or the or the termite mound the result is of signaling which which is i don't know if that's collective signaling i i don't know if it's the stigmaty part of it like i i don't know why nature sees the advantage in the following but there has to be something there why why

Why is that advantageous?

Why is that more adaptable versus the alternative?


SPEAKER_07:
Okay.

Thanks, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I suppose one way of looking at that is it's the only cause.

I mean, if we're going to take a realist route, recognizing that it may be, it's the only plausible route on the table.

Um, we, we, they don't get to, you know,

forge teeth in a kiln or you know in a way that's partly why all chemicals that are available in nature have to be within certain plausible temperature scales and pressure scales that that can yield those react those products at so

And that kind of doesn't answer the question exactly, because I know that's kind of a bit of a, but it's part of it's what's available, I think, in terms of biological plausibility.

And I suppose, in some ways, humans, we we've adapted a cognition to try and move outside that.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, yeah, Dean.

One last thing on this, and that is that following implies that there's also something leading.

There always has to be something taking that initiative for others to fall in line behind.

So shifting that and making leadership something that's more lateral, so sort of going forward together as opposed to who do we decide to...

follow behind that's an interesting thing in terms of sort of sussing out how this least action principles things turns into things that we actually see phenomenal phenomenologically so again we're going to get into the what what the final form takes i just think that when we were sort of treating this in the point zero this was kind of a pivotal moment because it went from what are all the things that have to be in place for formation to occur

to now let's look at what the form now results as.

And as I said in here, in that one paragraph, it said,

Well, the previous paragraph says, physics offers a useful formalism to understand at a quantitative level the ability of biological systems to work towards.

So now we're basically now moving to something that is adaptable.

So I think, like I said, I don't want to over-talk this one point, but I think it's an interesting part in terms of, especially when we get into the discussion at the end.

around why, what, what some of the assumptions were in yada yada.

Okay.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
So this work towards, um, idea, I mean, that can be thought of as a modeling and a life realist problem.

Like how, how does that work towards, uh, and in some ways, uh, accuracy and complexity can

be used if we're at the level of assuming that we are actively inferring to stay alive.

But prior to that, something like conservation and dissipation or conserved are a bit more foundational.

Because if by conserving or working within this conserving dissipating noise dynamic,

at levels which are below what we are consciously aware of, however, which all our cognition is effectively built upon somewhere, we're able to potentially give that towardsness without necessarily having set a goal.

And it could be, and I think that might be an interesting, see how that rubs out in the real world of active influence labs and papers and stuff.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah.

Cool.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

A lot you linked there, Stephen, just now, like accuracy, complexity.

And then, okay, we'll leave it for a future day and work.

And who knows how many of these are just concordances versus tautological, but accuracy within a model is like pragmatic aims within a model with the imperative to prefer to fit as much data as possible.

And then it's like conservative using the reward structure that worked at one time step.

using that generative model moving forward versus changing it any sort of dispersion around the parameters as evidenced at the lowest level of the chain the position of the particles or the actual parameter that's being modeled like the actual image that's being percepted on versus these higher generative models which don't realize like at the kind of

um you know tip of a javelin so to speak so then the signal and noise is also like conservation and dissipation with respect to the model and then that is coming all the way back to morphology with like the position in stasis versus vibration of the particle from thermal so it's like a lot that gets linked here but where's least action in all of this


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
So just to read a quote from the paper, it says,

Since self-organizing open systems are not conservative, their structured flow is quintessentially dissipative.

And that's in the third paragraph in the least action principle section.

So that goes back to what I was saying earlier.

does that equate to death?

Like when a system totally dissipates, like it's ultimately dissipative.

So, you know, we stay in this like nest for a little while and then we dissipate, right?

Like, can it be modeled like these processes using these equations?

I find that super interesting.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

Thanks, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
This idea of the least action, I think tying in with what Blue was saying there as well, is it's least action, maybe we should say dynamical least action, as opposed to least action, which we normally think of, i.e., well, like I was saying, reactants, products, what's the route to get from A to B, or the army lined up to final space.

Normally, we are taking

starting conditions ending conditions um or you know where i am now what's my goal what's the least to get there but those two things are defined in some ways they're they're definable so i think it's a good now all the bit in between is um trying to go to least action um

in some way, using that kind of in the space of chaos, I suppose, if we're going to take the kind of complexity approach in human systems, it's in a chaotic state where you're trying to at some time make sense of how to act.

But however,

know in some ways there's only chaos moving into complexity which is available at some biological systems theoretically maybe not the idea of complicated and kind of simple sort of reproductive sort of steady like equilibrium state systems like mechanical systems aren't necessarily available although you could argue that maybe certain properties of our morphology like our

our bone structure and that sort of gives something which is approximate to that.

Once we know how to move our arm, we have a relatively simple thing that we can now bring into our regime of attention.

But yeah, I wonder what people think if dynamical least action is somehow what's going on here.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, thanks, Stephen.

Just

here's one take on that it's a good idea or question i hope this is accurate too because i think we're all learning here but this is definitely a really challenging area in some ways to approach especially given our realistically limited familiarity so again it'd be awesome for people who have more familiarity with these equations to

join us like either in preparation or even just joining us on these streams so that we can actually learn and connect to these other areas somebody who sees this formalism like every day just like we might see some other one okay but steven brought up is this a dynamical least action okay so first kind of

a hopefully non-contentious point that we're analyzing what we model.

We can only ask the computer to calculate the numbers that we ask it to model an at.

We can't expect something that goes truly beyond that.

Not to say that the models can't have surprising outputs or interactions, etc., but we can't have it go beyond what we specify.

And the model is over x tilde.

which is the generalized coordinates of motion, which is the position and all of the higher derivatives, the whole integrator chain.

Position and all higher order moments of the statistical distribution.

They're called moments, like the first, second, third moment of the derivatives of the statistical distribution.

And these are basically,

terms of approximation of motion that allow a high order like a taylor series approximation or a volterra series approximation to allow snapshot modeling with real-time flow action cognition perception it's the flow over as gets explored

the blanket states.

This is like the flow over S, A and I, states, actions and internal states.

So like this is enabling a flow description of Markov blanket states.

and their perception cognition action their flow overstates their change through time including higher order moments of time so that it is a dynamical systems model but still there has to be a snapshot like a time series model of a stock price it has a value at

whatever time resolution or continuous or discrete it's being time series model that so it's kind of the relationship between snapshot modeling and capturing higher order Trends and this is a certain way to think about that in the direction that they're going to take it towards the Markov blanket partitioning and bridging it to everything that that affords okay um Dean and then Steven


SPEAKER_03:
This is really important because I want to tease something that maybe we can look at right here, but only in the point two.

So between us doing the live stream zero and today, there was a report about the rate at which

I think it was a UN report, the rate at which climate change is happening so rapidly that as people who are sort of in that highly changing flow state aren't able to necessarily going to be able to adapt to the rate of change.

And so I wonder if some of what this paper speaks to might help us understand why the authors of that report

indicating to us that the environment in which we are existing in is going to change so quickly that as cells within that larger structure, our form is not going to be able to adapt quickly enough to the way that the

external system is changing.

So I want to save that for the point too, but I think this least action principle part would be a good entry point into some of these bigger questions going forward.

So I just want to park that, but I think it matters.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, just to give one note on that, the rate of change and how it changes, those are kind of natural language descriptions of derivatives of how things are changing.

Might be a simple claim to some, but that's really important to keep in mind.

So how things are changing and then that's always going to be unknown to some degree.

So how things change and so on, this is the generalized coordinates of motion.

And so it is about modeling rates of change and predictability of systems that have rates of change.

And okay.

Yes, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
with this we mentioned there about your action perception cognition and in some ways the cognition is cognition on the generative model and the generative model is an action policy model okay so we've got this recognition coming in but it is drive by this action and of course one challenge you've got in the climate change scenario is um

really what you think is one thing but being able to act and being i mean the danger is we hit a point where no matter how much we know it's beyond the ability to act in our capabilities and uh capacities as a as a as a species um the so this this while i think the word cognition is useful it may be useful to be careful just that

the inference process is more general because it can be a process which is, like I say, happening beyond thought.

So thought is another action almost giving a higher order understanding on the generative model for an action in active inference.

And of course, a lot of what's going on underneath is beyond our perception.

literally um way beyond so uh that that that can be interesting or useful to strip out nice yeah blue thanks


SPEAKER_04:
So just to kind of go back to dynamical least action, I do think that that's what they're referring to.

At the very end of the section, the authors say, from our perspective, the key observation here is that any dissipative random dynamical system can be formulated as gradient flow on the log likelihood of its states.

This is reflected in our solution to the Fokker-Planck equation in 17, which means the action is the time or path integral of the marginal likelihood or self-information for any system or model M. So this is really the key thing.

This means the least action integral over the Lagrangian turns into an integration over the self-information of states.

which is known as entropy in information theory.

In short, the principle of least action manifests as a principle of least entropy for systems that possess a random dynamical attractor and thereby obtain non-equilibrium steady state.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks a lot, Blue.

Great point.

Good day, Franz.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi.

Hi, sorry that I'm late and I hope

Only have a half an hour or two.

I'm in the middle of finding preschool.

So daycare is a whole mess right now.

I do apologize.

I don't want to take this time.

It's a little bit of a mess.

Next week should be better.

I think we found a school.

So hopefully next year will be more easy.


SPEAKER_06:
Cool.

unexpected but preferred you know how will we model that uh but thanks a lot for joining this is really cool so we were just describing some of the formalisms but where would you like to begin it'd be awesome to hear like any just introduction and context on the paper and then we kind of jumped in at least action and would love to hear your take on that


SPEAKER_01:
sure um all right full introduction so i guess um i'll just start with myself so um i i work in mike levin's lab and tufts and doing a phd in biology and this is the whole kind of active inference um part of my work is came actually before my entire phd so i joined mike's lab because i wanted to do

really learn what kind of information physics do in a biology context.

So I didn't want to study the whole level of, you know, I mean, I'm still doing it as a technique, but I didn't want to have the focus on protein interaction and, you know, genetic information where you measure all these things.

So I was basically wanting something a bit more broad than that.

And so when I reached out to Mike and once I got somebody accepted, I was like, you know, I have some months to kill.

Can you send me somewhere or do something cool?

And then he sent me to Carl Frist.

And that's the first time I heard the term active inference.

So I spent about four months in Carl's lab and then basically started working on it.

I think half the work in the paper was actually done in those couple of months when I was in Carl's lab.

So the overall goal of the paper and of that part of my work is to see if we look at morphogenesis and similar biological processes, can we look at something where you have a very kind of baseline stem cell-like behavior where you have cells that can't do, like morphogenesis basically, I don't know how much you're familiar with the whole biology aspect of this paper, but essentially it's the idea as you model cells that are uninformed, they have some kind of genetic code, something that encodes their structure, the

Basically, you have the generative process already ingrained in the generative model into those cells, but they're completely, right, they're stem cell-like.

They don't have actually yet achieved their final form.

And they are, just like in the simulation in biology, right, they're starting off with very few asymmetries.

I think there's a famous, I forgot who said that, but some physicians at once said most of physics is basically just symmetries.

There's symmetries everywhere, and that's exactly kind of

how most biologists think of morphogenesis.

There's some asymmetry in the beginning.

in the egg or some, some, some different information, some gradient of something, some localization of certain agents.

And then from that on, basically everything else just follows through.

But it's, it's, it's hard to believe that's the whole side of the story because there's just so much complexity and so many cells doing this at the same time.

So if there isn't any capability for them to adapt to signals in the environment and to learn from each other, it's hard to believe that the timeframe they're given, they can really, um,

you know, achieve the complex morphogenesis outcomes that we know do exist.

So coming to this paper, basically this model is actually already like the father or mother of this paper was already done before I even heard of this topic, that that was the annoying one's place.

So the model structure itself was already done by, I think called it most, if not all of it.

And Mike just basically was on the paper and Giovanni as well.

They basically gave him some input on, on, on what,

what the background of biology would look like.

And so they already figured out, basically, let's do a simplistic model, eight cells.

As far as I know from Carl and as far as myself and my simulations, many practical concerns don't want to be too complex.

If you have too many cells at once, then you're going to run into problems in the beginning.

Something I actually add onto the model, even the baseline model, was

that damping parameter, which I talk later on in the results, which might often like, it's not, it's not a key part, but I find it very interesting because it's one of the requirements for, for active infants for, for phenogenization, variational phenogenization, there's a smooth landscape.

And when you have all these cells initially clustered together and they're trying to infer their place and they all kind of have some random

randomly initialized prior beliefs, they don't know where to go from there.

And if you, right, if you have already high precision in their, in their sensory apparatus, initially, they have a really hard time, they still end up mostly fine and getting later, but they jump all over the place.

And you can imagine that'd be very bad for an, an biological scenario of every cell immediately jumps to the first cue they have.

We actually think now in, in the Mike Levin labs that, um, love cancer initiation happens a little bit like that, where, where positions are, are set too high.

there's a paper coming out soon by a colleague of mine that talks a bit more about that argument.

But so basically from, we had the target morphology already, Carlos encoded that, and he saw what you see in the baseline control experiments was already done.

What I was interested in is basically, again, coming back to my question and my approach to this from the biology side of view,

is how can we use the aspect of information flow and specifically active inference to manipulate and better control morphogenesis outcomes and control biology.

So the two main results in that paper are looking at if you sort of, you know, instead of like a normal biology experiment where you basically interrupt one part of the machinery and then see how everything reacts, you actually control the process information processing itself.

So one was basically if you put in an asymmetry in the response of the cells to the signaling ligands, they get the signaling concentrations in the environment, how can you basically completely remodel the entire morphogen as outcome?

Even though you actually left the entire coding itself, that's always one thing I tried to stress in that paper, the target morphology in all the simulations is exactly the same.

None of them, they basically said there's that coding,

of where they're supposed to be, but how the process information has been changed.

So the first figure is that where you have those two heads and two tails, I don't know if I did the two tails in that, or if I just did it myself and didn't publish it, I think it's in there as well.

Then that's basically something that we also see in the lab.

I think that was mentioned as well, that that's something that my 11 lab has done with an area where they basically induce those two head types, right?

That's something that's really weird to a biologist.

And again, in the type of,

manipulations that we do in the lab that have been done in this lab, they didn't manipulate the genetic code.

Again, the DNA from those panaria that was exactly the same, but somehow they perturbed the actual bioelectric network itself.

So basically on the state space, essentially.

So that kind of like where this inspiration came from.

And then the second part where the malformation, or I also talk about cancer information,

And of course, it's completely called cancer because we didn't put proliferation in this simulation.

So it's the initiation stage.

But it's the idea is that, again, and there's something that we talk about also in the lab and with Carl and many emails afterwards.

And it kind of also goes back to this whole idea with how different psychiatric disorders work in the brain where you have some of these inference processes being disrupted and then lead to large scale outcomes, but they kind of start somewhere.

So the idea was here is that if we disrupt only the

the information flow from one cell to the other cells and the other cells to that one cell, then what would that cell do?

So it basically just completely reduced its sensitivity to the environment and then saw it happen.

And what happened was that this one cell basically kind of like, it didn't move a whole lot.

It got inferred the wrong kind of cell type.

And it was completely out of place, right?

So that's always bad in biology if a cell is doing something that's not supposed to in a place where it's not supposed to be.

And what I thought was interesting afterwards, well, okay, so how can we rescue that?

And again, like, right, not trying to rescue it in a traditional cancer therapy idea where you bombard the cell or just kill it.

How can you actually have the system remodel itself?

So then the idea was to increase the, so the sensitivity was still disrupted from that one cell.

but then the flow, like how much the other cells reacted to it.

So basically we manipulated how the information flow from the other cells to that cells was flowing and increased that.

So, and then what was interesting is that the kind of, they were just kind of like going more close into an interaction, which is seen in this time-lapse figure.

And then eventually they reshape.

So even though the cells, like normally if you run this, it's a deterministic simulation, right?

it's always the same random seed.

So you run the simulation and you run it again, there will be some outcome.

So you can kind of know which cells go where, even though, you know, no cell starts off with like knowing I'm supposed to be in that cell.

That's not how it happens.

But because we run the simulation with a fixed randomized seed, we always know which cell ends up going where.

And then in that cancer simulation, that was not the same anymore.

So actually, even though at the end, after that rescue experiment, they ended up with a perfectly normal shape in the morphology at the end,

It wasn't what normally was supposed to happen, right?

The cells that normally work on to their fixed positions didn't all do that.

So there was some reconfiguration, which is something that that's, that's an ideal strategy that you would like, right?

Something that you exploit the systems interaction itself to then rescue it.

And overall you want to work on the, the, the few type, but you want to work on what's actually wrong.

You don't care.

exactly what Cell does and is implemented.

There's a lot of cool science, a little tangential, but there's really cool work by Eve Marder that works on neuronal networks and lobsters where they see that this works in lobsters because it's a simple enough system to work neuronally.

But what they're seeing is that there's actually a multitude of implementations that the neural network can use and do use individuals to use entirely different parameters with like two to four differences in ion channel concentrations to achieve the same end result.

And it's actually the response, the response to stress, to perturbations in the environment is then in the details.

But in the end, the actual homeostatic aspect of it is kept the same, right?

The goal of having something

end up the same.

Stephen would like to speak.

Go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, hi.

Thanks.

Yeah, I was just going to... One question.

Is the idea of flow... In a way, more flow is better, even though that... So unlike, say, a generative model where you maybe don't want too much complexity, you can have a lot of flow, but as long as that flow is not noise...

Um, it just is able to inform.

So that's the first part.

And the second part is, are you saying it's, it's with this flow, it's about finding where the choice point is or where the threshold is to say, okay, that's now going to decide that that's going to create a morphological target as opposed to it just being a gradual gradient descent on energy.


SPEAKER_01:
It is more a gradual aspect.

So the, it is, I would say it's, it's not ideal to think about decision points, even though in the end it doesn't happen.

It's something that we're just, we're used to in our level of, of speech, but on the level of, of, of I would say the underlying cells, it's very much a gradual process, right?

There's basically, you have all these different probabilities, which are probabilities of being one cell in the other in the simulation.

And the idea of increased information flow or increased sensitivity, whatever aspect you're modeling and manipulating or precision as well.

is that you are trying to get the vibration of your energy to be minimized, but also specifically to converge on a system where those probabilities actually end up somewhere meaningful, right?

If you don't want to be in a state where they're constantly kind of fluctuating, constantly randomized, so you mentioned noise, that's one aspect you want to avoid.

You also want to avoid that they basically do this and that

that's where you're right with the decision point, right?

Like the, the, the cell was basically going towards one state and then there was wrong one.

And then you increase the information flow of the other cells and the cancer rescue from, um, simulation to bring it away from that.

But you're not, you first of all, not actually working on like, you know, identifying that point and then you're fixing that.

You're basically just, just realizing that the, the simulation overall, it basically, you basically look at the, the probability changes over time.

So how are they updating and how fast are they updating?

And then, of course, in the end, what are they updating towards?

And that gives you a cue.

If you think from an experimental point of view or even like experimental or simulational point of view, then that tells, okay, so if that happened too fast, if there was malformation happening too fast, then you probably want to act and you want to increase sensitivity or something early on.

You don't do it at one time.

We just set the pattern for the whole simulations, but it tells you basically the strength that the sensitivity is.


SPEAKER_00:
respect to how early and how strongly that misinformation is happening does that answer your question somewhat yeah i think that does one i suppose one question just on that is is it is there like an optimum level in terms of this flow um i it peaks or is it like the more flow you can get the better and it's just literally a limit on how much information flow is possible


SPEAKER_01:
Hmm, let me think on that for a second.

Well, the short answer is that, the boring answer is that always will depend on the context, I would say.

There is no, I don't think you can say, you know, more, like, a broad statement, like, more information flows always better, doesn't make sense.

And I think you already gave the answer to that, why that is, right?

Because in the end, it will end up too much noise based on the system.

So that answer has to be with respect of how much information actually is being

can be processed?

What is the timescale of the sensor apparatus?

My experimental work works a lot on basically having different variation of input signals to my model system, which is actually an algae.

I will get to that.

But long story short, I actually once got the question where I had these randomized signals that was feeding it.

And then someone asked like, well, you actually, this is actually taking in more information.

Cause you're having, and I was like, well, and then like white noise technically carries more, right?

More variation, but it's not a formative, right?

So that's more information flow by itself is not better, more informative information flow.

The informative part being is actually does it, how quick does it change over time?

So there's a lot of the important aspects, other derivatives there.

And with respect to the, also the sensory precision and, you know, the timings, there's certain timescales involved in like how sensory states, how fast

Sensory states lead to updates of internal states.

All these things together make up basically how fast an agent can react and how much information it can process.

And the optimal level would be dependent on that, essentially.


SPEAKER_06:
OK, awesome.

Dean or Blue, before we have anyone, go again.


SPEAKER_04:
So I have a question.

Can you flip to figure four, Daniel, please?


SPEAKER_05:
Yep.


SPEAKER_04:
So you had mentioned earlier, Franz, hi, by the way, it's nice to see you.

I'm really glad you could make it.

I'm glad you could make it.

It's a pleasant surprise.

But here in figure four, you mentioned that you didn't

model proliferation in this model, but it seems to me that there's like more, like it looks proliferative here.

So is it just like a very dense cluster at the first time step or do you duplicate it every time step or like how did you end up with so many more like feeds or whatever, you know, agents at the end than at the beginning?


SPEAKER_01:
there might be an optical communication problem on my part.

So the actual cells are eight in each of those images, all of them.

But what you're seeing is the trace of it, right?

So only the ones that have like the strongly colored dot and then like the little star around it at the end.

But if you look at the last frames on there, those are actually the cells.

What you see in the back is basically like time lapse kind of like,

snapshots, they're not actually cells in there.

It would be actually interesting, I never even thought of that, that would actually be a fairly simple introduction at each of those point steps, you just make that a new cell, that would be pretty cool actually.

I know, I think basically Carl, in one of his, when he initially published that, I think he had, at the end of the simulations, he basically added some new cells, but he never went further with that, and I think it's the same problem that I mentioned that when you have initially, and in the first

timeframe at T equals one, that if you have some cells close together, you have to kind of set the sense precision lower because otherwise they're too close together.

I mean, it works somewhat, but it's very susceptible to perturbation in that stage.

So in order, if you basically want to reintroduce perfluoration, either like you said, or like you gave me the idea to do in between or you do at the end,

you would have to come all that, which of course, what, what cells do, right?

If you have new cells formation that are not going to be the same kind of, uh, sense of rest that then a mature or reform cell is.

Um, but that was basically, I think just for the simulation, what was making a little bit com complicated, but, um, it is, I'm not right now actively working on that simulation anymore.

If, if I did.


SPEAKER_04:
um that would be great yeah maybe i'll come back to that no that would be way cool and if it needs to be like less sensitive at the beginning like you just double the earth or yeah you just double the sensitivity at each um time step and then that way like you know you would get that enhanced sensitivity over time and it's also very interesting from the point of view factor also there's some really cool work right now also done by i recently read that wall from the guy behind from alpha


SPEAKER_01:
He's citing this whole new physics approach where they basically just have a simple set of rules and then they just use fractal kind of multiplications.

And then each time that that goes on and they create all these kinds of physics laws, which I haven't yet gotten deep into.

I can't really say anything about how good and useful it is, but the fact that we all know is a very kind of informative mechanism that's used in biology extensively.

And that's something you could use here as well, where basically at each step where you introduce a new cell,

of just have the same rule set with the initial and you run like a small simulation in that simulation essentially and with the same simple set of rules you could probably make up a whole much more complex so it probably looked nothing like this i wouldn't expect this to then afterwards still have like the same shape but cool stuff cool ideas right now but one day


SPEAKER_06:
Just kind of unpack that because it's a great suggestion.

And thanks for kind of giving your take on it too, Francis.

It's really cool to hear.

Like when the cells divide, you may need a first symmetry break or to introduce a symmetry break, you get some gradient.

It can be gravity.

It could be a nutrient gradient.

It can be the entry point of the sperm that triggers like a calcium wave.

But it's like asymmetries can give rise to asymmetries and then interacting, you get two morphogens and then now it's high, high and low, low.

And then the alternations,

influence gene regulation and that's like very complex but um adjacency effects are really important and that's how we get the self-organization like of the insect eye or of tissues because they don't have to do what this challenge is which is sort of like getting formation spaced out this is like the bird flock morphology which is also so cool because it does apply to other systems too which i'm sure we'll be exploring more but like

bodies fill out into a morphology not just dissolve this is yeah cool though i mean of course we really learned a lot let's return to least action just and feel free just to leave anytime you'd like but on least action where does it come into play or what is it doing here yes so it's it's there was more of a background um section so um georgie gorget was also on that on that paper was also my um


SPEAKER_01:
We kind of talked to him because this is not, nothing that I did in there was like novel.

I didn't like, it was novel the way we framed it, but I didn't make it, I didn't make new math for that.

But the idea was that, is that what, what Yogi was doing, a lot of these action principles, you know, the classical action principles apply to biology questions.

And he was like, well, you know, it's really, I think you're missing like a communication,

aspect of this where you're not communicating clearly how this fits into these action principles.

And you're not communicating clearly of what, like where diverge essentially.

And Carl actually did write a paper on it where he sprinkles it in there.

But I wanted to make this more explicit essentially that the variation of the aviation principle is at least action principles by definition essentially.

But what I was trying to show here is simply kind of like the whole idea of this

paper from background was that anyone could start from this that has more of a physics background and then can work themselves through active inference to biology.

And that's something that physicists are very familiar with, right?

And the idea is actually where does this, what is the interesting take on it from the variational free energy?

And that's what I think in the, so you start with a general definition, what is an extrema?

And then you kind of see later on that the whole definition of the, of the Clubber-Clubber divergence of innovation of energy very much corresponds to that.

And it's also just interesting to see basically where, where that takes from.

So that's, that answers your question.

That's basically the point of that was more not, not that least action that I used that particular equation.

I didn't use the classical, the typical equations that Carl uses for his variation of energy.

There's more of a motivation and I hope

It goes to show essentially where this all flows from.

How do you get from the Apunna function in the beginning for stability, or the Lagrangian function, how do you get from there to a variational PI interview to really make that kind of integration to physics tighter, which I know I failed at because there were the comments to that paper that were published with it.

And if you read that, two of them were like, we still don't see how the integration is doing.

And then my comment to that was then, I think I called that

that mini paper response paper, like a TIPA integration to physics.

So I know I didn't succeed in that, I apologize, but that was the goal.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay, awesome.

Dean, would you like to go anywhere, ask anything?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I don't even know.

I'm just going to sit back and then, because, well, for me,

you've taken a whole bunch of stuff around what a form might turn into based on what signals it's capable of acting on.

Is that, is that a, a gross, besides being a gross oversimplification, can we start there?

Does that make sense?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So like, yes, yes, that makes sense.

Basically what, what

I always like talking about models, like what you put in and what you get out, right?

So what we put into the model is an encoding of signaling responses, which is like a classical, like if you see signaling A, B, but not much of C and D, then you think your cell type A, whatever that means, head type, and then you adjust your own signaling expression.

So each cell basically has four signaling molecules that they can exchange, they can express, they can sense.

And based on different combinations of those, they think they're one or the other.

And that is semi-place encoded.

So they have basically from that map, that's what the target morphology is meaning.

So what we put in basically is that encoding, the generative model, generative parcels, how they update that, the tickling diffusion constants, all that stuff, that basically holds information and spreads to each other.

And then what we get out essentially is what kind of shapes, like you said, can emerge from that.

Of course, initially, right, the initial model was basically you're not interested in how many shapes because you're interested in can it do the shape that you put into it.

So the point of this paper was keeping that same target, the same kind of like each cell has these options that it can be based on what it's sensing and then it's all secreting.

But keeping with that, can you get different shapes just by messing up the way that the information flows in and outside of the cell and it's being processed around the things?

And again, the inspiration from that comes from the lab that I'm working in where we do a lot of this, where we don't actually mess up the genetic coding.

So we don't mess up the genetic model in that inference terms, but we mess up how basically the state space looks like, how the information at each point in time is updated.

And that's the idea of this.


SPEAKER_06:
What does it look like to engineer or design a different target morphology?

How did you fit the Bayesian model or fit the flow descriptor, whatever it was in its representation towards the anatomy that's described in figure three?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So the outcomes that we get, like the experimental outcomes here, we didn't design the

Like I said, we keep those the same.

We just basically had some intuition that some of them turned out to be true of how we could change it based on just the asymmetry that we put in the information flow.

How would we design this one?

Mainly, so this is an abstract level.

And again, this model itself is not, that's already called this before I joined it.

So that's not, I didn't do this new.

But how do you approach this?

So basically the idea is, the idea of it is fairly biological.

The idea is that you have

showing encodings where certain transcription factors basically will, based on whatever you sense, will then basically activate gene expression in the cells that were then allowed to differentiate.

So cells, most of morphogenesis essentially starts off from something I mentioned initially.

You have some asymmetry in signaling that there's this thought that basically even when you already have the unfertilized egg in an animal system,

there's some asymmetry where that's being stored actively by the whole organism of the mother, essentially.

And the base from that asymmetry, then you have a gradient of already of difference.

And then, so basically some cells will sense more of signaling type A and less of B. And then from that, they will make, they will be, so certain genes will be expressed that will then change a sulfate to a sub sulfate.

And that, and then you have more sulfates and the same thing happens there.

You have now more asymmetry, but starting off in the same one.

So you, again, will have cells that will sense more and less of some signaling ligands that will basically then turn out to be incorporated through transcription factors, differential genetic expression to differentiation.

So this is essentially what this is doing, right?

You're encoding what the codes here are, essentially those different relationships between transcription factors, between signaling receptors, transcription factors downstream to a genetic code, where then basically

We don't do proliferation again, but that's the first step.

There's basically one snippet of target morphology, one aspect where you have at that point in this hypothetical morphogenesis experiments, you have four different signaling ligands that are being expressed, that can be expressed by the cells.

And based on where you are in the cluster, you'll see more or less of it.

And based on that information,

you will then yourself as a cell start to express more or less of what you basically start differentiating.

Um, so then you will start expressing more and less of that.

And at some point of that, you will reach a certain threshold where they actually will fully have undergone the differentiation process and have a new cell fate.

And that's what these different, um, head, tail and stuff.

So of course, like, you know, there's no animal system I know of that has a, you know, eight cells and, uh, four cell types.

It makes a whole body.

That would be pretty crazy.

Although there are some interesting, um,

There's some small owners and systems where there are the C. elegans, these worms are one example where they have a complete map from cell to cell, from basically a gene.

They know exactly which cell basically turns out to be what cell at the end.

So they can go from the embryo and they can tell exactly this cell is going to be at the end of time.

This is the minority of examples.

Most model organisms that I know of are a lot more messier than that.

And that's what this is trying to basically answer, given that you have a lot of messier, that cells can be different things.

And then if perturbations happen, like they happen all the time in environment, and often we do see then, you know, misformed embryos, a lot of that we saw in the lab, other labs do it too, we see it in nature all the time, where you get completely different

uh outcomes in the morphology even though not all of these occur because of some genetic mutation that's not always the case sometimes it's just basically some perturbation environment and the same genetic code with some little differences that was here it's basically the the differences here between one simulation and different if you did it that way we didn't but if you did at least not in this paper if you had different minimization initially of the prior beliefs you can also get different outcomes but

even with one minimization of the initial beliefs, you will get certain outcomes for those cell types based on the coding, but also on what the environment does.

That's the kind of the goal is you have cell types, you want to see how can you change the line of cell type differentiation based on an interplay, not just like saying you do this and you tell the cell to do this, but based on how they interact with each other.

Hope that answered your question.


SPEAKER_06:
It makes me think of Waddington's landscape, the epigenetic landscape, which I'll copy in.

How would you say it relates to epigenetics or the epigenetic landscape?


SPEAKER_01:
If I have my shirt here, I have a shirt with it, but I don't see it right now.

Yeah, I love the Waddington.

Yeah, it's exactly right.

So that was the big, I love you big enough.


SPEAKER_06:
I'll put it onto a slide.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Basically, the whole evolution was that initially when we started understanding genetic information, it was thought, oh, well, that's the end of it.

Now we know where to be done here.

We know basically that there's some certain signals that will be assessed, and then you will get certain genes, but the thing rolls down.

But basically, from that, it's all straightforward.

What was new then later on was the epigenetic part of it.

There was basically actually modifications happening, not on the

Like you did not, not the mutations of the genome, but which genes were more or less accessible for expression, which, you know, can, so basically you, you kept the coding the same, but based on modifications, a lot of system modifications, right?

The, the, the way that the chromosomes where the DNA is wrapped around itself in chromosomes, the more or less tightly they are called to each other, the more or less accessible to transcription factors.

And that started basically happening later on.

And now we think a lot more about this and we even see that's even heritable.

And it's also interactive with a lot more of the physical forces of it.

So, you know, perturbations in the mechanical or bioelectric environment will lead to a lot fast epigenetic transformations.

Of course, it's also important to mention that there's a lot faster process.

It's faster to basically modify some of the proteins that make up the histones and then make up the accessibility of the genetic code than to start off going some evolution experiment where you start to do mutating and crossover until you get the right combination.

So it's a different layer of information flow that is interactive with genetic level.

So what this paper kind of interacts with a little bit or intersects with it is the aspect of health.

In that initial kind of formation where you have the same genetic code within basically one lifetime, how do certain modifications in sensory precision, which you can think of, right?

I didn't make that explicit claim.

I hate to make claims that I'm not actually then afterwards answering on some relevant biological mechanism.

I could think of easily that way that these modifications of the response function, the sensitivity of the double-tail experiments and the reduced sensitivity and the cancer initiation, those could easily be thought of as short-term epigenetic modifications.

And we do see that a lot.

This happens especially in stress environments and embryos and stressful environments and embryonic genesis.

where there's very quick changes that can lead to drastic outcomes.

And it's thought of as a quick response mechanism to basic perturbations.

And it's involved, of course, in cancer as well.

That's well known.

So that's kind of how I would think about that.

The landscape here can be thought of as the variation of fantasy landscape in the sense of what different outcomes you can get, how quickly to update your parabola is based on your changes in the environment.


SPEAKER_06:
Awesome.

Thank you, Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
When I was reading this, I was thinking of a company that I'm invested in that has taken stem cell derived isolates because people have diabetes and they have created an environment to protect against the perturbation.

So instead of

injecting those pancreatic cells directly into the portal vein, they tried to, they have, are working on trying to sort of create the environment in which the isolates survive.

So essentially it's, again, rather than looking

from the bottom up, it's sort of creating that safe environment in which these isolates can then carry out their function.

And so that's what I was kind of thinking about throughout when I was reading your paper.

Now, I'm not sure if that, again, whether I was thinking of the correct analogy, but yeah, in terms of what the pancreatic isolates can do depends on their survivability.

So if you don't have the right kind of environment for that,

they tend to die or worse, they don't die.

They become cancerous.

So it's kind of interesting that you're looking at it here.

And then I know of some sort of practical application where the research is really trying to build these environments so that they can actually protect against the perturbations.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, no, that's exactly the long lines that I'm thinking as well.

I do, but I have like two more minutes.

If I can then I have to push and go.


SPEAKER_06:
um really appreciated you joining if it works for you to drop in or out at any point in the dot too please feel welcome and any other time you or anyone else are welcome to participate but thanks a lot for joining you're welcome my pleasure see you later okay bye bye thank you

excellent that was great fantastic great yeah fun times um okay so here's here's one thought on the relationship with foraging kind of picking up on what we were just looking at so he described some of the manipulations as kind of like interventions that were epigenetic so it wasn't the addition of um

like another changing the model structure like changing their from four to five transcription factors um it was just changing their state it's like picking one cell up and moving it would be changing its position but then there's other levers of intervention like changing its sensitivity or other aspects of its cognitive or its generative model and the whole point with

Science and active inference, though see Anticipating Brain is not a scientist by Brunberg's paper.

So it's not exactly the same thing, but it's about informed or directed experimentation.

And that's true from the epistemic foraging with the isocating to the scientific experiment.

When we make targeted interventions into systems,

based upon a good understanding of them, we can learn about the cognitive model that's underlying it, or the as-if cognitive model.

So there's a lot of interventions that would not be informative about morphogenesis, like jokingly, you know, hitting the petri dish with a hammer.

It's an intervention that does kill cells.

It kills cancer, but of course, isn't that the joke, right?

Like there needs to be more to it in the experimental design and in the

the measurement of the outcomes so that we're actually learning something.

And so to make increasingly nuanced designs and learn more and more and apply better and better, that's where having like this kind of formal modeling really matters.

So this is kind of taking just saying like, well, changes in receptors might be a precursor or a biomarker or an early mechanistic warning of X disease.

you'll read that a hundred thousand times in the molecular biology literature and this is picking up there and putting it into a modeling architecture where we actually can talk about changes in signaling and position in an integrated way so that it might be able to actually model real settings just like people use the epigenetic landscape heuristically but also increasingly quantitatively

to model self-fade decisions.

But just to kind of close that, again, it's the interventions that we as the investigator know, based upon our understanding of like the natural history of the system, that...

give us updates on our cognitive model of the system.

So like an ant foraging example is they'll take a desert ant that forages alone.

The nest mate goes out without following like just simply a pheromone trail and pick the ant up when it's like, let's just say 30 meters away from the nest or 20 meters away, and then move it to like 90 degrees rotated the same distance.

So one extreme case would be it continues from that location 100% as if it were walking back from the north, let's just say.

That would be a pure direction step integrator model.

There might be an angle it takes between that and, for example, heading towards the nest.

that might reflect the usage of other sensory or cognitive features like detecting the polarization of light or scene memory or other ways that it might be able to adjust and turn its vector to some other direction.

So that's the kind of experiment where

we can start to learn like how much are the nest mates in their foraging adjusting between their own onboard memory versus these external cues that might be picked up like in one instance by any nest mate in that location.

So there's some cells where moving it into a different tissue, the first thing it would do is die.

because it's just like too acidic or just like not a good environment for it but there are certain interventions that do seem to happen that lead to at the very least we can say states we don't prefer or just more directly like states that are abnormal or unhealthy um though it really does come back all to blue's question about death and aging and how is that related and what is this living phase between the developmental part

and the death part, even though there's such a complex continuum between them.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Can I just ask a question on what you were just saying there, Daniel?

Do you feel that, or do you think that the level of what's happening with epigenetics is fairly flat?

And once these other types of changes happen, the adjacencies permeate out and can

the the cells are kind of finding their place um and is that a bit different to the nestedness you know that we're talking about the nestedness is because um like for instance a tissue or is that also does it then fall into some other type of um behavior where it's like into this idea of the nested um the nested kind of markov blankets

And is it then a case of what was the types of information flows which were conservation at one scale have become noise?

That makes sense.

So maybe I'm just curious about if that ties in here.


SPEAKER_06:
Um, it very well might.

I mean, what it just makes me think about is the eye specification in fruit flies and similar in other insects.

So this is like an example of a developmental genetics pathway.

at a relatively downstream level being worked out through a lot of work.

But these cells are pre-committed to being eye precursor cells, but then they undergo a second or a future stage of differentiation that results in a compound eye.

And then it's the modularity of this developmental framing of first eye precursor cell and then to a specified eye compound cell

that lets the insect eye scale in different ways, for example, than the mammal eye, developmentally.

So over evolutionary time, there's different affordances for insect eye evolution versus mammalian cell eye evolution, because they're on different pathways.

So it's kind of fractal because this eye field precursor, it's not...

the second one that comes out of the embryo.

So there's multiple like fractal layers and pre-committals, and it's not possible to jump from a canyon way at the bottom

directly over there's a few cancer cell papers that do a little bit more of like a reversion and around or a perturbation that pushes and then changes to like susceptibility or kind of like changes in the elevation of these hills between so it's a landscape which isn't just simply flat um it has some scale and then the

between how jagged it is and how much noise or flow there is is about how navigable that landscape is in that one model.

Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
So I have a question for Daniel and Dean specifically.

So when Franz was here, he talked about

the block matrix operator that he used in equation 39.

And you guys, well, maybe it was Daniel specifically, were talking about some kind of housekeeping term in the dot zero.

And I couldn't remember or place the housekeeping term that you were referring to.

And I wondered if it was like the same or similar in a similar or used in a similar way.


SPEAKER_06:
i think it's connor i'll bring in a housekeeping term slide it was from 32 livestream 32 stochastic chaos markov blankets and um here is the slide in slide 45 here it was um basically the helmholtz decomposition

is usually discussed in terms of just the gradient the solenoidal so sort of like directed term and then the isocontour circulation change in elevation ruler on the hill and then around the hill on the isocontour and then this paper um 32 um brought in the housekeeping term

then there was like a supplement so we didn't really totally go into it but together um they represent the total flow so it's a slight kind of um friction variation on the helm holds decomposition in this context but as connor mentioned in 32.3 it also has like sort of antecedents and maybe even similarities with other um areas so totally remains to be a little bit unpacked but it's the influence of how movement changes the landscape

at least that's a little bit how we were framing it, like change on a trampoline where the movement is going to influence it.

You can't just snapshot the landscape and then calculate what would happen and what the gradient and the solenoidal flow would be at every point because it's going to be the future.


SPEAKER_04:
That might be related to what Franz was saying, because he said he used it to smooth out the landscape, because otherwise you get stuck in a little local pocket when you're talking about something that's bumpy.

So it sounds like it could be a similar type of housekeeping thing, or just a smoothingness.

When you're going into the bowl, you don't want to get stuck in a bump down along the way, if you're marble traveling down.


SPEAKER_03:
I thought it was a cleanse.


SPEAKER_06:
There's just too many jokes to be made.

Wow.

I think in our last 10-ish minutes, we should just chill, land the plane, prepare for Dot 2.

It was pretty unexpected and awesome.

to have the um time that we got to speak and i think that's like the housekeeping term in action which is a process and a protocol and then people who have different perspectives on a situation but the group can always readapt to a changing landscape and so even if that's interpreted as structure learning at a higher level from the sort of

agent view looking up it's equivalent to adapting to a different situation in some fractal way slightly different or very different using the same affordances and perceptive and cognitive features as it had in the time step before and that's why this model that looks at the flow of the autonomous states so the states that can actually be controlled in the Markov blanket partition

in 30 by defining a specific function that we want to like be fitting well by really focusing on the flow over the blanket and internal states it allows inference on that component perception cognition and action of the given modeled entity to be

uncoupled in a certain way from inference on the hidden external state evolution which is fundamentally unknowable but in a slightly different way if that makes any sense and a classic moment blue to suggest the the mitotic elements and like

just to bring in the continuity and then the way that that gives rise to symmetry breaking sort of for free.

And that this sort of, and so it's cool conversation that we had today.

And so I ended up as a dot one might.


SPEAKER_04:
I didn't get to mention, and I was going to mention it, but, like, you know, there's that fractal fMRI brain pattern paper that I'm, like, dying to read and would love to discuss with the authors also.

But it's interesting just in terms of the fractal dimension also that Franz was talking about.

It's super cool.


SPEAKER_06:
Is there anything else that we want to, like...

write down to think about in the DOT 2 or questions that we'd like to ask Franz if he returns or just things that we want to take moving forward in the DOT 2 already.


SPEAKER_04:
I'm still digesting that one.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I agree.

It's like you're eating dinner.

It's like, what do you want dinner tomorrow?

Inverting space and time, we didn't really get to.

And some of these initial points, it was...

Right.

Least action, math and morphology, and then generalized flow, then taking us all the way back.

Dean?


SPEAKER_04:
So I would like to maybe ask Franz about quantum mechanics and what role, if any, that that played in, like, is there a quantum perspective that he was perhaps viewing in from?

when he was writing this paper.

I would like to ask just that one question because that will encompass inverting space and time and it will encompass what we were talking about with the probability current and the probability mass conservation.

So like that all is like bridging into the quantum where we'll go in the 40.

So I think I would like to ask that one thing.


SPEAKER_06:
Dean, what are you looking forward to?

What would you want to add here at the end?


SPEAKER_03:
I'm just going to go back to the drawing board and basically look a little more closely at some of those math operations because I don't tend to give those as much attention as I need to.

I think it's really interesting now that we've had a chance to sort of bring more people into the conversation.

I think...

think there's three parts to that.

I think we can agree there are three things that we can really center on now.

There's the forming, which is what figure four and five do.

But as soon as you go to figure five, what's interesting is that the attention seems to be on the shape that the cells eventually take.

And yet in the blackness around each one of those cells,

moment captures, there's signaling and there's changing, right?

So there's all the part we've talked about today, which is the whole flowing piece and where is it going and how is it channeling and how is it narrowing or how is it spreading and how is it dissipating and all that stuff.

But even in those diagrams, it's hard to figure out where the signal is.

Even when they introduce arrows, they introduce the arrow pointing at the form

not necessarily the signaling and the changing.

And that's where the math really comes in, I think, because without the math, you lose sight of those other two present factors that are all moving and mixing and turning into something.

So I hope Franz comes back because, man, he's got a heck of a lot more...

You've got a lot more to tell us about, really, because this is such a dense paper.

Like I think I mentioned to you, Daniel, before the point zero, this could be a 13-week course, this one paper, if you really wanted to.

I don't know how many hours he spent on this, but he already admitted that going to Carl's lab and from the lab he's at, there's way more multiples of 10,000 hours of work that were done before he started typing things out.

So, yeah.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
Awesome with that.

Maybe like think about is this idea of like multiple kinds of invisibility or overlay or unpacking like projection up into a bigger dimension of interpretation.

Like you pointed out how the focus was on morphology.

which is to say the final realized, like this picture is of the morphology of the animal.

It's not of the signaling density, but this could be like presented as just a gradient of transcription factor A, or it could be presented as a gradient of vitamin A, or like, it's kind of like Carilion photography, like looking at the morphology with the energy field.

I don't know if that's exactly what it is, but that sort of idea with the field based perspective is,

But then it gets hard to show many overlaying fields because like, what do you do?

20 overlaying colors, but we can't actually see that.

And so that's just kind of interesting, like a question about visualization of higher dimensional models with a lot of overlays.

And then that's like one kind of invisibility, which is something that's modeled, but just not graphically shown easily, like the density of 50 pheromones or 50 transcription factors or vitamins.

But then also, but it does exist and it's like modeled as an actual chemical component of the biological system, like the generative process.

And then there's this generative model with the mathematical derivatives, the generalized coordinates of motion of cellular position.

And those are also like invisible in a different way because they're a modeling tool

the derivatives are not anywhere in reality like what is where's the seventh derivative of the baseball's movement just relative to what where is it hiding in the current moment this is just a purely tool driven way of thinking about the current moment not just in terms of its composition and like anatomy and position and the lowest level of the observed model but like these higher levels which are

real yet not existing in the moment structurally real in the structural realism sense i'll take your word for it i've been wanting to say that for a long time i have to now go back and figure it out so um but what a discussion i hope like for those who stick around to the end here that they enjoyed this that this wasn't just um

Total morphotastrophe.

All right.

Well, fun times and awesome to have all the good discussions and appreciate everybody who was here, Blue and Steven and Dean.

So see you all next week or any other time.

Peace.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_06:
Bye.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

## KbyPFR7xUDo

SPEAKER_05:
all right hello everyone welcome to actinflab live stream number 39.2 it's march 9th 2022 welcome to the actinflab we're a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at the links here on the slide this is a recorded and an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so we can improve on our work

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will be following video etiquette for live streams.

Check out ActiveInference.org to learn more about anything that the lab is up to.

today in stream number 39.2 we're in our third discussion around this paper morphogenesis as bayesian inference a variational approach to pattern formation control in complex biological systems by franz kuchling who's here with us as well as fristen georgiev and levin so

We're going to have a fun discussion.

In the dot two, the dot zero was some background and context, hopefully overviewing the paper.

The dot one, we had a discussion that opened up several threads.

And today we will, in the dot two, say hello on the introductions and then just jump in to a blank slide or to a not blank slide.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
morning I'm Dean I'm in Calgary and I am going to say that I have one thing I want to look at down the road which is how long is a person a stem cell which I think this paper might help us parse a little bit and I'll pass it down to blue


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, I'm blue.

I'm a researcher in New Mexico.

And I also similar to Dean have questions about when a cell becomes a cancer cell and like, how does it develop its own generative model?

And just in general, like when you're looking at complex systems,

how these small perturbations can lead to like a totally different effect downstream, which I think is kind of related to the stem cell question that Dean had.

And I'll pass it over to the first author, Franz.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, I'm Franz.

I am a PhD student in the Levin lab in Tufts, Medford,

near Boston.

And yeah, I study active inference in my theoretical work and I do a lot of experimental work as well, looking at information processing in organisms and cells.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

So where does stemness or how do stem cells play into this paper and this line of research, Franz?

Definitely something we've touched on, but just to kind of start generally and then we'll zoom in somewhere.

So take it away.


SPEAKER_04:
Sure.

The idea is that the cells initially, in the simulation when they're being initialized, they're randomly initialized and they have very low beliefs about what cell type they are.

They can be one of four different cell types in this particular simulation, and they all share a model, a target morphology they could achieve that they essentially are programmed to achieve at some point.

but none of the cells are any of the given cell types initially, at least not with any significant precision.

And as they move along, signaling to each other and sensing each other and secreting signal types in response to each other, they then slowly by slowly infer a cell type, which essentially is differentiation.


SPEAKER_05:
So cells starting with low precision about what kind of cell they believe themselves to be.

And then there's a process of differentiation.

So Diener Blue, any thoughts on that sort of stem to differentiated continuum?

And I'll pull up an image from a non-active perspective that also shows that kind of a continuum.


SPEAKER_01:
So I...

have just something to add that ties into the paper where there's aberrant signaling.

So a stem cell differentiates, but then during the process of carcinogenesis, like retains some kind of, or, or D differentiates into something that's more similar to a stem cell than it is to a different kind of cell.

And so this plasticity is important to retain, like so that we can repair ourselves, but also it can lead to,

kind of an aberrant signaling pattern.


SPEAKER_05:
Yep, like this notion of having a terminal cell revert to a state and regain the ability of having stemness is

one of the characteristics of cancer because it can then sometimes differentiate into other cell types that are like normal and downstream of a precursor or abnormal in some other way how is this i was going to say it's also something that happens and especially in higher organisms right not not every organisms keeps absolute stem cells and all kind of populations


SPEAKER_04:
One example that I used to work on is in zebrafish, where you have an always developing eye, and there are certain parts of the retina, essentially, that can de-differentiate to some extent.

They're not entirely stem cells.

They have a stem cell niche as well, but there's also, especially in higher organisms as well, they keep those populations of either stem cells or of already partially differentiated cells that can de-differentiate.

So it's an important part in regeneration.

And ironically,

This is something that's not been studied for a while now.

There's older research that was done where highly regenerative organisms, when they undergo, they did this in salamanders and they injected them with carcinogens and they basically saw a tumor progressing and then they cut off a limb and these salamanders are highly regenerating.

We actually renormalize the tumors potentially.

So initiation of regeneration in those organisms seems to actually counteract

um cancer progression and even kind of remove the tumors um which is very interesting and it kind of um this feeds a little bit into the idea in this paper as well that regeneration right what happens is you suddenly now have a much higher flow of information um things need to rearrange to to re-differentiate and um and that is kind of like what i was thinking as well with the simulation here of the the cancer rescue phenomena where you you

you rescue this formation of aberrant cells and aberrant signaling by having a stronger contact between cells as well.

I'm not saying I'm modeling regeneration here, although you can.

I think in the original paper, Carl has done some way to cut, I think, part off and let it grow again.

I think that has been done in the original paper in the annoying once place.

But that's something to kind of keep in mind.

This is something that...


SPEAKER_05:
experimentally highly studied um to an extent so one general note and then a question this question this idea that the organisms that have the highly regenerative capacity and there's a continuum from regrowing just the tail to regrowing a whole limb to kind of an extreme or a highly um

regenerative case like the planaria that was studied in this paper so it's all kind of a on a continuum from total ability to regenerate from any adult somatic cell can fully recapitulate the full population all the way to a total opposite of that and then you pointed out that it might be related to cancer progressions and phenotype and that speaks to what blue brought up about the um

like system level effects.

There's the individual cell and then there's the system level, because clearly there's something about the system level in the regenerative situation that would lead to this being different.

Or maybe it could be explained by just something internal to the model.

Anyways, you mentioned that higher information was associated with rearrangement.

Could you explain a little bit about that or how does it play out in this paper or in general?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, it's basically the idea that it's not so much the total information content, but the flow of it.

And we talked a little bit about this last time.

It's hard to really kind of quantify this in a more meaningful biological sense.

But the idea is that it's information flow.

I think Dean asked this question, is more information always good?

And my kind of answer to that was it's within context of what the

participating organisms can receive and can process.

So in the sense that if you have, you know, cells that, you know, processing certain information with a certain kind of rates, time constants, then kind of getting information in with that timeframe in mind is what makes it more likely for them to kind of understand better their environment and react to it, as opposed to a cell, you can think of it also cancer cells,

um that you know have that whole sensory part completely perturbed they do not react to the environment anymore then everything else becomes noise and it gets ignored um that's kind of the idea so there is there is a lot of different differences in of how the cancer cells because they have changed ion profile ion channel profiles they have changed uh machinery of what they're actually transcribing so all of that leads to the difference in how signals are being processed

And understanding that and then reacting to that is, I think, is a key to understanding and treating this disease.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know if I have the answer to my question, which is how long is a person a, in scare quotes, a stem cell.

But one of the things you mentioned, Franz, in the point one was I think Steven asked the question about how much volume in the flow.

And what I've heard you say back was it's always a state space dependency.

Which, which I, when I'm reading the paper, it was, I think you made a really good sound case for that.

But then one of the things that when you had to, when you had to sign off, one of the questions that I brought up, hopefully that maybe we can discuss a little bit today is they can figure four and five of the paper.

All that black area around when the sort of cells move into place, that's a crude way of describing what's going on there.

But all that black area around that, is it fair to say that that's kind of the state space dependency or is that just assumed?

And how would we, because Daniel did a good job of sort of saying there's some invisibility aspects to this when we do multiple layering.

And so how do you give people a sense of what's going on in that blacked out area, right?

I think black is a good color representation because it's not really a color, I don't think.

But it kind of speaks to this idea that we've got these low beliefs, but for how long as a person or as cells, as a cluster of cells, is that beneficial?

Right?

We're talking, of course, here under the big umbrella of morphology.

So that was kind of where I was wondering today, maybe you could explain it.

Because the eye tends to focus on the object within the frame, as opposed to sort of the area around what we would consider to be the object.

So maybe you can kind of help me understand this state-space dependency piece.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

I mean, so, um, if, if you have to look at figure two or so, and, um, what I didn't plot in the, in the, in the figure four and five and two, I did is the back of concentrations, right?

So there are of course, some, some levels of, of, of signaling, uh, molecules in the background as well, um, which will also of course be the case in the, in the actual simulations, um, down the line of four and five, um, the,

the blackness so the one interesting part about the simulation which was done mainly for simplicity and lack of necessity is to not actually have an external environment per se like there's nothing right there's no external force like outside of basically everything in the simulations is done by the cells where the cells they make the environment right so there is essentially there's an external environment by the signaling molecules that they put out but we don't have any external um

limits around it.

We just basically plot the signaling molecules don't go faster than that.

And there isn't any external force, which we could do, right?

Part of the simulations where you do this asymmetry, we essentially get sort of an implicit environment by changing the response to the signals around you.

You can imagine that you put something in the medium that flips how a signal is being processed, and then that's it.

So back to your question about this blackness.

And when is that beneficial, if I answered that question correctly?

There is, of course, like a precision component to it and kind of more less hand wavy.

If your environment is very volatile and constantly changes and you keep

but you have a not this essentially is a closed system, right?

If you had an open system, constantly you would get signals also from the environment.

This will also become all a lot messier and especially initially, right?

In the first frames of that figure four and five where you had the simulations, they all started together.

I mentioned last time there's certain smoothness requirements where like if we had to put this dampening on the sensitivity a long time, so inverse dampening, it will get more sensitive with time.

which is because initially they're very unstructured.

They have very low pyroblasts and they will jump crazy if they have high sensitivity to each other because they're in such close proximity.

And that is something that we, of course, do see in biology, right?

We do see most, especially the higher organisms, right?

They start off usually in close environments.

Now, of course, you can argue this.

You don't need to go to any information stuff.

You can just argue, well, it's just, you know, thermally insulated.

They have their own food supplies.

It makes sense.

you know, just makes like a more safe zone, like just physically energy speaking.

But I do think there's a big component to it.

It's like shutting this highly volatile, you know, it's self-inferring organism off from influence from the environment at a stage when all these cells are figuring out what to do with each other.

So they need, they kind of need to have a kind of a barrier between signals from the environment, which normally, you know, to us adults, to a mature organism or not,

really dangerous but to end developing organism full of stem cells can be problematic and will basically would um would perturb its natural kind of progression in this state space on this sulfate acquisition um there is a cool paper i can reference to you from chris fields who i am from disclosure i'm working with and very much admire him who wrote a paper about multicellularity as exactly

The consequence of what I just said, the multicellularity basically emerging as a way to shut some cells, cells that are an initial evolution of multicellularity, cells that are undergoing some evolution towards complexity, needing some kind of barrier from the environment, basically making themselves, creating a Markov bank around them.

that makes it so they're not constantly, you know, being perturbed by the environment.

And that's the idea of how my mode of celebrity arose in the first place is to insulate niches, which will become stem cell niches from the environment so that cells that are undergoing, you know, very dynamic changes in short amount of time

that therefore need to be kind of sensitive to the environment, cannot be, need to be isolated from influence in the environment that would perturb this careful inference of cell type.

Thanks.

Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so in this figure too, you can see that there's, we're talking about ranges because we've got values on the horizontal and the vertical sides of the box.

So one of the things that I think is really interesting is that once you, so we've all spelled it out if we're dealing with active inference, we want to avoid something surprising, right?

The whole variational aspect of this.

So again, if we're talking about going from something that has low beliefs to something that gains in, I'll say gains in sensitivity without hopefully killing what I want to say next,

If it's about signal adaptation to these top-down conditions, which influence the final form taken,

Is there some way, based on what you researched with this paper, is there some way to know as you're approaching that place of energy exhaustion?

Is there something that the cell tells you that it's finding this too surprising?

Because one of the things, again, we talked about was that rate of change being so rapid, say, like the UN report on global warming, where

We simply don't have the machinery to be able to adapt Is there something that you found out through this paper that kind of said to you as you were looking at these things?

Oh, wait a second here.

We're just going to we're going to we're not our intent is not to kill this thing off But we're approaching that place where the environment is just too changing too fast Yeah, um


SPEAKER_04:
I'm trying to give you a more detailed answer than hand waviness, but let's start with the general answer first.

So yes, one way you can quickly see it is in that something that you get with the prediction error plot that you also get with the free energy plot.

In a perfect world, you'll get a nice, smooth exponential decay of the free energy function.

If that keeps changing, bouncing up and down,

that will be very problematic.

I did some simulations afterwards.

They're not included in this paper, but based on exactly the same stuff, where I was including a time, based on top of this time sensitivity, you know, increase that I use for basically, you know, increasing the sensitivity over the time, but having a low in the beginning.

On top of that, I put in a pulsing, like a sinusoidal or rectangular function

which was, we were just trying to simulate what I'm doing in my experiments in a lab where basically, you know, pulse certain signaling inputs to my organisms.

And I wanted to see basically if I randomized that or if I made that in a certain pattern, how well would the simulation still be able to cope with that?

And in the case where I had like a nice regular pattern of that, in the

free energy land and the free energy decay, you hardly saw that, you know, initially, initially when, when that sensitivity was very high, it was, you know, you can see it there, there was like a big jump in this and fuzziness.

You could see it also in the, in the belief updates, you know, the basically they were they kind of emerged kind of like they diverged initially very strongly and diverged in terms of their beliefs that they had about themselves.

But then kind of afterwards, when the sensitivity overall was kind of acclimating, but was kind of varying around this acclimation point, you didn't see that much anymore in the regular pattern.

But when the ones were less regular, that was very much perturbed.

And the energy also didn't actually quite, not only did it not come to kind of like to this,

asymptotic behavior but actually started increasing again basically um just was really perturbed and you didn't see that so to answer a question like um how do you see if if you are not adapting correctly even though you don't actually know yet what what the what your external state is i would answer it's how much are you switching back and forth between your beliefs and uh

I guess more precisely also like how certain are you of that, right?

This is something that we talk about in metacognition, which I've recently, for my last paper, I've been getting into and reading about metacognition in rats and primates and other animals.

And the first step to metacognition is, as far as I understand it, is having a certain confidence about your results.

They did this with rats where they basically gave rats the option in this kind of cognitive task

that they could also just not answer the task, not push the lever, because I think it was levers, I forgot what the task was, but it was basically levers, and they had an option to not push the lever, for which they would get a lower reward than if they, a much lower reward than if they got it correctly, but more than if they got it wrongly.

And so what they saw is that they actually would, in certain cases, when they hadn't learned the task correctly, they would just not push the lever.

And that is used as like a first instance of the medical condition, a sense of they must have been unsure about what you do and then chose not to do it.

So I think that's kind of like if you, it's one thing if you kind of lean back and forth because you always think, well, you know, I'm this and that.

Being unsure is normal, but kind of constantly going back and forth between certain states of sureness is also problematic.

So that's the generalized answer to this.


SPEAKER_02:
I think the interesting thing there is the emphasis on the back and forth.

Metaphorically speaking, we tend to give a lot of attention over to the balance piece, but what you're talking about when you're talking about the environment is not the plank as much as a moving fulcrum.

So how do you adjust, right?

The balance, I guess, is the outcome, but it's

the uh the process itself is the back and forth so yeah i wondered about that because some things you do want and from like from an epigenetic standpoint you do want certain cells to die you want their energy to expire absolutely i mean right that's part of the back and forth as opposed to the balance you know there's no balance metaphor you want there you want them to die and they're not dying so that's really interesting thank you yeah


SPEAKER_04:
I wanted to add one more kind of attempt to answer this more specifically.

There's a paper by, I'm probably pronouncing his name wrong, Droefeli, which was, if you just Google valence and active inference, they basically looked at valence in terms of judging if your actions are certain, are they better or worse, basically?

Are you assigning a sign, positive or negative, to outcomes?

and they were doing that in the active inference schemes, and they were defining it, and there's other definitions, not everyone's going to agree about this, but they were looking at it in the active inference scheme about the rate of change.

They were looking at the first and second order derivatives of how, if I'm saying this correctly, about how the prior beliefs were updated to the precision, how important, like how

how sure they were about what cell type they were.

And so basically in the second order derivative, basically how much would they change at any given time in their beliefs?

That's what they plugged in valence into different mode that gets more complex than that, but that's the gist of it.

So that I think is within the framework of active inference is a more specific answer to your question is look at the rate of change by which your beliefs are updating

And that with respect to uncertainty, of course, there's this whole cause written about this as well.

I'm very interested as well from the biologist's point of view is that stress sensing mechanisms, like stress is a universal driver in biology.

It's actually much more important than rewards.

I kind of find that we always talk about rewards, but biology is much more focused on stress.

um because it's more informative and it's more important to deal with than than what maximizing but of course you always say it's just negative but um the the point of being is uh stress as in as in terms of for uncertainty like not having not minimizing your energy effectively and stably um that will lead to stress and there's paper that doesn't humans i think mentioned last time as well where they do experiments with humans and mice as well where they

very ethical, where they give electric shocks.

I think they did it both for mice and humans.

And then they showed that the cortisol levels were more stressed out, not just by the electric shocks themselves, but they couldn't predict the electric shocks.

So it's that uncertainty of what's coming next.

I think that is the most... If I had to say one thing that is most indicative of you going in a bad place, it's if you are stressed because you have no idea what's happening and you cannot even

If you know something bad is going to happen and you know when it's happening, that's a lot less bad than if you don't know at all.

One last really dark example to really make it a dark place is there is a, I was born in East Germany.

I guess I was only one year old when the wall fell.

But my parents were very much, and there was this, now it's a museum, but it was a prison for the basically political detainees in East Germany, in East Berlin.

And we went there as a class once, and they showed us all the techniques they used to interrogate prisoners, including torture.

And one of the torture devices was, I believe, a Japanese device where you would put your head down on this device, and there's water that's dropping from the top onto your neck.

So you think at this point, that doesn't sound too bad, right?

The problem was is that the drops,

There's a lot of viscosity in there.

So they'll have kind of fluctuations, so the drops wouldn't always come at the same time.

And it kept repeatedly happening over time and time again.

And the prisoners actually, people that used to be in prison, they were actually the ones giving the tour.

So they were telling us, yeah, if you're on the device after a couple of hours or so, these drops will feel like hammers on your neck.

And apparently, a big component of that

not the body not being able to adapt to it because, you know, the drops don't come at a perfect five second interval.

It happens kind of at semi-fast randomized intervals.

So that I think there's a huge part in not just looking at stress over time, but how you can adapt to that stress.

And in order to adapt to stress, adaptation to me always involves a component of prediction.

If you can't predict the source of the stress when it happens,

It makes things a lot worse.

This has been shown extensively in humans and also in lower organisms.

And I believe very strongly that there's something fundamental to any biological system, to fundamental drive.

If you're prescribed to the point of view that minimizing uncertainty in your environment is a fundamental drive of life, then

With that, you prescribe that minimizing stress and the source of stress over time and being able to predict it is also fundamental.

And lack thereof makes a very dangerous system.


SPEAKER_05:
Blue?

Thanks.


SPEAKER_01:
So all that's super interesting.

Just, OK, so let me, I'm going to start at the front and work backwards.

So in terms of uncertainty and uncertainty

how that's causes stress.

I'm really kind of, I don't know, reluctant to use the word stress in a biological system.

Like I think about stressing a biological system is like pushing it out of equilibrium.

But, but maybe that's just a stimulus, right?

Like I want you to rebalance and go to like a new equilibrium, like, or like turn on heat shock protein, or, you know, there's a variety of different things, like many ways you can view stress as a stimulus to

do something new or to perturb the system in a new way.

But in terms of uncertainty, I think that there's a lot of truth in how uncomfortable people are with uncertainty at a cognitive level.

And you can even see it in the stock market before the election is in, before the election results, the stock market goes crazy because nobody knows.

I mean, it's not that one candidate is preferable over the other, but it's just the unknowing is very,

like people freak out so so and that speaks I think to metacognition also and then so I wanted to back up a little bit if I can to your discussion of information flow and how that might be difficult to quantify and Daniel I don't know can you flip to the section for me please on the generalized flow section I think we started to get into that a little bit last week and

We did discuss it in the doc zero, but I have like, I know that this is very,

mathematically technical and so I just have a little bit of questions about this and maybe you can help explain it in a way that's perhaps less technical but specifically information flow and Chris Fields is coming to discuss the FEP for generic quantum systems next week and so I can similarly interrogate him about some of this stuff and I'm looking forward to it but yeah

you know, we have a discussion, there's a discussion in the paper about the probability flow and information, like a probability current, I think is actually what is used and getting into information currents.

Like if you look up what is an information current, I think there's like the idea of the von Neumann information current and

um that like is explicitly related to quantum systems so is there any similar like do we have a way to measure information current because even when mike came to the live stream and talked about um um expanding cognition biological cognition computational boundary of a self there was sorry um but when you expand biological cognition like there's a you know you're

basically expanding your informational awareness.

And so is there anything like an information current or how can you best relate that within a biological system?

Is it like an expansion of your computational boundary or does it look like just more information goes in and comes out?


SPEAKER_04:
I think it depends on what level you're looking at.

I would say it's both.

So

The second part you mentioned, the information flow comes in and out.

That's something we just have more access to, biologically speaking, experimentally, right?

And you can absolutely, you know, you can look at, you know, you have all these sensors for receptors being activated for genetic transcription in response to that.

So that's something that you have the best chance of quantifying experimentally.

And in terms of computationally, it's something you can monitor and then also couple that with what Chris feels.

Good thing you mentioned that because then I can relate to him.

That's basically what he's also very interested in, right?

How does physical energy, of course, play all into this metabolism, right?

None of this comes for free.

That's something that biologists often kind of, not biologists actually, no, theoretical biologists,

often under the table because the idea is that energy is abundant in life, which is to an extent true.

There's plenty of sunlight.

There's plenty of things to fool around.

But at the same time, locally, just with entropy, there is a strong competition there.

So just because you are living in a reservoir that has plenty of food and sunlight,

That doesn't mean that you locally are going to survive because there's people locally competing with you.

The same is true, right?

I mean, this is always like when you talk to people that have problems with the idea of why does entropy, I don't want to say names, but that saying that entropy is always increased, if chaos in the universe increases, how do we see

much more structure evolving.

And then, of course, the answer to that is that, well, just like in a bath of water, if you have certain oil droplets that are going to come together, because overall, that gives more degrees of freedom for all the water molecules.

So the entire system, entropy did increase, but you managed to find a solution that does increase that by locally creating more water.

That's the drive of, I think, of life overall.

The quote that probably

The talk that got me into biology was from a biophysicist in Heidelberg, was saying life is not about energy, it's about entropy.

But the two come together, right?

Yes, it's about how much information is available, but then by extent of that, once you are subscribed to that, once you have to form these localized structures, then energy becomes important again.

So, and that's where I think is needed right now when you have these highly spatially organized systems

energy suddenly does become something that is valuable again.

Yeah, I think I kind of lost my train of thought there.

The boundary of self, that's right.

The other information flow that was part of the information flow, we can measure that.

We have good ideas what's lacking is a quantum understanding of how metabolism is really hooked into the information flow.

whether or not it's built into the model or whether it's ad hoc, just down the line, you give it certain resources, and after a while, it just exploits them.

The boundary of the cell is interesting because, of course, in the cell, we think, well, we have a, you know, there's a membrane.

The boundary of the cell is fairly obvious.

It's not actually as easy to assess, I think.

And, of course, if you look at multicellular organisms, it becomes, you know, tissue scale, then that becomes a lot more difficult.

But even on a cellular level,

Um, if you have certain receptors, um, you know, you have certain activations of it, then a model, any gender, gender model, not just in the active inference scheme, but especially in active inference scheme, you also have a model of yourself, right?

And if at what point your own, your own, what you're, what you're secreting on the owner, your signals that you secrete also feed back into what you're sensing after all.

So it is kind of thought that that whole system is very much perturbed in cancer cells as well, where the, how much, like, is it, are you actually receiving things from the environment?

Are you basically just secreting and secreting and you don't really react to it anymore?

So the boundary of self, what Mike, if Mike already talked about this, he will have been much more eloquent than I can be about this, but the idea is the boundary of self is encoded

specifically with time and spatial constraints so like how much your body of yourself what your yourself might be more general about this your self model depends very much on your sensual on your sensory memory like how how far do you sense and how and spatially how much around you can you sense and how much back do you have encoded as memory how much are effects in the past um persisting so that you know so even though if you have a cell that's a certain membrane if

if that cell does not actually keep any track, if that cell is not somehow sensing beyond a certain boundary, and then it creates its own boundary by these highly peripheral cells that are basically surrounding themselves with each other, then suddenly the environment becomes mute.

So the boundary of the cell has essentially expanded, I would argue.

I think that's kind of the thought train here.

I just hope that was some way I would answer your question.

Awesome.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So just, I was curious, you mentioned that there was a talk that got you hooked into biology.

Was it Eric Smith and his discussion of biology and entropy?

Because that's also fabulous.


SPEAKER_04:
It was not.

I'm real, just saying that.

No, it was, damn, that's really embarrassing.

I don't remember right now the name of the person that got me into biology's.

as I speak English right now, it's all in German back then, and always kind of my brain then has problems switching between those two in content as well as language.

It'll come back to me probably within this talk.


SPEAKER_01:
Eric Smith does a wonderful job, though, of, you know, discussing biology in terms of entropy.

And so if you are not familiar with this work, I would just highly recommend it.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_05:
That really...

reflects on our um discussion what parts of the self model are important to carry forward and then what are the affordances for direct and indirect self modification so that's one piece like you mentioned the auto crin signaling and that's not even a contentious component it just is being

modeled in a different way with active inference, rather than just a molecular event that's happening, that like cells secrete molecules that they also possess receptors

to measure, it's just putting that into a framework of reflexive self-modeling and stigmergy and niche modification here.

But just one other point that I thought was really maybe useful to highlight was this sensitivity.

And just like many of the terms in Active, we're kind of seeing that there is a narrow or a quantitative sense, and then there's a broader sense.

Because in any dynamical systems model, you might hear about

sensitivity of the parameter which is how much changing that parameter changes the outcome of the system and so that's a quantitative sense and then also it was brought up that it's important to model these like second order derivatives like how fast are things changing relative to expectations or how fast are they changing how they're changing and

that is what the generalized flow is, is all those higher derivatives.

So we can use that quantitative sense of sensitivity to look at how parameter changes in the generalized coordinates of motion matter.

But also we can perhaps with cognitive modeling, take this discussion of sensitivity in the way that people are usually meaning it, like sensitivity of what is seen on someone's emotional state.

and then model that using cognitive parameters like valence and affect even though that's quite a disjoint use from the parameter sensitivity discussion on the generalized coordinates so it's was an awesome discussion with like what is stress

And how does that relate to the parametric sort of neutral perspective on what stress or sensitivity might mean?

Just the model descriptive versus some of these functional or phenomenological even ways that these terms come into play.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So that's super interesting, thinking about sensitivity and stress just in terms of cognition, right?

So I know people that have sensory processing disorders get super aggravated by something like a bright light or a windy day, and just how sensitivity does play into that.

maybe the flow of, of information, like, because, you know, I'm suddenly sensitive to this and I'm also sensitized to every other thing in my environment.

Like someone's screaming over here and it's windy and it's hot and it's bright.

And then like, I become just so overstimulated, right?

Like people have these, these processing things and it's sensory things.

is that something that like has momentum, right?

Like, so you have enhanced sensitivity and does that just like, then all of a sudden you're just, you're so sensitive.

Like we hear people say stuff like that, like stop being so sensitive.

Just in terms of, of cognitive processing.

I thought that that was just super interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
I think that's an excellent point.

I mean, that's, that's something that, that,

that shows exactly how important it is for humans, and again, I argue low levels as well in the evolution, to be able to model our sensitivity, to change our sensitivity, right?

We would never be able to have conversations in low environments if we couldn't change consciously our, and sometimes subconsciously as well, our sensitivity parameters.

And I think

that's something also that then also feeds into metacognition, right?

You'll learn like, oh, well, was I not paying attention enough?

Is that something you need to pay more attention to?

You're trying to tune this in.

And I think that's the, in the sense of on the cellular level, I think where that feeds in is by learning over time, right?

By how much are being, how many receptors are being activated?

How does that feed in downstream?

then there is this component where essentially the cell can up its sensitivity by expressing more receptors.

If it's not understanding its inputs, it can increase those proteins that are responsible for sensing these things.

And there's also different, if you talk about ion channels specifically, and in the lab we work with that, there are different versions of ion channels that have different rate constants.

The same is true for active proteins as well, such as pumps.

So that becomes a lot more explicitly modulating sensitivity over time in a way to better react and cope with, adapt to its environment.

Again, adaptation, keep in mind, involves prediction in most cases.

If not explicitly, then implicitly.

Awesome.

And by the way, the guy is Michael Hausmann in Heidelberg before I turn around my grave.

That was the person that got me to physics, to biology, biophysics.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Just to kind of connect that change in sensitivity to some of those mechanisms.

So if it's the sensitivity to a given hormone or a given circulating molecule, then that sometimes gets accomplished biologically by changes in like the membrane receptor density or changes in downstream signaling pathways.

So even if the amount of receptor in the membrane stays constant, it's like you can

release more of the neurotransmitter in the synapse, or you could have more or less receptors, or you could have more or less of all these regulators and phosphorylating proteins, et cetera, in the downstream signaling pathways, because there's a lot of complexity in that space, but there's a lot of knobs, including rates of change and rates of rates of change and lag effects with transcription factors and all this other, basically anything is possible.

And then at the organism level, just to give one, and then anyone else maybe at some other level, it's kind of like a nestmate ant being sensitive to interactions.

And then a nurse who's a younger ant is initially more susceptible or more sensitive due to multiple reasons, like at the antenna, at the brain, in just spatially where the nurse is.

And then there's this...

development towards being a forager, being sensitive to forager cues, finding oneself in spaces where there are forager cues that are useful.

So there's a lot of ways that these changes in the type of sensitivity, again, are already things that we talk about in developmental biology.

And so it's so cool to see how that is connected to the molecular mechanism, the affective angle, and then

with the underpinning of the generalized flow.

Yeah, Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
So you guys can push back on this hard if you want, but it's interesting.

One of the terms that I coined was that stress programming, or at least programming

with stress assumed was basically learning, either formally or informally.

That's what it is, because there's a certain amount of stress involved, be it positive or negative.

But kind of through that viewfinder, I think it's interesting that back to the back and forth thing, stress programming can be safer

or it can be riskier, as long as it's not sort of killing the learner.

If it's safer in the sense of as intervention, I think this paper,

show that you can intervene but riskier is as distribution like sending something out into the unknown it can be safer as teaching or taught it can also be riskier as unteaching or untaught sort of just sort of throwing somebody into a situation and see whether they can paddle or not

The last thing is it can also be seen as both modeling in the safer sense because we've reduced some of the variation, or it can also be riskier as in terms of coordinating, meaning the person has to kind of figure it out as they're flying the plane.

So I wonder what you guys think.

Do you think that, can we, is there some agreement that learning in general is

be it formalized or informalized, has an aspect of stress programming that kind of is assumed or am I way out?


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome question.

Blue or Franz, what do you think?


SPEAKER_04:
I don't think you're off.

There's definitely, of course, explicit incorporations of stress into learning, but your question, I think, is like,

is kind of always implicitly there, even if not explicitly.

So one interesting kind of fact, this was Blue mentioned earlier, that stress can be interpreted as like human perceived stress, hormones, but it can also just be like perturbation from equilibrium, from homeostasis.

And they actually do kind of, this has been breached, this has been combined in homeostatic reinforcement learning where they kind of implicitly, explicitly make

the reward and reward-based reinforcement learning about the homeostatic off point.

And then stress becomes suddenly a lot more explicit in that sense of perturbation from your homeostatic set point.

In the active inference scheme, stress is basically just your, you could just define it basically as your overall stress.

difference and again like with those fans i was talking about like how much is your is your is your private belief certainty changing are you minimizing uncertainty um over time or not um it is it is hard i think it's hard it's hard both to completely say stress is not involved and without saying that well you're just calling everything stress but it kind of it's really

It depends on how you define stress.

But if you think if you go with something as in stress as you're not right now in an energy-minimized state, you're not in an active improvement scheme, or you're not in your homosex set point in a more basic scheme, then stress is, I would argue, ubiquitous in learning, yes.

Because without that, if you don't have the difference to that, if you don't actually

If you don't have any drive to learn because you think everything's perfect, then it's hard to have learning.

So specifically, if learning is about, with the environment and context, what are you getting from your environment?

Are you trying to adapt to it?

Are you trying to learn in the sense of adapt to it and find a certain equilibrium with it?

Then I think stress becomes very much explicit and it's ubiquitous in learning.


SPEAKER_02:
I just want to add one thing and that's perfect because I always talk about the minimum of two and I think you're absolutely right, Franz.

I think you have to then look at stress as being either voluntary or involuntary.

I think that's the minimum of two that you have to look at because I think if you have voluntary stress,

It's measurably different than the involuntary type.

So, yeah, you're right.

I don't think we can just throw everything under one umbrella and make it a monolith.

I think we have to partition it right from the very get-go and say, all programming, be it a curriculum, whatever, whatever the curriculum is that those stem cells have,

that's some of it's going to be voluntary and some of it's going to be involuntary based on the situation that they're they're placed in so again i wasn't trying to pull it in that direction but i didn't bring up stress but i really like that it was brought up so okay yeah blue blue sorry so just um from uh


SPEAKER_01:
neuroscience perspective.

It's interesting, like the voluntary and involuntary stress thing is so different.

And I feel like maybe Daniel will remember, we discussed that at some point, like when you're exposed to a stress that like you do to yourself on purpose, like your strength training or something like that versus, you know, some, some externally imposed stress that you didn't volunteer for.

I think that that has a difference in affect.

I feel like we looked at a paper.

I can't remember off the top of my head though.

Um, but in terms of sensory processing, it's really interesting in neuroscience, we actually adapt, right?

So, so you can listen to like your, you, this is a great example.

Like you turn on the car radio and like you're listening, jamming out in the car for, I don't know, a while, 20 minutes, 30 minutes.

And then suddenly it doesn't seem as loud.

And so you turn it up and

And then you're jamming out, jamming out, jamming out.

And still, it doesn't seem as loud.

So you turn it up because the same level of stimulus produces a decreasing sensation.

And that's true in terms of, you know, visual, like when you first turn on the light, you're like, oh, it's so bright, but then you adapt.

And so in terms of sensory processing, we have a mechanism for adaptation.

And I wonder about actually cells, like not neurons, because this is like, I'm specifically talking about like a sensory processing way, but I wonder if cells do the same thing.

I mean, I guess like, you know, the receptor shuts or the receptor is triggered and then it can't get activated again for

some certain amount of time.

So even just receptor binding in and of itself is like an adaptation mechanism.

Like you can't constantly like dump the chemical into the receptor, open the channel or whatever.

Like that's not like biochemically possible.

But I wonder if, you know,

cells have some other adaptation mechanism outside of this, like, channel opening or closing, or just this, is there more than, like, the mechanodynamics of the channel that enables cellular adaptation?


SPEAKER_04:
I can think of a couple ones, but we're an expert on this, but there's, well, you can think of first, like, on the epigenetic level, if you basically just, um,

you know, recruit more histones, basically have a more tightly packed chromosome, you're going to have less genetic expression, no matter what kind of signaling input you get to the nucleus.

That's one way I can think of it.

Another one is mechanically.

So the right, most of the, I hope I'm not overgeneralizing, but I think most of the, you know, signaling against that receptors are sensing and then has to be transported to the nucleus somehow to cause transcription.

That is usually directed, right?

That has to correct of a cross-site skeleton.

So if you change the mechanical properties of the status skeleton itself, and again, yeah, I'm out of my league, but that's something I could very well imagine to ask someone that's smart on that topic.

Lastly, if you're talking in the intercellular context, then, you know,

Things like, you know, what we, in neuronal context, you have these, you know, the synapses.

In the non-neuronal context, you still have gap junctions and other complexes that basically allow transport between cells.

And those can also be modulated by the cell.

So then there you can also get habituation.

And I definitely know of examples where people have shown habituation

And even other, there's active research on showing that there's more just habituation, but also actually learning of a certain pattern as well.

I think that's true.


SPEAKER_01:
So I'm really interested in the cytoskeleton, because a lot of, I mean, the receptors are in the membrane, embedded in the membrane.

But we don't really, there's not a lot of work that looks at the cytoskeletal dynamics with respect to,

modulation of receptor dynamics right right so like that's a field that i think or i haven't seen very much work um in terms of how does this the underlying cytoskeleton contribute to the properties of the membrane and how a cell might be behaving and just in terms of like you know things having to get into the nucleus i don't know i'm iffy on that one um i i think and it's just because i did very early work like transfecting cells in a variety of different ways and

you know to get a gene into the into the cell to get the cell to express the gene you have to get it through the nucleus right how does it get into the nucleus like nobody can answer you so like if it doesn't have a nuclear target on it like how is it going so is it just like osmosing itself through or or like like just how is that exactly happening and so you call the vendor like oh i'm trying to use your product whether you're electroporating or you know using some kind of lipid mediated transduction

They don't know.

They have no idea, actually.

So it's just a super interesting prospect.

And I think that in terms of both that and the cytoskeleton, there's a lot of like dynamic remodeling that occurs during cell cycles.

Right.

Like during the phases, you know, like when a cell is dividing and growing and becoming two cells, there's and so like the nuclear membrane, that's the point.

But in terms of terminally differentiated cells, like a neuron or something that's not undergoing constant change and remodeling, it's curious to see how that can happen.

And I'm interested if anybody has any good, like, hardcore mechanistic papers that you want to point out to me.

Or if anybody listening in the live stream wants to drop them in the YouTube chat, I would really love to take a look at them.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

I really like Dean returning to this idea that there's the, there's a continuum or there's multiple archetype dimensions.

So not that it's all going to map onto just two, but we know it's at least locally going to be at minimum two, that there's the kind of one mode of interacting and

in an educational or training setting with a teaching and a taught, that could still be in an interactionist or an instructionist way versus the unteaching and the untaught.

So that's the difference between the athlete having their form like observed in a tight feedback versus when they're on a sojourn away from that sort of a training context.

And so there's like an environment or there's a setting

where there's some kind of stress as fundamental.

And then there's another type of environment where the different kind of stress is fundamental.

And then Franz was an awesome point.

moving from that basic homeostatic framing where stress is usually considered at the first derivative or the state.

So it's like for a thermo organism, thermal stress is gonna be when it's hot or cold.

And then that's gonna be like a bowl or it's a V or it's a bathtub or it's some other thermal stress curve.

It's about temperature.

moving into the generalized coordinates of motion with temperature and change of temperature and change of temperature, so all the higher derivatives of temperature, that expands the space a lot because maybe it's possible that a temperature that you slowly reach, like over 10 years,

is a different amount of stress than just jumping there instantly, time matters.

And so the rates of change captures that time dependence in an instance with a snapshot vector.

So that's sort of the formal use of how we can look beyond just the stress on temperature.

And then we introduced the whole cognitive stress because you said, well, for the active inference entity,

this is sort of like the first resonance and this is the one whose violation of integrity results in physical death but then stress moves to higher or different

analogous settings and that could be how fast am i learning and as pointed out by dave in the chat and by dean and others like it really matters whether somebody has agency or affordances to change it and so my closing point there with the voluntary involuntary is like grad school and stress because or any research or any educational environment but one that many people experience is like it can be stressful

It's also a very often privileged setting to be in.

And one is taken care of sometimes in a way that even neighbors won't be.

And so that is something that I saw first and second hand.

And just thinking about the stress, it's like, why is it stressful to just read a few papers some days

or something like that.

So just kind of interesting with what is voluntary and involuntary, how we commit ourselves to different kinds of stress of what kind.

It's like, well, I wanted it to be novel, but not that novel, and how we actually make those action selections in uncertain environments.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So just to add on to the voluntary versus involuntary, like grad school is an entirely voluntary endeavor, obviously, but like high school is not.

And like I dropped out of high school at 16.

Like as soon as I was old enough to drop out, I was like, I'm out.

Like I'm not doing this compulsory regimented program.

Like, sorry.

No regrets, right?

Like I started college, obviously have a PhD, like did well, but it's the difference versus involuntary versus voluntary.

Like when it's compulsory, it becomes torture.

I mean, just my two cents.


SPEAKER_04:
We had a discussion in our computational group recently about this whole idea of how do you quantify any kind of agency and Josh Bonger in that context who works with us brought up this idea.

Instead of talking about agency, which is hard to quantify, you can talk about empowerment.

In the computational sense, empowerment is about

how much do your actions, how much can your actions influence your sensations?

Again, this makes very clear in an active inference scheme, right, where you have this Markov blanket.

So to build an example, right, if you don't, if there's no actions you can take to change it, that's, you know, we can think about it as natively stressful, but we can also define that fairly clearly in a computational sense using something like empowerment.

So it's a

And that, again, I like that you brought this up because this drives home the point that a lot of these fundamental things we understand about stress in human context, anyone that's ever dealt with depression or people that suffer from depression knows that it's never really about the objective total amount of stress, but how it's being perceived by that person.

And I think this definition of empowerment helps a lot to understand that better.

How much control do you have over that?

There's other things that, of course, feed into that.

But it also makes then fairly clearly that a lot of the fundamental principles must hold true in lower organisms as well, because these definitions are, of course, as soon as you prescribe actions, of course, you can argue that there's no real actions in cell biology, then that's okay.

That's just then, don't want to talk about that level.

But if you do look at active states in a certain context, then you do get

then you can fairly simply in an active inference scheme, but other ones as well, define empowerment, measure empowerment over time by looking at how much, how actions actually change the sensory states of the cell.

And then definitions of stress from that point of view also become fairly explicit.


SPEAKER_02:
Can I ask you a question, Franz?

Yeah, can I ask you a question?

Because you mentioned when you were with us in the point one for a bit there, and I don't know if you re-mentioned it today.

You said you went to Mark, I think, and you said, I want to do something cool.

We're going to bring this back to the voluntary and involuntary piece.

And then I think you said, I'd never heard of active inference before.

I was pointed in that direction to Carl's lab.

So in the context of what's voluntary and involuntary, when you...

When you said, I want to do something cool, that sounds like you wanted to do something voluntarily.

Then you got this deep dive into activism.

You pushed that up against your biology background, which is something that you've obviously done because you like it, right?

And you wanted to finish off your... So going forward now, that voluntary piece that got you into the active inference, what do you see the active inference doing in terms of this empowerment question?

because Daniel's written it out here with a question mark behind it.

So how do you feel more agential?

Sorry, I always kill words because I'm not very... Anyway, I'm just curious what you think now in terms of what sort of empowerments you've sort of become in the sense that now that you've got this sense of what active inference can do and what some of these math formalisms provide and what the statistical...

Yeah.

What do you, what do you, what do you, like, what are you thinking going forward in terms of the reapplication of what you, what you pulled out of a, out of a, out of a different, different bucket and then it's set down in the bucket that you're most familiar with?


SPEAKER_04:
So you mean like what I put out on a personal level, like for my life decisions?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, like when you're going to be going forward and trying to use that active inference sense in terms of some of those decisions.

And what kind of environments do you think you see yourself projecting yourself into that you may not have projected yourself into prior to sort of engaging or encountering or exposing yourself to active inference?


SPEAKER_04:
That's a good question.

I think in the end, it's...

it's my wife and I, we both love this word, serendipity, which is the concept of happy accidents, which there's all kinds of connotations there, but in an active inference scheme, or any, you know, when you look at, you know, what is the information flow from you, what the idea is that you, if you have tumor, if you have, so it's going really active inference right now, I'm sorry, if you have super high precision, very strong prior beliefs, then whatever you, if you are confining yourself and you don't allow variances,

to change your mind, then you're almost always going to be upset because you never, you know, your precision is set too high, right?

There's a paper going to be coming out soon about this collaborator as well, looks about precision in this context as well.

So that's something that, you know, any active inference modeler will know that you have to, you know, keep that in mind when you set your precisions.

For me personally, it really is an idea of like, I think every, there's,

This is not a novel idea by myself by any stretch, but any human tells stories about their environment, but most about themselves.

And the storytelling is, in my sense, nothing else than doing a model.

an active inference scheme, making a generative model and setting that.

So I think to, for me to, I'm way too young to be giving life advice, but for me to, to, to achieve any kind of happiness, you have to really be careful of what story you tell about yourself and how strictly confined that on things.

And there is definitely advantages of, I think personally, I've always had better luck personally, I think by, by not,

not letting that not define that too, too strictly and really looking into what, what your environment throws at you.

And I think that helps.

And I know personally people that have a very hard time with that and that have very strong models of, you know, I'm going to, you know, get married at that age and then do this and that.

And then when things don't happen that way, I think at least it's love and happiness.

So, you know, in that context, active influence, what can I do for you?

I mean,

think it's it it makes things explicit that we all kind of hear about some level and and you know i don't know when you come from psychology biology just you know folk psychology things just people giving you advice parents saying i think oh now this is i don't want to say that you need any of those insights i think you can get this lots of ways but what i like about that inference scheme that it you know it's it's putting this dimension it makes makes the it makes the i think also biology the biggest advantage is you get a very explicit

a structure about information flow for very simple systems.

And because it's been primarily applied in neurosciences, you get, for us, intuitive results from that.

What happens if you have tri-precision?

What happens if your priorities don't change?

What happens if your energy isn't being minimized?

All these things.

I can fairly easily explain that in the context of human behavior because that's been applied and we all have a true understanding.

Um, but I think there's, um, for the biology point of view, there's, there's a lot of things we can learn from that.

If you look at the fun, the mathematical definitions, then of course you deal with the baggage that you get from the neuroscience, which I had to deal a lot with, uh, which is fair.

Um, but for your life, I think it just helps you once you see really how, how much study has been put into mis inference, you know, a mal like bad inferences.

And of course, people doing tests in an active inference scheme about, you know, psychology, like behavior, task states, then I think that that's one lesson I can definitely learn from that if I hadn't done already, is that be mindful of your bias, be mindful of the rate of change, like how, what are you really stressed out about right now?

What's the worst uncertainty coming from?

How much should that throw you off, right?

And this is, in a sense,

to kind of bring all this home a little bit, the biggest limitation of any algorithm, of any model is that you are defining the general model beforehand, not just an active inference scheme, but any.

There's papers that come out that criticize the idea of artificial generalized intelligence because you always have a predefined model and life on that sense.

But that definition does not do that.

Life always, you know, virtual systems, evolution kind of generates

bunch of diversity in its background and from that kind of they pick the best path and constantly evolve the generative model so you know that's kind of like limitation of active inference any other algorithm which can be overcome by you know chain different algorithms together by evolving system by having models make models there's some cool work on that too but that's something you need to take i think both computationally scientifically most personally could take a mind of is like

at what point do you change your own model and allow for flexibility?

That's what makes human right now still, that's one of the sort of acts that makes humans superior, I would say, to any kind of algorithm right now is because they all come predefined with a lot of the hard models.

Again, I'm saying this now and I also don't actually agree with that 100%.

I don't actually believe in fundamental differences between different intelligences, but that's something that

at least kind of intuitively makes sense to us.

Whether or not that's really true scientifically, I have my points to that.

But that's going off the rails.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Wow.

a few things like we often talk about concordances with different systems and it brings the cognitive apparatus that was developed for humans and starts to at least instrumentally if not from a realism perspective also project that and so it allows um as a trans discipline

people to talk about systems and map their analogies and models in a way that would help us find the resonances between cellular metabolism and economics, kind of taking a vague feeling like those might have some similarities into using the same notation, terms, forms,

etc so that's one very interesting piece about active inference and also the limitations in terms of at what order and how much uh time and attention is allocated to this structural aspect and how many different families of structures are provided on what and then to your um well communicated uncertainty about if and how biology is different from other kinds of

processes um that's an awesome question especially connecting back to your point about the reservoir of energy versus how locally there can be a different energy or entropy balance so it's almost like there might be

little pieces that can be mapped to digital signal processing with super high fidelity.

And that'll be taken as like a win for the realists.

And then there might be other parts where the instrumentalism

bridges because we're just making a model of this one smaller thing and this one larger thing.

And then in cases where this is fully computationally defined or fully described, then there's like a case for a real.


SPEAKER_01:
What does empowerment look like at maybe like a low organismal level or even like a cellular level?

How, um,

like is cellular behavior or lower organism behavior like voluntary versus compulsory and like is there a way to measure that like obviously like you can trap an animal in a box and frequently like you know will try to get out but if you don't trap it would it go into the box and hang out there like like does that happen maybe i don't know does anybody know of any examples of like what um empowerment looks like at like that's just it's a super interesting concept to me


SPEAKER_04:
um in the in the sex it's if you take that definition of um the combination of how much your actions um change your sensory puts your perceptions then and definitely definitely if once you have a definition it's of course built on what your different actions are and that that is fairly easy and because you don't have to go into this route what is voluntary or not you just basically

something internal state you know you basically you can even simpler you look at the the flow of states your marker blanket which you can show forms naturally which call is shown and then from that point of view once you have active states then you can measure that fairly fairly easily so as example i would argue if you know if cells actually interact with each other and really change other cell types we have here's a great example morphogenesis is traditionally

i'm not sure i think it's pretty fairly established it's really driven by life's organizing and it's always a subset of cells that will drive itself the ones i would argue then that those cells are probably very much in power because their actions uh cause differentiation of cells around them which then will very much and they're going to do certain expression of self as well so then that will they have action very much control that whereas themselves um the receiving end have a lower power because

their their own signaling probably isn't really because they're not not they often just don't have that that they don't make a lot of that signaling self that it's being organizing element so they are not going to have a lower let's think of that you're asking me what anyone yeah what as as our guest or anyone else is welcome to

Whether to go, I personally like to get to a place where there comes more than kind of quality of like making actual, like instead of just like making these abstract models of active inference, you can measure on the other hand, if you can really map those two together, right?

Like in the sense of, I mean, a lot of work went into this whole SPM software that they developed in London.

And at this point, right, you actually can get fMRI data and then you can do a dynamic causal model and you can really

can really postulate different causal models and then do a you know a patient belief updating you can do a hypothesis testing right in this in the sense that which hypothesis is more probably to have cost that you see um if we get to that level in a morphogenesis exam you can get the high fidelity images of the developing embryo that you would get with over time get signals that you can measure and feed back into your model and really

make really of what cause a model like what structure would have caused these sensations that you or the the data that you're receiving that would be a huge step forward and microscopy is really doing some uh having some great advance on that one example i can give is a friend of mine works on that dimitri crumb and we used to be in heidelberg and he was this light sheet microscopes there's a lot of other groups i mean he's a master student phd student

um about that from him but there's groups um you can go that do high fidelity um light sheet from two sides we can really nice like near confocal resolution um but with high high temporal resolution um of their organism doing and recapture the entire process of you know from castellation further on that's you could collect where you can really start to make

postulate our causal models in an active inference framework, and then they basically retest where is the actual home there.

And you can retest the idea that we already have, as I mentioned in morphogenesis, and retest out how much that fits into our notions of computational belief updating and actions.

I would love to see that in my lifetime.


SPEAKER_05:
Wow.


SPEAKER_01:
Super awesome.


SPEAKER_05:
So just to kind of restate that, SPM has been developed in the capacity of behavioral neuroimaging.

And so it allows a combination of observable features, such as what button somebody pressed or what image somebody was shown, and also observable features of the environment, like the measurements coming in off of the EEG or the fMRI or the MEG.

And it allows integrated modeling of those different kinds of parameters along with the dynamical causal modeling on the underlying dynamic system identification.

And there's a lot more in the SPM documentation on that.

And so ACK-DIMF here, along with some advances in, for example, the ability to look at the process of embryogenesis and track cellular location for a whole organism developing through time,

then that can be fit as if those are the fMRI measurements of this embryo SPM and then the underlying mechanics of development like a hypothesized morphogen gradient or a known or hypothesized mechanical relationship

that's part of the model.

That's like the underlying neural systems model in SPM.

And so it's kind of a great dream, but if it can be stated, if it's likely to exist, it sounds like you're taking some actions that will reduce your surprise about it.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_05:
Pretty cool.


SPEAKER_01:
So on the microscopy note, I'm like getting ready to, um,

receive and set up of IOAFM.

I'm really looking forward to the multi-parametric capability of I can look at structures top to bottom, also do fluorescence imaging.

So I'm really excited to have

affordances available on this plane.

Like the micromanages are great.

Like I've used an AFM, you know, it gives you the biomechanics of your sample, but not, not it's, I've never also been able to look at the sample.

You just, the, you know, mapping without being able to see it.

So I'm really excited to be able to see and measure mechanics, what's going on in a cell.

That's cytoskeleton parameters.

discussing earlier about how that, you know, manipulates or enables cells to do different things.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Let's look at any other things, or

Also, we can sort of give a closing round, whatever people feel like.


SPEAKER_01:
So one thing I'd like to find out is really about the aberrant signaling figure.

So I don't think we went into figure five very much last time in the dot one.

And maybe you could talk about the aberrant signaling rescue.

Kind of unpack that for us in your own words.

We're not seeing the slides anymore also, Daniel.

I don't know if you know that.


SPEAKER_05:
well i'm not yeah it's also kind of lagged on youtube so i'm recording it i'll re-upload like the high quality one it's kind of like weird it's a normal video chat but the youtube stream link is like disrupted but c'est la vie um yeah so actually if you don't see the i'm showing figure five even though you can't see it so just

Oh, yeah.

I see.

OK.

We can do that too.

Yes, that's good.

Great.

And thank you.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

So this is the top row here.

It's just the normal simulation, this reference.

You start off with these eight cells in the beginning, and then kind of have this vague, very specified, very low prior belief of what type they are.

And as they come out, that

density changes, so the hue tone here makes them, means that they're now more, the more redder they are, the more sure they are of being this head type, head type cell.

Or in this case, the green, the tape.

And B, where basically one, one cell, which you can see kind of heating off, the arrow points towards, that had a reduced sensitivity to measurement, to six, basically,

had a really hard time, basically.

First of all, it was much longer, kind of, unspecified than its neighbor cells were.

And in the end, it achieves, actually, it gets wrong cell type.

Not only is it at a wrong position, like there's no cell in the original one at that place.

And even where you expect it to be, either yellow, red, or somewhere in between, but not blue as it is down here.

In the sense that the initiation of a cancer is, I term this that way because I think that's basically the first step in cancer initiation is a misidentification of your environment and your place in it.

The original paper from Carl was called Knowing One's Place.

The cell definitely does not know its place.

So this is where it goes in.

And then here is where you have basically the same as above, but

the overall not just the absolute flow of actually signaling like two one cells is to get to that has been upregulated so that each cell basically now drives more concentrations of cells to that cell and basically kind of tries the ideas to compensate for that that quality sensitivity and what happens which i don't expect at all is that you have

If the cell contracting was more here, so you don't see that so much yet, you see the cell that kind of initially would have normally gone down, more cell, you push out in the end.

What happened, the words is that those were put into more of signaling concentration and allowed

arrangement allowed this cell to retake a place that is conforming to what you see in the target morphology.

And what I'd also like to always reiterate when I talk about this figure and both figures, really, is you do not, in the simulation, at any point in time, change target morphology.

All the actual encoding was exactly the same.

So what they were expecting and where they were expecting was exactly the same.

And that, I think, is where I see the fundamental promise of this work, that you don't always want to change the code, right?

We know that we have higher , we haven't ever had.

And yet, I don't think anyone really thinks that this is the way

forward in all cases and in all you know if if you can do it and you have really complete understanding that's great and you have no other options in an extreme case that is absolutely warranted i'm not trying to dissuade anyone anyone from advances in gene therapy but i think it's you know there's the genome is so complex so many things that can go wrong we don't know all of the details that if you did not have to start messing up people holding i think that would be preferred and i think this is all and also

from a, even just from a capability setting, you know, that you don't always have the capability, not with high fidelity that we think often do.

So our lab as well, I kind of take at the core of my experimental approach to things is that I want to understand how, how cells interact with their environment and always start and work on that manipulation, basically control information and sensing and drive them towards different states.

Again, with that Arlington,

landscape that we talked last time where you want to direct the flow.

I do actually this time have.

I took my shirt off.

I didn't see that right now.

I do have the white landscape there on my shirt.

This time I did that.

So that's kind of like what is that you're trying to redirect the flow of self-made decision-making, not try to manipulate the actual peasants themselves.


SPEAKER_00:
So what was the signal response?

Oh, sorry.

There.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
The perturbed signal response.

Yeah.

What was, how did you perturb the, like, did you cut it off?

Did it get less information or did it like, was it supposed to like infer an incorrect place?

Like how exactly in that one cell, did you manipulate the parameters of that one cell so that it went to a different place?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, basically, um,

Let me see.

I think I .. It was basically done in the .. It was a decrease in sensitivity?


SPEAKER_00:
Is that what it was?


SPEAKER_04:
I'm trying to make this specific ..

So it's basically in the gradient that we also formally induced.

So that's basically how much actions are being updated based on sensory inputs.

And we can put a gradient on there and a sign on there of how much they act on that.

That is the part that I manipulate here.

But that basically means is that by

altering the response capability of the cell how much how much sensory update up how many how much to what extent sessions are being updated based on external information flow and with what kind of uh you know how on top of that that by that you're basically upping or reducing the sensitivity to the environment you basically you're misarranged you're misregulating the

Again, it's empowerment, essentially, but that's downstream.

But you may have the potential of the cell to act with environments and do anything about it.

And also, even upstream, how much sensing of that.

So in this case specifically, it just wasn't really sensing as much of its environment as it was supposed to be sensing.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

It almost...

is equivalent to the argument or the dissolution of sort of nature and nurture partitioning by just taking a complexity stance, kind of like Evelyn Fox Keller in her book, The Mirage of a Space Between Nature and Nurture.

You were talking about a target morphology, but then about how changes in the signal.

We're about to do number 40 on the quantum FEP paper and Blue and our friend Jason and I have been preparing a lot for it.

And I think separating quantum from

the electrons and their behavior and just asking, well, what is quantum strategy or what does this quantum statistics or quantum information projected onto biology mean?

Not how it's been approached from the mechanistic question, which is quantum biology.

Well, that's about the synapses and their quantum mechanical properties or about photon tunneling or proton tunneling and like quantum effects.

But what about just using the statistics instrumentally of quantum and talking about situations with complex patterns of uncertainty and observation bias and memory and modeling and all of that?

And this was like a dot too that kind of like,

opened up a whole new area for us in our discussions with morphology and like the spatial and the embedded and then cracked a window into just another area we'll go into.

And you brought so many awesome insights.

So we really appreciate it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, that talk should be a real pleasure.

I highly recommend tuning in.

Chris Fields was great to listen to, and it's some exciting work.

And if you also, if you have seen, I'm sure you have seen the particular paper from Carl Frist, and he has a section there on quantum mechanics.

And it's a very cool section because he actually derives, I think, the Schrodinger equation from essentially from a true inference point of view, from just a definition of what your log probability density is.

Very cool.

I don't know how much that will feed into other and future work, but it's always very exciting to me when you see different fields at least formally being able to be related to each other.

That usually means there's something going on, something fundamental.


SPEAKER_05:
We'll have more to say in .40.

And join us, Franz.

Yeah, and you're welcome.

Anytime to participate.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it'll be Chris and Carl and I think Mike.

I think everybody's coming.

So if you want to come.


SPEAKER_05:
Sure.


SPEAKER_01:
Join the panel.

You're more than welcome.


SPEAKER_05:
All the events and pop in if it works.

So thanks again, everybody.

Hope that the viewers can bear with the lag if it was there, but c'est la vie.

So peace out, everyone.

Thanks a lot for this great discussion.

Thanks for having me.

Bye.

Bye-bye.