## NHfGuwoCXI8

All right. Hello, everyone. Welcome to Acton Flab guest stream number 16.1 with Mark Solms.
It's January 22, 2022. It's going to be an awesome discussion. We really appreciate everyone
taking the time out to participate in the live stream and in the discussion. We're going to
have some intermittent presentation intervals by Professor Solms and also a period for discussion
alternating with that. So we'll each just introduce ourselves and then pass it directly to the
presentation section. So I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in California and I'll pass to Dave.
I'm Dave. I'm a software developer and student of psychology. I live 200 kilometers north
of Manila. Stephen.
Hello. I'm Stephen. I'm based in Toronto, Canada, and I'm doing a practice-based PhD around social
topographies and how people engage in community development. And I'll pass it over to Mark now.
Welcome.
Thanks very much. So what I propose to do is to, in a moment, I'll share my screen and you'll
see my slides. I'm going to start with the summary slide of all the points that I propose to cover.
And then I'll take them one by one, each of those points. And at the end of each of them, I'll stop
and see if anyone wants to comment or ask a question. And then we slowly plow through it like that. We've
got two hours, so it should be okay. But if worst comes to worst and we don't get to the end of the
list of topics, we will arrange a follow-up meeting to conclude them. So I'm very glad to be here.
Thanks for inviting me. And I'm really looking forward to this discussion. Here come my slides.
On the screen is the title of my book. And here is the promised summary of what I'm going to cover.
As I said, I'll cover each of these points in turn. And then we'll have questions and comments
in between. And if we don't get to the end, that's fine. Let's rather give each one of the topics the
time that it needs. So I start with the assertion that affect is the foundational form of consciousness
and that affect is intrinsically conscious. I then move to make the point that that claim,
that affect is intrinsically conscious, in other words, that you can't have a feeling that you don't
feel, that this is not based on semantic arguments, but rather on empirical evidence. And I will
summarize the evidence. I'll then make the point that affect is not synonymous with interceptive
inference, which is widely believed these days. And I'll tell you why that matters when I get there.
And then I'll move on to making the point that all of this casts new light on the hard problem,
particularly if affect is not just an interceptive form of perception, because there are lots of
problems about perception that have got us into this hard problem in the first place.
I'll argue that affect, rather than being interceptive inference, that it's an extended form of homeostasis.
And I'll tell you what that, what I mean by that when we get there. And I'll make the point that complex
organisms like ourselves require multiple homeostats, and that these are to be treated as categorical
variables, which matters. And that these variables must be prioritized. One can't meet all one's needs
simultaneously. I'll then, this is a large point. This one is a large point, the empirical evidence about
affect. And this one is another large point. The mechanism of perceptual and cognitive consciousness
is precision modulation of allostatic prediction errors. That's a big claim. And so we must spend some
time on it. I'll then talk about the nature of the predictive hierarchy. I seem to see it a little
differently from most people. So I want to set out my stall on that score and explain why I think the
predictive hierarchy is arranged concentrically. And that this, with the, as one moves toward the
periphery of the hierarchy, there's progressively increasing tolerance of uncertainty. And then lastly,
I'll say a word or two about why I think that consciousness can be artificially engineered.
So even if we don't get to the end of all of these topics, one way or another, even if we're the second
meeting, those are the topics we will cover. And we'll see how far we get tonight. And at least,
you know what the over, what the overall, when I say tonight, I'm in Berlin, I know it's morning for
some of you. But at least you get the overall picture from that slide. So let's start with,
affect is the foundational form of consciousness, and it's intrinsically conscious.
The discoverer of the unconscious, I quote him, because Freud more than anybody wanted us to
realize just how much of mental life is unconscious. Even Freud said that it is surely of the essence of
an emotion that we should be aware of it. That is, that it should become known to consciousness.
Thus, the possibility of the attribute of unconsciousness would be completely excluded
as far as emotions, feelings, and affects are concerned. It's quite a startling statement
from, as I said, the discoverer of the unconscious to say that the possibility of the attribute of
unconsciousness would be completely excluded as far as emotions, feelings, and affects are concerned.
Now, I know this is a controversial issue, and that there are all sorts of ways in which people want
to argue that there are such things as unconscious emotions and whatnot. And this has partly to do with
the fact that different people mean different things by these words, emotions, affects, and so on.
And it has, there are also all kinds of methodological operationalizations of these things.
I won't go into all of that. I'm happy to, if any of you want to discuss it. But I've,
I've emphasized the word feelings to make clear that if anyone wants to argue that they think that the
word emotion can apply to unconscious processes or affects can apply to unconscious processes,
that's fine by me. But the word feelings, I don't see how you can ever argue that feelings can be
unconscious. It just doesn't make any sense that a feeling could exist without being felt. If it were
not felt, it would not be a feeling. And so I'm going to focus everything that I'm going to say on this
process, this, this thing, this, this mental state called feelings. And I'm arguing that feelings are the
foundational form of consciousness, and that these, this form of consciousness is intrinsically conscious.
David Vogelpohl, MD, So that's a sort of a dogmatic statement. I'm not sure if anyone wants to discuss
that. Perhaps you want to hold your horses. But that's the end of my first point. So anyone who wants
to interrupt here, go ahead. Otherwise, I'll move on.
David Vogelpohl, MD, Thanks for the digestible claim based format. My question would be,
what else has been posited in your view, as a foundational form of consciousness? So what are
the counterfactuals for that first claim? What other horses are in the race?
Dr. Peter Van Doren, MD, The reason I focus on that fit.
Well, I shouldn't say the reason I focus on that because that's not quite what you're asking,
you're asking, what are the other horses in the race? So let me say that the whole
search for a neural correlative consciousness, which is in a way where the trouble began
with Francis Crick, it was focused on visual perception.
And there are good reasons to focus on visual perception, mainly because if you take a look at
your, you'll excuse the pun, take a look at your consciousness right now, it's probably dominated
by visual perception. Visual qualia predominates in our consciousness. And a very large part of our
cortex is given over to visual processing. And everybody's always believed that cortex is where
it's at when it comes to consciousness. And we also understand a very great deal about visual
cortical mechanisms and visual mechanisms altogether. So that was a perfectly reasonable place to start.
So that's the other main horse that's in the race. But vision was thought to be a good model example,
not because it is the totality of consciousness, but because it was assumed that if we can crack the
problem of how visual consciousness arises, then we can generalize our conclusions to other forms.
And I'm going to argue that there's something profoundly different about visual consciousness
and affective consciousness. And moreover, that there's something profoundly different about cortical
consciousness. And the brainstem mechanisms, which is where affective consciousness arises, and I know that
I'm saying that boldly now, and I'm about to argue that point in the second of the bullet points on the screen.
Affective consciousness is not a cortical form of consciousness, it's a brainstem form. And that the
cortical form of consciousness is contingent upon the brainstem form. And this is one of the main reasons,
apart from evolutionary reasons, which sort of interdigitate with and flow from that, from that
anatomical localization. Why I think that affect is the foundational form. So it's really vision that I'm
using as my kind of foil to answer the question simply. Stephen.
Stephen Sackler
Yeah, one question with feelings is, would you say that feelings are integrated with
proprioception, in the sense that they are felt sense of where the body is as well, so it brings it into
kind of an action orientated domain? Or is it enough to have sort of a sense of how things are going,
sort of an overview of just an emotional state? And then whether those two connect in some way?
Stephen Sackler
As I'm going to argue, when I get to my third point, I don't think that affect is synonymous
with interoceptive inference altogether, interoceptive perception altogether. And I don't know,
some people would call, would, would, would class proprioception with interoception. Some people would
not, some people would say it's a sort of a, it's a sort of a hybrid between interoceptive and
extraoceptive perception. But to the extent that by the word proprioception, you're referring to a form of
perception. I would disagree with that, because I don't think that affect is a form of perception.
I think that proprioception follows, if by proprioception you mean what, what urologists normally
mean by that word, it's, it's a, it's, it's part of the broader category of somatic sensation.
And therefore, it does not qualify, I think as affective. Because as I say, I'm going to argue
that affect is not a form of perception. But there, there, there, I draw a distinction,
as do, you know, I think it's, it's perfectly fine to draw a distinction between
extraoceptive bodily sensations and interoceptive bodily sensations. But I think that the interoceptive
type, um, is, is, is, is nothing other than perception, um, and not intrinsically different. So even if
you think of proprioception as straddling those two domains, I still think that it's a modality of perception,
perception, and suffers from all the same problems as vision for that reason.
I see we have a comment in the chat line, I'm not sure how, how we're going to deal with that if one of
you's, um, I'll read this, it was a question in the live chat from Ingrid, they wrote, what differentiates
affect from feeling from your perspective? Is affect conscious or pre-conscious? Thank you.
You know, this is a, a, a, a perennial problem. Uh, we don't all mean the same thing by these terms.
So that's why, uh, I've focused on the word feeling because there can be little doubt what feeling
denotes. It denotes something you feel. In other words, something that you are, uh, necessarily aware
of, if you were not aware of it, you, it wouldn't be called a feeling because you wouldn't feel it.
Um, affects and emotions denote many different things to different people. So, uh, when you ask me,
is affect pre-conscious or conscious and so on, it depends what you mean by affect, um, to my mind,
and I can only say, um, you know, just make clear how I use these words. Uh, I use the word feeling, uh, to
denote the subjective experience of affect. Uh, affect is a kind of abstract term for a function, uh, that we
feel, um, but that doesn't mean that you all have to use the word in the same way. And it's precisely in
order to not get lost in this kind of semantic tangle, uh, that I'm focusing on the word feeling. Uh,
and, uh, I'll make clear, uh, uh, in, in the very point that I'm moving to next, uh, what I mean by
feeling in terms of it's, um, it's, it's physiological and anatomical and other objective, uh, um, uh,
instantiations. Excellent. Steven, you, you have your hand up probably just did, or is that your
previous hand? So just go to the second point. Okay. Very good. So the second point is, as you saw,
we've just been talking about the meaning of the words. Um, and I've, uh, I've, um, staked my claim,
uh, for the word feeling, uh, to make clear that that's what I mean when I say that affect is
intrinsically conscious, I mean that it is necessarily felt. Um, I I'm also saying it's the foundational
form of consciousness that doesn't flow from the word, uh, except perhaps from the word in the sense
that the way that Nagel and Chalmers, uh, define consciousness and many people seem to have got sort of
uh, agreed with this way of defining it, that there is something it is like to be conscious that,
that this something it is likeness, uh, uh, it seems to be more or less the same thing as feeling.
It seems to mean the same thing, but feeling in a rather broader sense of the word than affective
feeling. Uh, so I want to be clear now, uh, why other than those, other than those linguistic or
semantic points, uh, why I'm making this claim, uh, about feeling it's not by any means based in the
semantics that you have to feel appealing. I, I want to be clear, uh, why I think, uh, that this is
the foundational form of consciousness. We've, we've all known since 1948, uh, when there was this big
surprise that Magoon and Maritzi found, uh, that all consciousness is contingent upon, um, what we
subsequently called reticular activating arousal. In other words, upon the, something that's contributed by
these core brainstem structures, uh, which after Magoon and Maritzi's work came to be known as the
reticular activating system. I want to be clear. I'm, uh, not only, uh, talking about the reticular
activating system, but also about the peri-acaductal gray, which is not, uh, technically
part of the reticular activating system, but it is part of, uh, the brain structures, uh, which seem to be
fundamental, uh, to the generating of consciousness. Um, the, what Magoon and Maritzi showed among
other things was that if you make a small lesion above the reticular activating system, thereby
severing it, uh, disconnecting it from the forebrain and from the cortex, uh, in, in particular, uh, then
consciousness, uh, is obliterated entirely. Cortical consciousness is 100% dependent upon brainstem
arousal. Um, that was a shock, uh, and a shock that I don't think, uh, we have fully come to terms with,
uh, even all these years later. Uh, it should have led us to realize that we've been looking in the wrong
place, uh, for, uh, the neural correlative consciousness. If we're looking to cortex, because
it's plain, even from just that study performed in 1948, uh, that cortical consciousness, uh, is derived
from elsewhere. Cortical conscious consciousness cannot, uh, occur, uh, in the absence of reticular
activating arousal. But, uh, the way that Magoon and Maritzi, uh, uh, fudged it was to say,
and everyone more or less, uh, in their wake, uh, has said the same, uh, that it turns out there are
two kinds of consciousness. Uh, there's the brainstem kind, uh, which we call wakefulness or the level of
consciousness. Um, and then there's the cortical kind, uh, which we call awareness or the phenomenal,
um, uh, contents of consciousness. So this distinction between a quantitative level contributed by the
brainstem and qualitative contents contributed by the cortex, uh, is the way in which we save the
cortical theory of consciousness, um, following Magoon and Maritzi's, uh, seminal observations. In case you're
wondering what this refers to, uh, it refers to a more recent study by Fisher and colleagues,
which showed that the smallest lesion necessary to produce coma in human beings is a two cubic
millimeter, uh, lesion. In other words, a lesion, the size of a match head, uh, in the parabrachial
complex. So there's no doubt on the basis of Magoon and Maritzi studies all those years ago,
and on the basis of these, uh, much more recent observations, uh, that the, that consciousness cannot
exist without whatever it is that this part of the brain contributes this, this primitive brainstem core.
Um, but this, uh, idea that it's merely a, a, a level or a, or a quantitative dimension of consciousness
is what, uh, uh, I, I, I think, uh, is unsustainable. Uh, and I'm going to very quickly, because I'm sure
many of you have heard me talking about this before. I'm going to very quickly whiz through the evidence
for why this, this, uh, uh, notion that the brainstem contributes only a quantitative level, a sort of a
wakeful prerequisite, uh, for consciousness, uh, rather than a quality and the content. Um, but I
want to, before I do that, to just give you a clear picture of what is meant by this distinction. Um, the,
the, the, the, the distinction, uh, is, is, is analogous to, uh, the difference between a television set
and its power supply, uh, the idea that the cortex is responsible for the contents and qualities of
consciousness for phenomenal consciousness, the real stuff, the real failure of consciousness, where
this, this, the thing that all the arguments are about, um, it's that this is like the television set,
and it has to be plugged in. Uh, of course you can't, a television set can't do its televisual thing
unless it's powered up. Uh, but, uh, to claim therefore that the real source of television
and, and all that that word represents, uh, is the power supply, the electrical source, uh, in the wall,
is, is ludicrous. Uh, and, and that's pretty much how we've all seen until very recently, how we've all
seen what the brainstem contributes to consciousness. So nobody's doubting that it's necessary, that it's
prerequisite, uh, that, that, uh, without it, you can't have cortical consciousness, but it's been,
it's been, uh, uh, uh, reduced to a mere power supply, something which is not actually consciousness
itself in the sense that, that, that we're all, um, arguing about. So why do I think that that's not
correct? Well, uh, I'll start with the most dramatic evidence, which is patients who have no
cortex. Um, if the theory that the cortex is necessary for the contents and qualities of
consciousness, uh, then, uh, patients without cortex should be in a coma or at the very least,
if we claim that the brainstem produces nothing other than the sort of background level, then
patients with no cortex should have some kind of blank wakefulness.
Dr. Michael B. I suppose the closest, uh, natural kind of thing, uh, that tallies with blank wakefulness
is the vegetative state, uh, which is also called non-responsive wakefulness. In other words,
there's wakefulness without anybody being there, without it there being anything it is like, uh, for,
uh, the, uh, organism that has blank wakefulness, uh, due to the absence of cortex. But when you look,
um, at cases who, who have no cortex, and here's the scan of a girl, uh, with hydran and cephaly
born with no cortex, uh, and you, uh, examine the girl herself, you see that she's not only conscious,
in other words, not in a coma. She's conscious in the sense that she wakes up in the morning,
goes to sleep at night. Uh, but more interestingly, uh, she is responsive. Remember my definition or the
definition, uh, of the vegetative state, uh, the state of blank wakefulness, it is non-responsive
wakefulness. And clearly this girl is not non-responsive. Here she's responding, uh, to
the placement of her baby brother on her lap. And she responds emotionally in a way that any kid,
any little girl, you place a baby on her lap. She'll, she'll, she'll most will express pleasure.
Most, most kids like their little baby siblings being placed on their laps. Um, and it's not just her,
it's most of these kids. Uh, if they're, if they're raised in something other than a state of complete
deprivation, uh, like Romanian orphans, uh, who fall into what might look like a vegetative state,
although their cortex is entirely intact. Uh, if you actually raise these kids in, in, in reasonably
humane conditions, uh, they are conscious and responsive, uh, affectively responsive. That's
the main point that I'm making these children with absolutely no, no cortex, their consciousness has
a quality and the content, uh, that quality we call affect. Uh, it feels like something to be these kids.
Um, and the content, uh, is not monotonous affect. It's all kinds of affect that he has a summary slide, uh, uh,
extracting, uh, what beyond marker, who studied many, many, many of these kids, what he said about them,
they show all of these different emotions. Um, and most importantly of all, they show them in situation, the
appropriate ways. In other words, they respond with laughter. If they're tickled, uh, they respond, uh,
with, with arch backs and, and, and, and, and protests, uh, if something that they want, uh, is denied them,
they respond with a startle, uh, if there's a sudden, uh, unexpected noise and so on. So, uh, the evidence is
that these kids are not only conscious in the sense of being awake, uh, which is interesting in itself.
In fact, I can't imagine what a state of blank wakefulness might be like, but there you have it.
The, the, the, the, the, the, the concept, uh, derived from the green and Maritza's work is that
there is such a theoretical fiction as blank wakefulness, but these kids are not black. Uh, these kids
are emotionally responsive, uh, in, in exactly the way that you would expect if they had consciousness,
at least in the form of affect. So I'm arguing that, uh, with no cortex at all, these kids, uh, display
the content and qualitative, conscious contents and qualities, uh, in the form of affects. Now, of course,
the big methodological problem is that how do you know what it's like to be these kids? How do you
know if there's anything it's like to be these kids? They can't tell us anything about what it's
like to be them. So, uh, all you can do, um, in this situation, uh, is, is look at other lines of
evidence. Uh, if we can find multiple converging lines of evidence, converging on the conclusion that
the brainstem is where the affects are actually generated, uh, then, uh, we can do no better.
We can do no more. We can do nothing other than that in science. So I want to show you now, uh, what
happens if we look at cases who can speak, who've lost great swathes of cortex. Uh, we, we, we, they
can't have lost all of the cortex because otherwise they wouldn't be able to speak to us. So I'm
wanting to show you examples of cases who have lost great swathes of cortex and the cortex in question
is the cortex that has been, uh, that, that, that has been most closely identified, uh, with, with,
with sentient being with, with the subjective presence of a mind of a conscious mind. The first, uh, example
is of prefrontal cortex. I think that it's fair to say that the mainstream view is that where all of
this information processing comes together and is received by a sentient subject of the mind,
uh, the mainstream view is that would be in the prefrontal cortex. Now there are few patients there.
It's rare to have a patient with absolutely no prefrontal cortex, but here's one example. And I'm
just giving you examples in, in, in this presentation. I'm, I'm, I'm speaking about individual cases,
those individual hydranencephalic kids that you just saw, um, they are representative, uh, of the
class of patient that I'm talking about. Here's a patient of my own, um, who has no prefrontal cortex,
but happily, uh, has a sliver of language cortex. And so he's able to tell us what it's like to be him.
Uh, I asked him if he was conscious of his thoughts and he said, yes, of course I am. And I explained
to him that according to classical theory, he shouldn't be. So, uh, in order to confirm that
he's conscious of his thoughts, I asked him if, uh, if he would be willing to solve a problem that would
require him to consciously picture a situation in his mind. And he agreed to do that. So I said,
I want him to picture in his mind. I want him to imagine that he has two dogs and one chicken,
which he's, which he then says, okay, he'll do. And then I asked him, do you see them in your mind's eye?
And he says, yes, he does. I then asked him to count the legs. You know, this is not an everyday task.
It's something that's unexpected. So there he has these two dogs in his mind's eye and a chicken,
and he has to count the legs. And of course the answer is 10. Uh, I asked him, how many legs do you
see? And he says to my greatest disappointment, he says eight, I say eight. And he says, yes, the dogs
eat the chicken, uh, which, um, I think is, uh, enough evidence for me that this chap, uh, is there, you
know, that there's, there's, there's somebody at home, uh, who's looking at these dogs and the chicken, uh,
and imagining perhaps concretely, you know, that the dogs actually at the chicken, uh, or perhaps, um,
uh, he's, he's pulling a fast one. He's making a joke. Um, and in fact, the making of puerile jokes,
uh, is a very common feature, uh, of patients with the frontal lobe syndrome. And, uh, this is linked
traditionally with the commonplace observation that these patients are, uh, emotionally disinhibited.
Uh, and why I draw your attention to that is that, uh, if it were true that the cortex and the
prefrontal cortex in particular is where affects are generated, then how come, uh, if you have an
absence of prefrontal cortex, not only is affect preserved, but affect is excessive. Uh, there's,
there's more affect than normal. There's, there's too much affect. Uh, this is entirely
incompatible with the idea, uh, espoused by many, uh, respectable neuroscientists, uh, Joseph
Ledoux, for example, who's a great, uh, authority, uh, on affect. Um, Joseph Ledoux says that of course,
the amygdala and other subcortical machinery for anxiety doesn't actually generate any feeling at all,
that the feeling of anxiety is read out to use his term labeled, uh, by the prefrontal cortex. And
that's when it actually turns into a conscious experience. Uh, so I say again, if that were true,
then how come, uh, not only my patient, uh, this one making this joke to us, uh, but all frontal
load patients, um, the, the less frontal cortex they have, the more affect they have. Uh, so the less
capacity they have to read out and label their feelings, somehow it seems as if they're beset by more
feeling rather than less. Um, since I'm talking about feelings, uh, the other major candidate, uh, the
other major cortical candidate, uh, as being the seat of the sentient self, um, is the insula.
Bud Craig claims that the insula, or perhaps even just the anterior third of it, um, is where the
sentient subject comes into being. And he links this particularly with affect. He says that this is the
part of the cortex, uh, which registers, uh, the state of the own body. How do you feel now, uh, is
registered by, uh, this part of the cortex. Uh, and it's on this basis that he claims that this is where
the sentient subject comes into being. So again, just one case, who had absolutely no insula,
bilaterally obliterated, and he interviewed in much the same way as I interviewed my patient with no
frontal cortex. Um, and the Marsy asks him if he has a sense of self and he says, yes, he does.
And I won't go through all of this, all of which is, uh, Demacia trying to, um, ascertain whether or
not that this person is conscious and in particular, whether or not he possesses selfhood. Does he even
understand what selfhood is? Um, and eventually Demacia says, what if I were to tell you that I
know you better than you know yourself? Patience says, I would think you're wrong. Demacia says,
what if I were to tell you that you're aware that I'm aware. Patience says, I'd say you're right.
Demacia says, you're aware that I'm aware. Patience says, I am aware that you're aware that I'm aware.
Please note all these references to I, uh, there is a sentient subject speaking to us here, uh, with
absolutely no insular cortex. So I think the claim on the basis of, uh, the hydran and cephalic children,
uh, the claim that the cortex is the seat of consciousness and of feeling in particular
has to be dismissed, uh, but they can't speak. So we look at the other major candidates who can speak
patients with no prefrontal cortex. They are conscious. There's a sentient subject there,
and they feel like something they tell us and they show us, uh, and likewise patients with no insular
cortex. Um, of course the claim can be made. Well, in these cases, uh, their consciousness arises from
the remnants of the cortex, the remainder of the cortex, the quarter, the cortex that is not removed.
Bear in mind, the ones who have no cortex, you know, uh, who clearly show, uh, uh, behavioral displays of
affect, uh, every prediction that you might make, uh, from the hypothesis that it feels like something to be,
these kids is confirmed by their behavior, uh, by their responses to affective stimuli. Uh,
and, uh, in that case we say, well, we don't know cause they can't speak. Uh, so then we use these
other cases with no prefrontal cortex, no insular cortex who can speak. And then we say, well, it must
be the, the, the other bits of the cortex that are generating the consciousness. It seems like, uh,
losing wicked to me, but, uh, uh, let's look at other evidence than lesion evidence. Uh, remember,
we're looking for converging lines of evidence, converging on the conclusion that the feelings are
generated in the brainstem, in the brainstem. And so here we look at the case of a patient in,
where an entirely different method is used. That is deep brain stimulation of a part of the reticular
activating system. In this case, the substantia nigra, uh, the surgeon was aiming for the subthalamic
nucleus, but the, the, the, the electrode went into the substantia nigra. And when, uh, he stimulated it,
the patient fell into a profound depression, uh, within five seconds. Again, I'm not going to read
all of this to you. It's, it will take more time, uh, than is necessary. Uh, uh, if you read it
yourself, uh, you'll see this patient within five seconds felt fell into a profound depression.
She has no psychiatric history, never been depressed before, never had a diagnosis of any kind, let alone
a diagnosis of major depression. And here within five seconds, you can generate, produce, cause,
a suicidal depressive state, uh, which within 30 seconds, uh, of switching off, uh, the, uh, the,
the stimulant 90 seconds, I mean, uh, after the stimulation was stopped, the depression stops.
Uh, very interestingly, uh, she, uh, agreed or very bravely, she agreed to have the stimulator, uh,
switched on and off, uh, either in the subthalamic nucleus or in the substantia nigra of the reticular
activating system, where she was blind as to where the stimulation was being applied. And every time it
was applied in the reticular activating system, she fell into this severe depressive state again. So
this is, you know, this is what you would expect. This is the, uh, the prediction, uh, from the
hypothesis that ethics are actually generated in the brain stem, uh, uh, the, the, the, the prediction
would be if you stimulate these reticular activating nuclei, you will generate affects. And that's exactly
what you do. This is also why I mentioned the periaqueductal gray earlier, because, uh, if
you stimulate reticular activating nuclei, you generate intense affects, but the same applies to
periaqueductal gray. In fact, the greatest intensity and range of affects anywhere in the brain
can be elicited from deep brain stimulation of the periaqueductal gray. Uh, brain stimulation of the
cortical mantle produces very little, if any affect. Um, another method, positron emission tomography.
So another study of Damasio's patients in states of, uh, uh, anger, uh, sadness, happiness, and fear. Uh,
you see where the brain, uh, the, the, the, the major brain activity is in all of these affective states,
the major activities subcortical it's in the brainstem it's not cortical. So again, uh, this is
exactly what you would predict if the affect is actually being generated by the brain stem, not
being read out by the cortex, but generated by the brain stem. Uh, and then there's also the matter
of the neurotransmitters that psychopharmacologists tinker with, uh, the mainstream psychiatric medications,
uh, modulate, uh, neurotransmitters that are sourced in the reticular activating system. Uh, we don't
normally think of it that way, but it is simply the case, uh, that serotonin, which we increase, uh,
with antidepressants, uh, is sourced, uh, in the reticular activating system. Dopamine,
which we block with antipsychotics, um, is sourced in the reticular activating system. Noradrenaline,
which, uh, is blocked in many anti-anxiety drugs, uh, is sourced in the reticular activating system.
If the reticular activating system was just the power source, uh, that I, uh, referred to in my
analogy about the television set, then it should only interest anesthetists. You shouldn't be able to
change the channel, uh, alter the programming of the television set by pulling out the plug or, or by,
or by attenuating the power supply. Uh, you might expect the screen to sort of go blank or, or, or just
flicker, but not to have whole new programs with new contents and new qualities. Um, and so this is my
argument that the, the idea that feeling states affective feeling states of the kind that those
children display, uh, of the kind that psychiatrists are, or, or, or directly trying to manipulate,
uh, are generated by upper brainstem structures. They're not generated by cortex. You don't need to
have cortex in order to have these states. And yet, uh, we all know and agree, we all agree that cortical
consciousness is contingent upon reticular activating arousal. Uh, if we now are forced to accept that
reticular activating arousal is not contentless, is not a mere quantity, is not just a level, uh, but
rather has content and quality that we call affect. Then we have to accept that affect is a prerequisite
for all other forms of consciousness. And it's on this basis, not on semantic one, that I'm claiming
that affect is the foundational form of consciousness. Uh, it also makes good evolutionary sense, uh, that this
ancient structure, uh, uh, rather than the cortical mantle, uh, which evolves only with mammals, um, that
the ability to register your own subjective state, how are you doing effectively in terms of hunger and
thirst and sleepiness, um, and, uh, to hotness and whatnot, um, that this should not require, uh, such a
late evolutionary development. But that's another point. I'm just wanting to slot in there that I also
mean it in the evolutionary sense. When I say that affect is the foundational form of consciousness, I
don't only mean it in the functional sense. Now I'll pause there because that's a big claim and a very
controversial claim. Uh, in fact, I must tell you, I'm still slightly dismayed that it remains
controversial. Uh, I've been, I've been really surprised by the degree of pushback, uh, that I get, uh, when
I argue and it's, I'm not the only one who argues that I'm not the first one to argue it. Um, but, uh, uh,
Demacia argues it, uh, uh, uh, Panksepp was the first to argue it, um, Malka argues it, uh, and, uh,
here I come a good few years on and argue the same thing, citing all of this evidence and, uh, wow,
people just don't want to accept it. So let's hear what, what, what, what you have to say.
Stephen.
Stephen.
Yeah. Yeah. I'll read a question from the chat first and then we'll go to Stephen. So,
Jonathan in the, in the chat wrote, I can imagine a modern large language model, the likes of GPT-3
creating such conversations without apparently having a mind's eye. While I agree, it is good
evidence. I think we are seeing machine learning systems having similar conversations. So you've
presented case studies that are the tip of the iceberg of broader populations and analyses.
How do we think about our evaluation of conversational dialogue
in questions about necessity and sufficiency here?
Stephen.
Yeah. You see, this is a kind of a, um, a relative of the philosophical zombie, uh, argument. Uh, the,
the problem with this sort of thing, uh, is that, um, in fact, the same applies, uh, to you and me.
I can't know for sure that Daniel is conscious, that Stephen is conscious, that David is conscious,
or that the person who asked that question is conscious. You know, they, the, the, the, the,
the point you've just made really does apply in exactly the same way. There's no greater reason to
believe that it applies to the patients that I've just presented to you than, and that it applies to
you and me, uh, because you too could be a philosophical zombie. In other words, you too
could look as if, um, you have internal states, say that you have internal states, but actually
there's nobody there. I can never disprove that. Uh, that is a metaphysical problem. That's not a scientific
problem. Uh, the scientific method, uh, requires, uh, that your hypothesis has to be consistent with all
the known facts. Um, and then you have to make falsifiable predictions, uh, from that hypothesis.
And if your predictions are not falsified, then they are upheld, uh, unless, uh, and until, uh, they, uh, some
evidence is, is found, which positively, this is what positivism is all about, which positively falsifies
it. So I'm saying these kids look as if they're conscious, you know, they, they behave as if they're
conscious. Now it's true that they might not be, and Stephen might not be, and Daniel might not be, and
David might not be, but you know, um, my hypothesis is that they are. So what do I do? I say, well, if
Daniel, uh, feels pain like I do, then when I stick a pin, uh, in his hand, uh, he's going to go, ouch,
and withdraw his hand and avoid me in future. Uh, and that's, uh, you know, that's a confirmation of
my prediction. Uh, the same applies with these kids. Uh, but you know, that's just one source of evidence.
As I said, you don't accept just one, uh, you then say, okay, well, what about this line of
evidence? What about that? And I've given you five lines of evidence here, um, in which in every
instance, uh, the prediction from the hypothesis, uh, that these people are conscious and that the
consciousness is generated in the brain stem and that the, that it has an affective quality,
every single line of evidence, um, you know, the prediction is confirmed. What you would expect would
happen if that were true is what happens. So, you know, I'm afraid you can do no more than that in
science. Um, and it's a curious fact that we raise the bar, uh, of evidence, uh, when it comes to
the problem of consciousness. Um, I think we must be very careful not to require, uh, any different sort of
evidence in the case of consciousness than we require for any other, um, uh, uh, matter in science. Uh, and
in this case, in any other biological function, you know, it's, uh, uh, uh, if, if you start with the
assumption that consciousness is something special, um, that, you know, the ordinary rules of science
don't apply to, then you're going to have a self-fulfilling prophecy. So yes, it's possible.
It's possible that these kids and those patients are not there, uh, that they're lying to me, uh,
that, you know, uh, it's, it's a little bit of a curious thing that somebody without a sense of self,
uh, wants to pretend that they've got one. Um, I think you're on a kind of slippery slope there to,
to, uh, to, uh, to irrationality, but I can't prevent you from holding that view. It's just
not consistent with any of the evidence, I'm afraid. Thank you, Mark. Stephen?
Yeah, I was wondering how much you think the challenge with uptake is because people are sort of
stuck in the idea that knowledge and information is a signal coming in and meaning, it's all about
meaning and the ability to communicate meaning as opposed to, um, engaging in meaningful action and
skillful enacted processes of the voice twitching, the voice box twitching and enabling words to be in
the space around us in some sort of way and whether that, that issue is, um, kind of a deeper ingrained
challenge to overcome. Well, I completely agree with that. I think that that is the, uh, the, the,
a fundamental source of the problem, um, because our common sense tells us our consciousness is
extra receptive, as I said earlier, you know, the, our conscious experience is dominated by visual qualia
and where do they come from? From, you know, things, light waves impinging on my retina from outside and
I'm seeing things out there. And so consciousness seems, uh, to be so obviously derived from something
out there. Um, and this is, uh, this was at the heart of the experiments that Magoon and Maruzzi did.
Magoon and Maruzzi weren't expecting to find what they found. Um, they, they, they were expecting that,
uh, a cat deprived of any extra receptive stimuli will fall asleep, um, if not fall into a coma. Um,
and it was therefore a great surprise to find that that's not what happens, uh, that the consciousness is
generated endogenously comes from deep within the brain doesn't flow in with sensory stimuli. Um, and,
uh, when they lesion that core brainstem structure, the lights went out, uh, and, uh, they, they couldn't
make sense of it. And they came up with this, with this, uh, theory, which as I've shown you, or at least
as I've shown to anyone who's, you know, who's willing to look at the evidence and draw the conclusions,
uh, that, uh, that, uh, that, that, that the, the, the, the way that they framed it is wrong. It doesn't explain
what, what they saw. What they saw was that consciousness is endogenously generated. And where does that,
where does the notion come from this common sense notion, um, that it flows in from outside? It comes
not only from our own, uh, everyday experience, but also from the British empiricist philosophers who probably
themselves derived it from common sense, you know, that the, the mind literally, the mind as a whole,
you know, is, is derived from sensory experience, um, that leaves impressions, uh, leaves memory images
impressed upon our cortex, uh, which are then associated with each other. And this, uh, according to British
empiricist philosophy, which underpinned, uh, the, the whole of 19th century, uh, and early 20th century
neurology and neuropsychology, uh, it's all predicated on that idea. So I think it's deeply ingrained within
ourselves and within our science, um, and, and, uh, you know, within public, uh, perception generally,
that consciousness comes from outside and, uh, you, you're speaking about some further, um, you know,
ramifications of that and therefore sources of resistance against the alternative view,
but all the evidence suggests that consciousness is endogenous, consciousness is generated from within.
Um, and, uh, I mean, you saw, I, I have, I, I, I'm, I'm sorry, I don't know who the person was who made
the comment about, you know, how do we know that this is not, you know, just some sort of program
spewing out language. Um, you know, I have nothing against you. I don't know who you are. Uh, I just
hear that all the time. Uh, and, uh, you know, I, I, I find it, frankly, I find it astonishing, you know,
that you present all of this evidence and then still people say, well, you know, how do you know,
how do you know that, that these patients are really conscious? And this is, uh, this, this,
this demonstrates the extent of the, of the prejudice, you know, that has come with that,
with that historical, um, uh, with that legacy, uh, that, that I've, that I've, that I've mentioned.
So yeah, I completely agree with you. Thank you. Steven with the raised hands,
then Dave with the raised hand and we'll go with the raised hands. Okay. Thanks. Um, yeah. So sort of
following on from that. Yeah. I totally agree. And actually I think the work with first,
Carl Christian and active vision, um, is, is quite helpful. There's the idea that we're reaching out
and feeling the world. Um, and I think actually I was looking back before 300, 400 years ago.
Um, if you went back in time, people actually almost had that as a, an intuition of looking out in the
world, but once we discovered the retina and then photography, we kind of re imagined. Um, so one
question I've got is, is regarding cerebral palsy. I work a lot with communities with complex disability
or non-verbal and their premotor cortex is often damaged. And in the 1970s, it was thought
medically, if you couldn't speak, you couldn't think. So that was where they were then. If you
couldn't communicate words. And then once they started using symbols, this symbolics and the ability to,
and, and they suddenly discovered that all these clients who had, um, who were non-verbal actually
could form complete sentences because they had a, a way to act in the world and interact in the world
and develop, um, language syntax and all of that. So I, I'm just thinking whether you've had a lot of,
uh, whether any of this works been tied in with clients with cerebral palsy.
Um, not only with cerebral palsy, but with all sorts of, uh, neurological conditions. Now the,
if I can just sort of piggyback on what you've said about cerebral palsy, the whole trend, um, within
clinical neurology, um, has been us realizing that patients who we thought were not conscious actually
are conscious. Um, the, the, and the whole re the, the, the sort of tenor of the research that's been
done, uh, in recent decades, um, I mean, locked in syndrome of course is the extreme example, but,
but I don't only mean locked in syndrome. I mean, all of these states of, of reduced and up-tundered,
uh, content and clouded consciousness and so on, minimally conscious states, uh, uh, so-called vegetative
states and so on. We finding more and more patients who actually, who we thought, uh, were not conscious
with increasing technology. We find that they are, um, with, with improvements in our methods,
we find that they are. So it's, it's a sort of an odd, um, it's an odd, um, contradiction with the
sorts of philosophical skepticism and doubt that one confronts from people who are saying, well, you know,
how do we know they're conscious that they, they, they, they're behaving as if they're conscious,
but maybe they're not. Uh, in fact, what we've been finding in clinical neurology is patients who
are behaving as if they're not conscious. Uh, and then when we, when, when we use the proper tools,
we find that they actually are. So, um, uh, your comment about, uh, cerebral palsy, uh, can be
multiplied your, uh, the observations that you refer to, uh, uh, consciousness, um, um, you know,
using reportability, uh, as a criterion, the, the capacity to declare, uh, your conscious states,
has really, it's, it's not just led to, uh, methodological and epistemological problems.
It's really led to gross clinical errors. You know, it's ethical problems. Uh, I, I feel we need a
lot more than mere philosophical skepticism, uh, before we can take seriously in neurology, which
after all is a branch of medicine before we can take seriously, the possibility that these kids and
these patients look as if they're conscious, behave as if they're conscious, say that they're conscious.
And we say, well, we can't be sure. I mean, think about the implications.
Thanks Mark. Dave, with a question? Yes. Um, two, I'd like to say two things, uh, to what you were just
talking about, uh, the difficulty of telling whether people who seem to be locked in or comatose are
conscious. There have been some people who initially got their experience in working with the dying. They
just wanted to people who were dying to not be alone. And they spent a lot of time as typically as
volunteers sitting with folks who seem to be comatose, who seem to be completely unresponsive.
And they found that events that unroll very, very slowly in the patient's room seem to elicit a
response. And they got in high speed cameras and would, uh, record what the patient is doing. And
that's a study that's also been done with, with infants, that infants seem to, to act extremely fast.
Uh, and that if you speed up those images, you can actually see a child respond and who seemed to be
just kind of lying there. They found with the comatose that it seemed they can carry out conversations and
it actually did resemble conversations, taking a person through childhood scenes, for instance, and
watching them respond and they nod or they'd shake or they'd grin. You mentioned some kid that used to
bully you over a period of minutes, maybe saying it over and over or speaking very slowly. And you'd get
this very slow, but eventually a full grin that a nurse would say, oh, that's just a grimace. Now, let me
check her diaper. And the other thing is a much better, bigger picture question. Who actually is hyper alert?
Getting out of professional settings or ideological settings. You walk around, you see someone who's just,
you gotta be really careful with them. They will just startle. You have to be really careful what, what you say.
You don't bring up unpleasant topics. You never imply that they've done something wrong. Who are these? For the most part,
these hyper alert individuals are children of alcoholics who as small children had to be the
responsible person. They had to keep daddy from hurting mommy. Even. And I wonder how was Niels Bohr raised?
Was he hyper alert? Is that why he became so amazingly oppressive? As nice as he might have been. Nonetheless,
unremittingly insistent that only he was correct. So in that big picture thing, are the folks who want
to insist that you absolutely positively are controlled only from the outside, were they the
people who as children were never able to emit? They always had to react. They always had to be really,
really careful because the environment really is something that will come in and get you.
Dr. Well, about your second comment, I will just say, please note how affective all of this stuff is
that you're talking about. And I think that we really underestimate the importance of affect in terms of
the whole gamut of phenomena that we call consciousness. But to your first point, I want to make clear that I
am, I mean, I agree with what you're saying about the inference of consciousness in these patients.
Dr. But I want to make clear that I'm making actually quite a, in light of, or notwithstanding, or, you know,
all of this other evidence and all of these other very interesting clinical phenomena, all of which
point in the direction of, we've underestimated the presence of consciousness. You know, that we've
we've been relying on very poor criteria in terms of reportability and so on, that really we need more
sophisticated methods. And the more we use more sophisticated methods, the more we find evidence
that there is in fact somebody there. I agree with all of that. But I'm making a very, very limited claim.
Dr. I'm saying, I'm not saying these kids are like you and me. I'm not saying they have a full rich inner
mental life. I'm saying only that there is something it is like to be them. And in light of all the
evidence in their cases, plus all the other evidence that I've cited, or using all these different methods,
all I'm saying is that that something it is likeness that these kids possess, is it feels like something.
They have feelings. That's all I'm saying. So it's all very interesting, all these other things about
how all these other capacities have been missed by us in relation to all of these other neurological
conditions. But in these cases, which have no cortex whatsoever, they have only some of them have basal
ganglia and, you know, other subcortical forebrain nuclei. Some of them don't. But even in cases you have no
forebrain, only a brain stem, they display affects. And so I'm saying that the brain stem
prerequisite form of consciousness does have a quality and the content, therefore feels like
something, there is something it is like to be these kids, and that quality and content is effective.
That's all I'm claiming. That the foundational form of consciousness is affect and it's generated in the
brain stem. So it's actually, I think, a rather modest claim in light of all the evidence. It's
quite a conservative claim. It's a sort of a deflationary claim. But so much flows from just that.
And I'll just say once more, I find it very hard to understand. I mean, I can understand it psychodynamically,
you know, or politically, or what, you know, I mean, people's whole careers, I mean, generations of
careers have been built on the assumption, you know, that the cortex and consciousness are intrinsically
bound up with each other, which, you know, so the people have a hell of a lot to lose. And
and many of us with egg on our faces, and I freely admit that I, too, believed that the cortex was the
organ of consciousness. This is what I took in like mother's milk when I trained. And I believed it for
many, many years after I trained, you know, and so it's, you know, I'm not exempted from that. But gosh,
we've got to look at the evidence. It's wrong, we made a mistake. You know, that doesn't mean the
cortex does nothing. It doesn't mean it doesn't contribute anything to consciousness. It's just
not the source of consciousness. The cortex is elaborates this very raw primary elemental feeling
that is generated in the brainstem. And all we need to do is accept that. And then we'll make huge
progress in consciousness science. The fallacy that the cortex is the source of consciousness
is really a serious impediment to us at this point in the history of our field.
Daniel. I think it's you next, Daniel.
Daniel. Yes, it is indeed a theme of the discussion that ambiguous evidence are continually interpreted
and reinterpreted in light of our inherited or our previously structured priors. And that's true in the
active vision example. It's also true in the scientific example, where our inherited priors about scientific
models influence how new evidence is not just perceived, but funded and carried out. And
it made me think about when people activate a gene or remove one gene and make claims of function
might be an analogous to the brain, but removing or having one node in a complex network showing that
there is a single point of failure or gain of function does not entail that as a generating mechanism,
which is just an example of an explanation that retains
an alternative perspective. And so I think it's interesting on multiple levels as we kind of apply
this idea of updating and learning and structural learning on our theories about ostensibly the part of
the body that does this function as opposed to one's hand, which is important and has nerves in it,
but doesn't do this kind of engagement.
Dr. Thanks very much. So I agree. That's an everyday observation that we are reluctant to accept
prediction errors. We cling to our priors, especially our most deeply consolidated priors.
And we see this in everyday life. Nobody likes to find they were wrong, that they have to change their mind,
that they have to accept evidence for review other than the one that they had always held. And this applies
even to us scientists. I mean, who in their graduate studies, when they were doing their first research,
didn't hope that their hypothesis was right. And then when the evidence came in and they found,
oh dear, I haven't found what I expected to find, it's not welcome. So what I'm referring to, based on what
you've just said, I know this is not quite what you were saying, I'm sort of elaborating what you were
saying, is that we don't recognize sufficiently the affective dimension in our resistance to prediction
errors. We all know about priors and posteriors and how this all works mechanistically. But just from the
sort of anecdotes that I've mentioned, I'm trying to get us to recognize that there is an affective
dimension to that. And when we get to this point about the concentric predictive hierarchy, I'll come
back to that. But I think it's an interesting and important observation that as you traverse the hierarchy
and get to what, in my way of thinking about it as a concentric hierarchy, to get deeper into the
hierarchy, in the traditional way we speak of going higher in the hierarchy. But as we go deeper, further
from the sensory motor periphery, so we come upon priors which are more and more difficult to update.
And I say again, there's a feeling that goes with that, which is, I don't care what you tell me, I'm not going to believe you.
Thank you, Mark. Stephen, with a question? Thank you.
Yeah, I know you're going to come back to the cognitive consciousness, but just something around terminology,
we've been doing work around an ontology working group at the Active Inference Lab, actually, trying to understand how to think about the language.
And you mentioned it could be affect is generated in the brain stem, and then, and that's when something's like something,
that's what it's like. But I'm also wondering how you take in the dynamic with the body and environment going down.
I don't know if that's seen as another manifestation, because obviously the brain stem makes sense,
because it's more integrated with the rest of the body's nervous system, it's less distant from it.
But I'm wondering whether the term generated within is more to do with when it's connected to the rest of the brain,
and when it goes down, it's actually more distributed in the mind body environment dynamic.
I would have nothing against that way of thinking. I'm very sympathetic with it.
I'm not a narrow localizationist. I'm very, very happy to recognize.
It comes naturally to me to think about functional systems which are distributed and dynamic.
And in fact, the reticular activating system is probably the most deeply interconnected with everything else in the brain system that there is.
It has tentacles everywhere. And not only, although it's called the ascending reticular activating system, it descends also.
It modulates the whole nervous system in very important ways that that will come to,
because this whole thing of precision modulation is at the heart of my way of understanding consciousness.
So the main thing that I'm wanting to say is I agree with you that this is a deeply interconnected system which functions by modulating other systems.
And I would be very happy if we had to leave it there and say, well, you can't quite say that affect is generated in the reticular.
In the reticular activating system because, you know, it's, it's really modulating these other systems.
My reluctance, however, in this case to accept that is twofold.
The one is that that's the kind of thing that people like Joe Ledoux are saying.
They're saying, yeah, this is all unconscious until it is labeled by or read out in cortex.
You're not talking about cortex. So, you know, that's, but the principle remains, you know, that I don't want to concede the point that it only becomes conscious once it modulates something else.
And that that's really where the contents and qualities are.
That's a sort of theoretical reluctance on my part.
You can see why.
But more importantly, more telling me is the evidence.
When you look at these kids, they have no cortex.
So their affects can't be modulating.
It can't be the result of something that the brainstem is doing to cortex because there ain't no cortex.
And yet, you know, there's all the evidence that they have affects.
And so I think as much as surprising as it may be, you know, it's not consistent with our normal way of thinking about cortex.
And it's also not something that I'm wedded to the idea that, you know, anything is generated in anything.
But the evidence suggests that certainly the modulatory influence that the reticular activating system has over the cortex, true as it is important as it is fundamental as it is to how that system works.
That the affects are not a product of the modulation of cortex.
The affects are generated in the subcortical structures.
And if you just take a step back, the implication of that is that, well, maybe there are affects in vertebrates who don't have cortex.
In other words, maybe affects are not the exclusive preserve of mammals.
And actually, that seems pretty likely.
It seems pretty darn likely that non-mammalian vertebrates have affects.
And again, you know, when you start looking at the evidence, it's pretty darn good that they do.
So I'm happy to accept everything that you're saying about let us not forget that this is a system which is deeply interconnected with other systems,
that its primary function is to modulate other systems.
But all I'm saying is that when it comes to cortex, it's not that the affects themselves are not generated by the modulating of cortex.
That doesn't mean that there's a disembodied brain or disembodied reticular activating system, but you can have a decorticated reticular activating system,
and it can generate affects nonetheless.
Thank you, Mark. Dave, do you want to go?
Thanks.
Okay. So one thought.
I see that the comments in the chat line have been dealt with. Can I move on?
Yes. Let's try to get to at least one other of these important points.
Oh, well, this is a brief point.
You know, the reason I'm making this point about affect not being synonymous with interceptive inference is because those few people working within the active inference framework who are not corticocentric,
and happily they're increasing. You know, there's people who worked within this framework, they had no reason to question, you know, all of the mainstream assumptions of cognitive neuroscience as far as cortex is concerned.
But slowly it's become apparent that affect is an important topic that we're not only talking about perception and action and cognition,
you know, we're talking also about affective processes and about body regulating processes and so on.
In fact, the whole of self-organization has to do with the regulation of the own body and the whole notion of self-evidencing systems and so on.
So this is happily slowly coming and increasingly coming into the mainstream of the people working within the sort of active inference framework.
But the dominant view within that school of thought is that affect is to the internal body what perception is to the external world.
In other words, extra perception is perceptual inference regarding things going on outside of me and affect is perceptual inference about things going on inside of me.
And that's, you know, if that's, you know, if that were so, that would be nice and simple.
But I don't see it that way.
So, and perhaps the outstanding proponent of the view that affect is interceptive inference is Neil Set.
And he's just brought out a really very good book.
I have it right here.
Here it is.
Being You, you know, which is predicated on that view.
So because it's because I agree with him about so many things, I think that it's easy for people to conflate our views and to imagine that what I'm saying is the same as what he's saying on this school.
And why do I think that affect is not the same as perception, but rather interceptive perception?
Well, first of all, because there are many interceptive perceptual states which are not affective.
So, you know, you can perceive your heart rate, the beating of your heart.
You can perceive your respiration rate or the inspiring and expiring of air from your lungs.
You can perceive gurgling in your tummy, which is an unequivocally visceral state.
And all of these things, you can perceive them indifferently.
You can perceive them without any affective valence or quality at all.
So if affect were synonymous with interceptive inference, then why are these common and garden examples of interception not affective?
And then secondly, if affects were interceptive perception, how come so many affects are generated by extraceptive events where there doesn't seem to be any clear
interceptive driving force.
So, for example, pain, which is a fairly simple example of an affect.
You know, you stick a pin in my finger, it comes from the outside and it penetrates the nociceptors in my extra receptive nervous system.
And I feel this intense affect called pain.
So that's extraception and yet it's affective.
The same applies to surprise, you know, to fright.
You know, you get a shock.
Well, in fact, electric shock is another one.
But these are, but I mean just, you know, fright.
Something unexpected happens outside of you and you startle.
And there's an affect that goes with that.
A particular type of disgust is another one.
You imbibe something that tastes or smells bad and you wretched up with this terrible feeling of disgust.
And then they're more, and they're not purely entirely non bodily affective states like missing somebody, you know, missing your brother.
It's clearly affective and there's nothing bodily about it.
So, and nothing intercepted about it.
When I say nothing bodily, I mean, particularly, you know, it's not, it's not about the state of your interceptive visceral processes.
So I'm saying there are interoceptive visceral processes which we perceive which are not affective.
And there are affective processes, affective states that we experience which are not interceptive.
So I don't think that we can say that affect is interceptive inference, that it's the same as external perception,
except it's directed toward the state, the internal state of the own body.
I think that it's something else.
And I don't say this to be difficult.
You know, I'm actually quite concerned that those few of us within the active inference framework who are recognizing the importance of affect,
can't agree on this point because, you know, there are few enough of us, you know, who recognize the importance of affect.
So I'm just wanting to make clear why I think that it's not merely a kind of mirror image reflection of of extraceptive influence.
And then I want to add one last point, which is that when you read, I mean, everything that I'm going to go on to argue about why extraceptive perception.
Remember what I said at the very beginning about cortical vision, having been the model example of where we will find the neural correlative consciousness,
which has led us down this blind alley and got us into such a mess.
That it has to do largely, as I'm going to argue later, with the fact that cortical processes and perceptual processes are not intrinsically conscious things.
You can perceive the world through all your extraceptive modalities, vision included.
At the cortical level too, you can perceive the world without perceiving it consciously.
In other words, extraceptive inference, perceptual inference is not an intrinsically conscious process.
There's nothing about extraceptive inference or perceptual inference that requires consciousness for us to understand the mechanisms at work.
And so if interceptive inference is just the same thing applied to the interior of the organism, it suffers all the same problems.
That it's not clear why it becomes conscious.
And I said that's going to be my last point on the score.
But in fact, I realized there's one more that I want to make, which is that the vast, vast, vast majority of our interceptive processes are unconscious.
I mean, even more so than our extraceptive processes.
Most of our regulation of our visceral, bodily economy happens autonomically.
We know nothing about it.
So it would be, again, a very curious place to find the essential mechanism of consciousness, and in this case of affect, if the majority of the mechanisms of this kind, in fact, do not operate consciously.
And if it suffers the very same problems as our extraceptive, using vision as a model example, using any form of perception, I think, as a model example of consciousness is to make a mistake.
Because consciousness is not an afferent process.
Consciousness is an endogenous process.
It's something generated not from within the guts, but from within the core of the brain.
And that's where we're going next.
So I'll stop there for any comments on that point before I move to the next one.
Great presentation, important distinctions and points.
So indeed, we'll take a breath.
And I think we can head on to the next one.
Okay, thanks.
So now, I've told you in relation to the point I've just made, I think that the hard problem of consciousness has arisen in large part from the example that we've used of consciousness.
So I'm starting with Crick, who has to be credited with bringing consciousness into center stage.
So, you know, I'm not bashing Crick.
And I also have said already, I think it's perfectly reasonable that he started where he did.
You know, it's clear why he started with visual perception as his example, where we should look for the neural correlate of visual consciousness, and then distinguish, you know, unconscious vision from conscious vision.
And then there we have it, then we have the neural correlate, and then we can generalize from there.
I'm saying that it turns out that was an unfortunate place to start.
And it links with what I was saying earlier.
That's also why I'm saying, I don't want us to make the same mistake, just turning it inwards and saying we're dealing with perceptual processes.
So let me say why all of this casts new light on the hard problem.
Yeah, so he asked Chalmers, the person who formulated the hard problem in the very paper that he formulated it.
And he says, what makes the hard problem hard and almost unique is that it goes beyond problems about the performance of functions.
To see this note that even when we've explained the performance of all the cognitive and behavioral functions in the vicinity of experience, there may still remain a further unanswered question.
Why is the performance of these functions accompanied by experience?
A simple explanation of the functions leaves this question open.
Why doesn't all this information processing go on in the dark, free of any inner field?
So this is a core aspect of Chalmers' hard problem.
He's saying that our normal way of going about doing cognitive neuroscience, where we take a mental phenomenon and we say, OK, let's see which part of the brain needs to be damaged in order to disrupt this mental state.
And then, you know, let's start piecing together what this part of the brain does and how it works.
And next thing we end up with a wonderfully complicated map of all of the mechanisms that work in this case, using the standard example, visual perception.
Chalmers' point is that you can do this.
This is the standard approach in cognitive neuroscience, but it doesn't tell you why there is something it is like to see.
So you can, you know, the famous knowledge argument with Mary, the visual neuroscientist, she knows everything that there is to know about the functional mechanisms of visual perception, but she knows nothing about what it's like to see.
In the example that Jackson or the story as Jackson told it, you know, she's never seen color.
But, you know, I like to extend and simplify his arguments and just say she was born blind.
She knows everything there is to know about the functional mechanisms of vision, but she's never experienced vision.
And if one day she's blessed with the gift of sight, she will learn something utterly new about vision, namely what it is like to see what redness is like, what blueness is like and so on.
And this is their argument. The argument is that the normal way we proceed in cognitive neuroscience, namely to dissect the function and in this way to explain the mental thing that we're trying to explain, works very well for all of these mental functions.
But it doesn't work very well. It doesn't work at all for consciousness. Consciousness defined as what it is like to perform these functions. So they claiming Chalmers is and Nagel and others of that ilk.
And so I think that somehow that somehow the consciousness is in a different realm from every other mental function, because, you know, when you when you've explained all the functional mechanisms, you still are left with this epistemic gap between that explanation of the function and the qualitative experiential phenomenal feel of seeing.
And so I'm saying that the problem is that they're using perception as an example.
Perception is not an intrinsically conscious function. And indeed, cortical perception is not intrinsically conscious.
That it is demonstrably the case that the cortex can perform uniquely cortical perceptual operations like actually recognizing color.
You can recognize color unconsciously. You can recognize faces unconsciously. You can read words unconsciously.
So if the cortex can do all of this perceptual and cognitive gymnastics without consciousness, I think it's perfectly reasonable to say, well, why doesn't all this information processing go on in the dark without any inner field?
Because that kind of information processing can go on in the dark without any inner field.
Perceptual inference is not intrinsically conscious.
So this statement of Chalmers is this really strong statement where he says there is no cognitive function such that we can say in advance that explanation of that function will automatically explain experience.
This is what he says on the basis of everything that I've just told you. This is where he's led. He's saying that explaining the function can never explain experience.
If that's the case, we're in big trouble because consciousness is somehow going to have to be dealt with in a different way from everything else in science.
But if you change that word cognitive to affective, would Chalmers have said this?
There is no affective function such that we can say in advance that explanation of that function will automatically explain experience.
Why it feels like something because that is the function of feeling.
The function of feeling is for the organism to feel it, to feel its own state.
So I'm saying had we begun there, had we begun our quest for the neural correlates of consciousness with this model example, had we begun by asking why and how does it come about that feelings are not
experienced, I think that we would have experienced, I think that we would have had a much less hard time of it than we would have had a much less time.
We have had with starting with visual information processing.
The mechanism of vision, the mechanism of vision, the mechanism even of cortical vision is not intrinsically conscious.
It does not automatically explain experience because it does not automatically have to be experienced.
But the mechanism of feeling, you cannot explain how feeling works, why feeling exists, what it's there for.
If you have a functional account of feeling, it would have to account for why it feels like something.
In other words, why it's experienced.
So I think that what I said in my earlier point that these facts cast new light on the hard problem.
This is the new light that it casts.
I just have also on the screen this slide, this famous review paper by Kilstrom, which summarizes all the experimental evidence for the conclusion that we were led to actually a good four decades ago already.
That perception without awareness of what is perceived is perfectly commonplace and learning without awareness of what is learned is perfectly commonplace.
Cognitive and perceptual functions performed by the cortex are not intrinsically conscious processes.
So this question of Chalmers is why is the performance of these functions accompanied by experience?
Why doesn't all this information processing go on in the dark?
That perplexity is not difficult to understand in light of those facts.
But I don't think that this question has anything like the same gravity when you apply it to the kinds of mechanisms that give rise to feeling.
I'm saying in short that if Mary was an affective neuroscientist rather than a cognitive neuroscientist or a visual neuroscientist, she could not know everything that there is to know about the functional mechanisms underpinning feeling without expecting that it will generate something that is experienced without the mechanism necessarily accounting for why it is experienced.
And this is why I think shifting our focus from cortex to brainstem and from perception to affect has big implications for our ability to finally come to grips with this hard problem of consciousness.
I'll pose there again.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mark.
Thank you, Mark.
I'll read a comment in the chat and then you can respond then Steven.
So Dean writes pre arousal plus awareness minimum of two, not as brain geography or territory establishment effort, rather a dance in an evolving relationship as we might see in an agent dancing with the environment.
Whereas the territorial view might examine control brainstem of the cortex or vice versa, one in a controlling relationship through a mechanical lens.
This relationship of arousal and awareness could be choreographed, but not choreographed mechanized, but not necessarily choreographed.
Not sure what that part meant.
Are feelings a residue of arousal plus awareness revealed?
We accept the signals like we dance out a path generated.
Look, I think that this is similar to the point that we were discussing earlier, you know, about generated in, you know, the upper brainstem as opposed to the upper brainstem modulating other structures, whether they be above or below the brainstem in the nervous system.
So I said, then I'm very happy to think of it as a dance, as something choreographed where it's not a matter of who's master and who's servant, you know, that's a, it's a, when it comes to the relationship between affective arousal and cortical representation.
I think that there's some instances where affective arousal just absolutely brushes aside any amount of decision making and thought processing.
And conversely, the opposite happens too.
You know, that there clearly are ways in which one can, in a top down way, modulate affect dramatically.
And I don't only mean, you know, regulate your emotions.
I mean, if you look at some of these examples of these Buddhist monks who are able to, you know, really massively control autonomic functions and the affects that normally would go, you know, with not breathing or walking on, you know, painful surfaces and so on.
Those affects seem to be overridden.
So nothing against the idea of there being a choreography between brainstem and cortex.
But I've already said why I think that in this instance, the affects do not require the cortex to be actually qualify for the name affect that they actually are felt without cortex.
I've already said why, what the evidence is, both in terms of studies of, you know, here and now studies using the various methods that I mentioned.
The most dramatic being, as I said, cases where there is no cortex, and yet there's evidence that there's plenty of affect there.
But also the evolutionary implications of that, which is that we don't have to wait for the appearance of cortex and the mammalian series for the dawn of consciousness.
But that if affect is generated in the subcortical structures, then affect does not require cortex and affect is, it can be, can be attributed to other vertebrates.
And not only vertebrates, by the way, there also is good evidence that some invertebrates are conscious.
The octopus is the famous, the most famous example.
But I think that there's a further problem in this comment, you know, which has to do with the word awareness.
You know, you speak of arousal and awareness, and you seem to attribute arousal to reticular activating system, which I'm happy with, and awareness to cortex, which I'm not so happy with, if you mean that you cannot be aware of arousal without cortex.
So I think this word awareness, it's like all the other words I mentioned at the beginning, like emotion and affect and so on.
And I said, I want to, I want to use the word feeling to make clear what I'm talking about, because these words mean different things to different people.
The word awareness means different things to different people.
And to, to, to many people, it seems to mean something like reflective awareness.
In other words, you know, in other words, you know, in other words, being aware of what you're aware of, or access consciousness, as Ned Block calls it, you know, that there's this sort of phenomenal consciousness, which is some kind of like a raw consciousness.
And then there's a, then there's a subject that, that accesses this information.
And it's, it's like the global workspace theory works that, I mean, it's pretty similar sort of idea.
If, if, if we're going to reserve the word awareness for that higher order thought or reflective consciousness or access consciousness, then it means that we can't attribute awareness to raw fields.
And, you know, that's, that's an odd use of the word awareness to me.
To me, how can you feel pain without being aware of it, you know, and, and pain, you don't need to have any kind of reflective cognition about it.
You don't need to have any explanatory labeling or, or anything.
It's just like, shed that saw and you pull away, even if you don't have language, even if you're not human, even if you're not a mammal, even if you're another kind of creature.
So I arousal for me implies awareness in the way I use the word.
But if, if, if we're going to use awareness for that higher order type of consciousness, then I would just want to remind you that there are other types of consciousness that don't possess that kind of awareness, which nevertheless have something it is likeness.
And, and, and the core of that quality is feeling that something it is likeness is feeling.
Thank you, Mark.
Stephen.
Yes, thank you.
So I was wondering if we think of consciousness as a kind of an integration of our action expectations of what's happening.
And those expectations then will, and Caspar Hesp talks about this with his work with active inference, is how those expectations were, weren't met and be effective.
Um, so I was wondering within that kind of, that prediction process, um, when someone gets a question, right, say a mathematician, when they get it right, they get a feeling that it's right.
It's like they, it's a felt sense.
And you could ask someone what's that feeling like, and they can sort of bring out a metaphor landscape that relates to that.
Like it can actually have a structure.
And there's a similar thing with pain as well.
Pain has to be expressed as a metaphor.
You have to say it's like a stabbing or it's a, a throbbing or it's a, it's always some kind of dynamical kind of metaphorical embodiment.
Um, so I'm just curious, um, as these, you know, this embodiment, this meeting in this brainstem, uh, how you, how you, how you see that in terms of if that's congruent with you and whether this, this is then a sort of a re, a re-imagining consciousness, like a re-imagining of these, of these expectations.
Um, and it can, it could go up or down, um, in terms of how that is being kind of, um, realized.
So I'd, I'd like to separate out, uh, two different aspects of what you're saying.
Um, the, the first has to do with metaphor.
Um, and, um, I think that, that may be true of, um, of being able to report or declare your conscious states in language, uh, that somehow or other you have to symbolize because language is, is just that.
It's a symbolic representation, um, of the, uh, thing itself.
Um, so, uh, that, that, that, that, as long as you, you, you use the word expressing it, uh, yes, you can't express, um, in words and emotion without using some sort of metaphor, some sort of symbolic system, uh, in order to be able to communicate it to others.
Uh, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the can of course be the direct behavioral affect of display expressing of the emotions in Darwin sense of the use of that, uh, uh, that which we then, um, us, us symbolic species, um, you know, we, we, we, we use that symbolically, uh, too.
But I don't think that the raw feeling itself has to be re-represented in any way.
I think it can just be the raw feeling without it being represented in any language in the
broadest sense of the word.
And so I don't think that metaphor is a necessary component of the core feature of feeling.
Then the other thing you were saying, which had to do with surprise, if I understood you correctly,
I, at times in my own thinking about this, there were times when I was keen on thinking about
affect or linking affect more with error signals than with inferences themselves.
And that was, you know, I was thinking along those lines because so many people within
the active inference framework were speaking about perception.
You know, this famous phrase, controlled hallucination, that perception is fantasy, that it is the
upshot of the predictive process.
And what worried me about that is the very thing I've been banging on about all along,
you know, which is that perception is not intrinsically conscious.
And so this business of inferring the source of your sensory signals doesn't explain why there's
something it is like to infer the source of your, the cause of your sensory signals.
And so, so, so from that sort of point of view, I've, I found myself thinking, well, it, it's not so much
that, you know, I mean, imagine if what you perceive is just what you predict, that that, that would be,
you know, bloody dangerous.
So the controlled aspect seemed to me to be the more important aspect.
It's the, it's the constraint on what you predict.
That seems to be more the upshot of what we call perception as, as opposed to hallucination.
And so I wanted to place the emphasis more on, on the error side of things than on the, than on the prediction side of things.
But subsequently I, I have changed my mind on, on, on that score for, which will become clearer.
You know, when I, when I get down here, where is it?
When I get down here, which we obviously not going to get to today, but I'm, I'm, I'm very much looking forward to us having a second meeting where we can get there.
For me, it's, it's got everything to do with the, with the modulation of confidence in the prediction versus the error signal or the error signal that is, that, that is connected with that particular prediction.
And, and, and, and I will just say it now because we're not going to get to it in this meeting, that, that the pithy formulation of the way that I see it is that it is good when things turn out as expected.
And it is bad when uncertainty prevails.
And I mean, yeah, goodness and badness, um, in, as, uh, in the, in the valuative sense of the word that is linked to the primary, um, value system of all living things, you know, which is that it is bad to die and it is good to survive.
And if things are turning out as expected, and if things are turning out as expected, in other words, you have a prediction, uh, which actually, uh, cuts it, uh, that, that is good, uh, from the viewpoint of the organism.
Um, and that if things are not turning out as expected, uh, and uncertainty is, uh, prevailing, that that is bad.
It, uh, it, it, it means, you know, this, this is likely to end in tears.
And so, um, the, the, the, the, uh, what was it?
The choreography that somebody with the dance that somebody else was talking about earlier.
And I think that what, uh, that, that, that, the, the crucial thing here, uh, is the, is the, is the palpating of the precision, uh, the modulating of the precision, uh, in the predictions.
Uh, uh, uh, over the error signals, uh, and that, that is at the heart of what affects all about.
And I'm only saying that now, uh, in advance, because I know we're not going to get there, um, in, in, in this meeting because we've only got seven minutes to go.
Uh, but I'm going to try if I may, unless there are any further questions and comments, are there any further questions and comments?
No, here are some future comments.
It takes many.
So then if there are still something, I think what we should do is I'll take, I'll take whatever comments remain or questions, and then we'll start next time with this point, because I don't think I can squeeze it in.
Uh, to, I don't think I should even try to squeeze it into, to, to shorter time period.
So, so, so yeah, that was my comment was, uh, we will have a last few minutes to, um, really just appreciate you coming on for the 16.1.
And we'll find a time to do 16.2 when we will condense and sort of reflect on what has already transpired and look forward to these next points.
I think it was really great to walk through it this way.
So Stephen or Dave, do you have any last thoughts?
Otherwise, Mark, please have a last thought.
So Dave first, then optionally Stephen and then Mark.
Yeah.
Yeah.
In addition to Professor Seth, whose book we already have, who else can we, uh, check with as people doing AI without the, um, the, the, the constriction?
With, without which you mean, with, you mean who else is working on affective processes within, within this?
Exactly.
Yeah.
So, um, two people who come to mind, uh, immediately, uh, is Manos Tsakiris, Manos Tsakiris, uh, and Katerina Fotopoulou.
Katerina Fotopoulou.
Uh, they, they, uh, uh, they both great.
Um, and, uh, uh, and also both of them are very good speakers.
Uh, so, so if you, if you're wanting to invite them onto, uh, this, this, um, seminar, what, what live stream series, I think that they would be, um, they would do well.
Awesome.
Thank you very much, Stephen.
Yeah.
Just to say, thanks very much.
And, um, yeah, we, we've been reading some of the work of Ryan Smith and Caspar Hess.
So, oh, well, Ryan Smith also, uh, Ryan and, and Maxwell Ramstead.
Uh, they're also working on affect.
They both, they, I should have mentioned them, Ryan Smith and, and Maxwell Ramstead.
Sorry.
Uh, they, they're doing some fabulous work.
I really loved their recent paper on folk psychology.
Uh, it, it was just brilliant.
Excellent.
Oh, thanks.
Well, we'll, we'll, we'll be connecting those dots up.
I'm sure next time as well.
Thank you.
Okay.
Well, um, thoughts.
Yes.
Yeah.
Just, just to say that I appreciate having the, um, I mean, it's not every day that you have two hours, uh, with, with, with excellent minds, uh, to be able to talk about only half of what you wanted to talk about.
So it's been very kind of you, uh, to, uh, to, um, give me this, this, this latitude.
Uh, I think that these issues, and I'm also particularly pleased that you're going to be in one way or another, uh, uh, recording.
And, uh, I don't just mean video recording, but also turning into some sort of written form, uh, what we're talking about, because as I hope, uh, you can see from what I've said, just in half, uh, of what I wanted to go through.
These really are pretty basic issues for, for consciousness science and for the science of the mind and for, and, uh, and, and by implication, uh, for what we can do within this active inference framework, uh, uh, uh, in, in tackling these.
Really, I don't mean to be hyperbolic when I say these profound and ancient problems.
I think that we have real prospects of being able to make significant progress, um, on, on, on these fronts.
And so it deserves is the point I'm making.
It deserves the time that, that we are giving it.
And I'm grateful to you for, um, for recognizing that.
Well, sir, thank you very much.

Thanks very much.
See everybody next time.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Cheers for now.

## c0_Vf5_qiWk

Hello and welcome everyone. This is ActInfLab Guest Stream number 16.2. It is June 11th,
2022. We're here with Mark Solms. This is the second part in our discussion. We had an awesome
part one. Today we are going to have a recap on some of the points that were addressed in
the first part in 16.1 and then we're going to head into some unexplored territory. So Mark,
thanks so much for joining for these sessions and please take it away.
Thanks Daniel. Glad to be here again. I was just testing out sharing my screen a minute ago and it
seems as if I'm incapable of showing you my face and sharing my screen at the same time.
So take a good look at me. You're not going to see me for a while. Here comes my screen. Please guard.
There we are. Great. And here comes my pointer.
There we are. And here's my title.
The emphasis is on physiological and philosophical considerations rather than computational ones.
So I'll start with a brief recap. I made a few claims and I didn't get to the end of this list.
So I will just remind you what those claims were and then I will pause when I get to the point that we stopped at last time,
which was here, that affect is an extended form of homeostasis.
I started with the claim, which really is the main claim of my presentation.
It is that affect feeling is the foundational form of consciousness and that it is intrinsically conscious.
I quoted Freud, who more than anyone else introduced the notion into mental science,
that mental processes are not intrinsically conscious,
that much of our cognitive processing goes on unconsciously.
even he made this point, the point that I'm making,
which in his words was that it is surely of the essence of an emotion that we should be aware of it.
That is, that it should become known to consciousness.
Thus, the possibility of the attribute of unconsciousness would be completely excluded as emotions, feelings and affects are concerned.
And I emphasize the word feelings because there's a whole lot of reasons why some people claim that there are such things as unconscious emotions and unconscious affects.
So just to be absolutely clear what I'm talking about here, I'm talking about feeling and you can't have an unconscious feeling.
In other words, you can't have a feeling that you don't feel.
So whatever might be meant by unconscious emotions and unconscious affects, they can't apply to feelings.
They can't be unconscious feelings.
But that might sound like a semantic point, just a matter of words, that you can't have a feeling that you don't feel.
That's an oxymoron.
So I then went on to set out various reasons, empirical ones,
why the claim that feelings are intrinsically conscious also has a solid empirical basis.
I drew attention to this discovery that was made in 1949 already, that the brain mechanisms for consciousness itself,
in other words, what wakes us up in the morning and puts us to sleep at night,
the sort of switching on and off of the lights of consciousness,
that this is the business of the reticular activating system.
The reticular activating system is the brain system for arousing consciousness,
for activating cortical processes and rendering them conscious.
I also mentioned the periaqueductal gray, which plays a crucial part in all of this,
together with the reticular activating system.
But I'll come back to that later.
For now, let's just focus on the reticular activating system.
To give you a sense of what I mean by how these structures,
their intrinsic function is the switching on of the lights of consciousness,
I pointed out that you can make a lesion or you can suffer a lesion as small as two cubic millimeters in size
in the parabrachial complex of the reticular activating system.
In other words, a lesion the size of a match head,
and that is enough in human beings reliably to obliterate consciousness entirely.
So I was saying, let's look at these structures if we're wanting to understand something of the intrinsic consciousness generating mechanisms of the brain.
And I made the point that if the cortex, which is where we normally shine our light in terms of looking for the neural correlates of consciousness,
if the cortex were the seat of consciousness, then there's an easily testable prediction,
which is that if you have a case in which there is no cortex, then the patient should not be conscious.
Not so.
Therefore, I showed you one such case.
This is one representative example of its type.
That here is a patient born with no cortex.
The condition is called hydranencephaly.
Here you see in an MRI scan of her brain that where cortex should be,
there is just cerebrospinal fluid.
And you see that her brainstem is perfectly intact.
So on the view that this brainstem area is where the consciousness is generated, that it doesn't require cortex.
This is a critical case.
On the brainstem view, she should be conscious.
On the cortical view, she should not.
And here she is.
And she's conscious.
As you can see, she wakes up in the morning.
She goes to sleep at night.
And in this sense, the lights are on.
But much more interestingly, she's not merely blankly awake.
Her wakefulness has a content and a quality.
And the quality that I'm talking about is affective quality.
You see how she responds to her baby brother being placed on her lap.
She responds with some form of pleasure.
And so there's a content to this mental state and a quality to this mental state that she's displaying.
Why that's important is because when we first learned in 1949 that the reticular activating system is prerequisite for all consciousness,
that there's no such thing as cortical consciousness without brainstem arousal of the cortex.
We had the view that the cortex provides the qualities and the contents of consciousness.
And the reticular activating system merely provides the quantitative dimension, the sort of level of consciousness.
So it's as if this was a power supply like a television set needs to be plugged in at the wall.
The reticular activating system is the prerequisite sort of booting up of the system.
But the television set itself, the cortex, where the contents and qualities of consciousness are processed,
could still be claimed to be the seat of consciousness and the reticular activating system merely as a power source.
This is why it was important to point out that this child is not only conscious in some blank sense of wakefulness without content and quality,
but rather that she displays affects.
She's emotionally responsive to her baby brother being placed on her lap,
just as this child, who also has no cortex, is emotionally responsive.
Here you can see she's responding with pleasure to a stimulus.
And this is quite generally the case for these children.
Here's Bjorn Merke's summary of his observations in many, many, many such children.
They express pleasure, they smile, they laugh, they show aversion and fussing by arching their backs and crying.
Their faces are animated by these emotional states.
They build up play sequences, they smile, they giggle, they laugh, they show great excitement, etc., etc., etc.
So I've highlighted all of those words to show that these two cases that I just showed you with no cortex,
they are conscious and they are responsive.
And in particular, they are emotionally responsive.
And on this, I base the claim that these children do have a quality,
that they do have a consciousness and this consciousness does have a quality and it does have content.
Many people are perplexed as to how this could happen, since they have no cortex.
How can they respond to things like their baby brother's been placed in their laps?
And so I just inserted this slide, I don't think I showed it last time,
just to point out that our sensory end organs, here's the example is the eye.
Same applies to the skin and to hearing and taste as well.
The optic nerve projects to the lateral geniculate and from there to the visual cortex,
but not only to the visual cortex, it also projects subcortically to the superior colliculi of the midbrain,
of the brain stem, which is immediately adjacent to the periaquiductal gray,
which I said earlier I was going to mention again.
So these children receive information in the brain stem, which is not conscious,
it's not cognitively conscious perception.
Conscious perception is generated in the cortex, but unconscious sensory information goes into the brain stem,
where it is responded to consciously by the emotional structures that are the main focus of what I'm talking to you about.
Now, of course, many of you, like many of my colleagues, will reasonably say,
well, how do you know that there's something it's like to be those children?
These might just be reflexes or instincts.
These might be the equivalent, these kids, of philosophical zombies.
In other words, they look as if they're conscious, they behave as if they're conscious,
but we can't know that they're actually conscious.
And so last time I tried to address this objection by drawing attention to what happens in cases who lose great swathes of their cortex
and because they haven't lost all of their cortex, they are able to describe to us what it's like to be them.
This is one way of getting around the objection that because these kids have no cortex and therefore can't declare their conscious states,
we can't be sure that they have conscious states.
So I focused, first of all, on a case who has a massive lesion of the prefrontal cortex.
The reason I did that is because this is a favorite part of the cortex for those who claim the cortex is the seat of consciousness,
like the global workspace theorists.
They say it all comes together in the prefrontal lobes.
All of this information that's processed in the posterior cortices is re-represented or accessed in the global workspace.
And this is where the sentient being, the subject of the mind, comes about.
And I pointed out last time that if that were the case, then again we have a falsifiable prediction.
A patient who has no prefrontal cortex, like this patient of mine, patient W, he has no prefrontal cortex,
but he has a sliver of language cortex.
He, if his sentient being was contingent upon the integrity of prefrontal cortex, he should not have sentient being.
And so I showed you what it's like.
I talked to him about what it's like to be him.
He claims to be consciously aware of his thoughts.
I asked him to imagine something for me, to imagine two dogs and a chicken, to see them in his mind's eye.
And then I asked him to count the legs.
I thought this would be a reasonable test of whether he's actually got conscious mental imagery.
And please note, the person I'm talking to refers to himself as I.
So he seems to think that he exists as a sentient being.
And I asked him how many legs there are in total, if you have two dogs and one chicken.
And to my disappointment, he said eight.
And when I questioned his answer, he pointed out that in his mind's eye, the dogs had ate the chicken.
So I thought that was maybe not a great joke, but it certainly suggested that there was somebody at home.
And I made the point last time that these patients generally, patients with massive frontal lesions,
that this tendency to make puerile jokes is considered to be a rather common part of the frontal lobe syndrome or the frontal lobe personality.
And this is part of a bigger story that I mentioned last time, which is that these patients are generally quite emotionally disinhibited.
And why that's important is because, remember, what we are considering here is the question as to whether the feelings that you saw in those patients,
those kids with no cortex, whether those feelings could be generated in the brain stem.
And the claim of corticocentric theorists like Joe Ledoux, for example, is that the feelings literally come about
when they are registered or re-represented or labeled or even named, some people claim,
that it's only once you are able to re-represent these subcortical survival circuits in declarative consciousness in prefrontal lobes,
that this is literally what brings the feeling about.
And I think it's quite interesting that these patients who have no prefrontal cortex don't have a dearth of feeling,
which is what you would expect if the machinery that brings feelings about is absent,
then they shouldn't be able to have feelings.
But in fact, what is generally accepted is these patients have an excess of feelings.
There's disinhibited emotionality in these patients.
I made much the same argument about the other major cortical area that is associated with the sentient self,
and that is the insular cortex.
Of course, this is associated above all with the work of Bud Craig,
but has been very widely accepted, that the feeling self comes about when the state of one's interceptive body
is re-represented in insular cortex.
And so, again, we have a falsifiable prediction.
If you take a case who has no insular cortex, like this patient of Damasio's,
then there should be no sentient self present.
And I showed you this interview where Damasio speaks to him about his sense of self,
and the patient is perfectly adamant that he exists as a self.
He speaks about himself as I, I, you know.
And this interview ends with Damasio saying, you're aware that I'm aware,
and the patient B says, I'm aware that you're aware that I'm aware.
You know, and this patient, just like my patient W, is not deficient in emotionality.
In fact, all the basic emotions are present, including both bodily affects and emotional affects
and sensory affects.
And not only that, he's also a little too emotional.
And this is a little disinhibited in his emotionality.
And this is what we quite generally see with patients with insular lesion.
So, again, it's very hard to sustain the argument that the self actually comes into being in the cortex.
Now, of course, those two cases, those examples of their kinds,
patients with massive frontal cortical lesions, patients with massive insular lesions,
of course, they are just examples.
But the point is, the point I'm making now is that there's lots of cortex left in those cases.
So, the argument is, well, you know, maybe the sentient subject is generated in the remainder of their cortex.
And it's a bit of a circular argument, because remember, you know, the children who have no cortex,
we're told, well, how do we know that they're conscious, they can't report their conscious states.
I then gave these two outstanding examples, looking at the areas of cortex that are most bound up with sentient subjectivity,
according to cortical theories of consciousness.
And these patients seem to have intact sentient subjectivity.
But now I'm told, well, you know, the remainder of their cortex might be what's generating the consciousness.
So, we can't use only lesion methods.
There's no way out of that, on pass.
And so, I then showed you last time evidence of a different kind.
I showed you what happens if you stimulate reticular activating system nuclei.
There, again, there's an easily tested prediction.
The prediction is that if these brainstem nuclei, the reticular activating system and periaqueductal gray,
as I'm claiming, if these are the structures that generate consciousness and feeling,
then stimulation of these structures should stimulate conscious feelings.
And I showed you that here's a case who had a deep brain stimulator placed into the substantia nigra,
this part of her reticular activating system.
And within five seconds, it generated, it produced a profound depression.
The patient was actually suicidal.
She didn't want to live anymore.
This is a patient with no psychiatric history.
The electrode was placed in her brainstem for the treatment of Parkinson's disease and stimulated the wrong nucleus.
And that's how this came about.
Ninety seconds after the stimulator was switched off, the depressed feeling disappeared.
And the patient generously agreed to allow for further stimulation in the reticular activating system and out of it.
And it was only when that particular nucleus was stimulated that she fell into the depression.
So this is the kind of evidence.
And remember, again, I'm just giving you examples.
You can stimulate intense affective states by stimulating reticular activating nuclei and periaqueductal gray.
You get the greatest intensity and the greatest variety of affects from stimulating there.
And you get nothing of the kind from stimulating cortex.
So this is a different line of evidence suggesting that feelings are actually generated in the upper brainstem.
And then I showed you another line of evidence that was positron emission tomography of people in intense affective states.
Here you see research participants in states of sadness, here of anger, here of happiness, here of fear.
And in all instances, the activation is in the brainstem and the circuits arising from it.
The subcortical circuits arising from it.
That's what we see.
And the cortex is, by contrast, largely deactivated.
So this is a further line of evidence that the, you know, an entirely different line of evidence.
Remember, we've got lesion evidence.
Then we've got deep brain stimulation evidence.
Here we've got positron emission imaging evidence.
That the part of the brain that's generating the feelings is the part of the brain that switches on the lights.
And this is why I'm claiming that the basic, the foundational form of consciousness, this prerequisite form is affect.
Affect is the elemental form of consciousness.
A further line of evidence is pharmacological manipulations.
If you tinker with the neuromodulators that are sourced in these reticular activating nuclei, like, for example, noradrenaline or serotonin or dopamine, all of which are sourced in the reticular activating system.
Serotonin is, of course, regularly pharmacologically manipulated for the treatment of depression.
Dopamine for the treatment of psychosis.
Noradrenaline for the treatment of anxiety.
Noradrenaline is sourced in locus-cerulius complex.
Serotonin in the RAFE nuclei.
Dopamine, at least the one that's important for psychosis in the ventral tegmental area.
All of these are parts of the reticular activating system.
If all that this system did was switch on blank wakefulness, it might be of interest to anesthetists.
But, in fact, it is the main target of the drugs of psychiatrists who are treating emotional disorders by manipulating the chemistries that are the source nuclei for which are in the reticular activating system.
So, on the basis of all of that, I argued, remember, that affect is the foundational form of consciousness and it's intrinsically conscious.
I said that feelings, not only on semantic grounds, I'm saying that feeling is the basic form of consciousness.
The reason I'm saying that is because the basic consciousness generating tissues of the brain, the reticular activating system, which is prerequisite for the activation of consciousness in cortex, that these structures generate feeling.
That feeling, therefore, is prerequisite, is foundational for all forms of consciousness.
I then made, this is a sort of a sidebar.
The reason I went into this third point is that, namely, that the claim that affect is not synonymous with inter-receptive inference.
In other words, that it's not just an inter-receptive form of perception, as opposed to the extra-receptive forms, which have been the major focus of consciousness studies over the last few decades.
In other words, vision being the main focus, I'm saying that affect is not, and why I say this is because this is increasingly being argued.
In fact, it was argued by Bud Craig himself that affect is just inter-receptive perception.
The perception of the state of the state of the state of the outside world in the more typical form or extraceptive form of perception that's been equated with consciousness.
I made the point that there's good reason to believe that affect isn't just a sixth modality of perception.
And the evidence that I presented for that was of various kinds.
For example, that there are affects which are clearly not inter-receptive.
For example, getting a fright or being startled or feeling pain when a pin is stuck into your finger.
These are all extra-receptive forms of stimulation, and yet they arouse affective responses.
So affect clearly is not uniquely inter-receptive.
And then I also made the point that there are many inter-receptive perceptual states which are not affective.
You can feel your tummy grumbling, or you can feel your heart beating, or you can feel your lungs expanding.
These are not intrinsically affective phenomena.
So inter-receptive perception can happen without affect, and affect can happen without inter-receptive perception.
So I was trying to draw a line under the idea that affect is just another modality of perception.
I think that by detaching affect from perception casts some new light on the heart problem.
And so that's where I went next.
And I reminded you that David Chalmers, who coined the heart problem, said that when we look at functions, perceptual functions like vision,
which was, as I said, the model example derived from the, or grounded upon the assumption that consciousness is a cortical phenomenon,
cortical vision became the model example of consciousness.
This was following Crick's initiative in the mid-1990s.
Crick's idea was that if we can identify the neural correlate of consciousness in the case of cortical vision,
then we can generalize from that, by discerning the mechanism whereby visual information processing gets turned into conscious vision in the cortex,
by isolating that mechanism, we will be able to understand the nature and function of consciousness.
And Chalmers said that that's not true.
If you isolate, identify the mechanism of visual information processing like this map here does,
it doesn't tell you anything about why there's something it is like to see.
And he used the well-known knowledge argument of Frank Jackson, the story about Mary, the visual neuroscientist,
who knows everything about all of this.
And I slightly simplify the story by saying, well, let's imagine that Mary is blind,
even though she knows everything about the functions of cortical vision,
she knows everything about the mechanism whereby visual information is processed in the cortex.
Because she's blind, she knows nothing about what it is like to see.
And if she were to be gifted suddenly with a normal sight,
then she would learn something completely new about vision.
She would learn what it is like to see red and blue,
what blueness and redness, et cetera, are like,
none of which is accounted for by this information processing flow diagram.
None of what she knew about the functional mechanisms of cortical vision
would have prepared her for what it is like to see.
In other words, there's something else about visual information processing
other than the sort of things that mechanistic functionalist dissections like this provide us with.
This mechanistic account doesn't predict that there should be anything that it is like to see.
And this is the grounds upon which people like Chalmers say that an account of the functional mechanism
of cognitive and perceptual processes doesn't tell us anything about why there's something it is like to perform these processes.
And this is the essence of the hard problem.
I said that I thought that this might be because they were looking in the wrong place,
that visual perception and all forms of cortical perception,
and indeed not only perception but learning and cognition more generally,
that this can readily go on unconsciously,
that these are not intrinsically conscious processes,
that it is perfectly possible to see and to recognize faces
and to read with comprehension and even to discriminate colors.
These are all uniquely cortical processes,
and they can all go on in the dark, as it were.
In other words, you do not have to be conscious of what you're perceiving in order to perceive it.
And so this casts a rather different light on Chalmers' point
that all of this information processing can go on in the dark.
So consciousness isn't accounted for by our normal functionalist mechanistic way of doing cognitive neuroscience.
So I was saying, well, that's because they're looking at functions like perception
and functions like learning, which are not intrinsically conscious processes.
I drew your attention to this other statement of Chalmers' from his famous paper,
in which he says, in summary,
there is no cognitive function such that we can say in advance
that the explanation of the function will automatically explain experience.
And my point was, well, that's because they're talking about cognitive functions.
Could Chalmers make the same statement if we were talking about affective functions?
I'm saying, no, he could not.
But I'm saying that we can say in advance that explanation of the function of feeling
will automatically explain experience.
Because the function of feeling is to feel.
It's intrinsically conscious, is this function.
Unlike vision and perception in general and cognition as a whole,
none of that is intrinsically conscious.
But feeling, affective feeling, is intrinsically conscious.
You could not understand the mechanism of affective feeling
if it didn't account for why it feels like something,
because that's the whole bloody point of feeling.
So this question of Chalmers' why is the performance of these functions
accompanied by experience?
Why doesn't all this information processing go on in the dark,
free of any inner feel?
I'm saying that that question is perfectly reasonable
when asked of these cognitive functions,
which are not intrinsically conscious.
That kind of information processing can go on in the dark,
free of any inner feel.
But that is not true of feeling, of affective feeling.
And so my claim, and this is where we got to last time,
this is now, I'm now starting with new arguments.
My claim is that if we can identify the functional mechanism of affect,
of affective feeling, then we will be able to explain
why this sort of information processing doesn't go on in the dark.
So I hope that that's clear.
That's kind of like my main point.
My main point is we've been looking in the wrong place.
We've been looking to cortical vision and cortical perceptual
and cognitive processes in general,
in order to isolate the neural correlative consciousness.
And Chalmers has said, well, it doesn't work.
You can isolate the mechanism whereby this sort of,
these sorts of information processing goes on,
and it doesn't tell you anything about why there's something
it is like to see, et cetera.
And so my argument is, yes, that's true of those processes,
but it's not true of affect.
Affect, remember what I've said to you in my summary now today,
that this is the most concentrated consciousness-generating tissue
that there is.
The reticular activating system and periaqueductal gray
is where the lights are switched on.
And that you need, you can switch those lights off
with as small a lesion as two cubic millimeters in extent.
So this is the place where we should obviously have been looking
in the first place in order to understand,
to identify the neural correlative consciousness
and to understand its mechanism.
And much more important than that is the fact that
the kind of consciousness it generates, namely feeling,
is, it is an intrinsically conscious mechanism.
That feeling, it wouldn't exist if it wasn't felt.
And so unlike vision and learning and cognition in general,
which does not have to be felt.
Affect does have to be felt.
That's the whole point of affect.
So I'm saying that if we could understand the mechanism of affect,
in other words, the mechanism whereby feeling comes about,
then we might make some progress
with this hard problem of consciousness.
So remember, that's how far we got last time.
And now I go on to, and I'm now going to slow down a little bit,
because I'm now going to argue,
try to identify what the functional mechanism of affect is.
But I thought perhaps before I do that,
I should pause for a moment in case there are any questions
arising from my summary of my argument so far.
I'll carry on.
Thank you, Mark.
Okay.
Thanks.
Thanks.
So you see, I'm saying affect is an extended form of homeostasis.
And by the way, this is not my argument.
This is an argument that was first, to my knowledge,
first introduced by Jark Panksepp in the 1990s,
subsequently popularized by Antonio Damasio.
So I'm just summarizing my version of what is, in fact,
now a good 25-year-old argument.
Homeostasis is probably the most basic biological mechanism.
It could be said that homeostasis is what enables living organisms
to resist the second law of thermodynamics.
In other words, it is what enables them to be living organisms.
They don't just dissipate.
They remain in an organized form.
And the basis of this is homeostasis.
That rather than just explore all possible states,
we living things have to remain within highly specific states.
And these are called the settling point or the set point,
the viable ranges of the organism.
And this applies across multiple different parameters.
Let me use the example of core body temperature.
For those of us who think in degrees Celsius,
you know, we have to remain between 36.5 and 37.5 degrees Celsius.
That's where we need to be.
If we deviate too far from that very narrow range,
then we are at risk of dying.
And that doesn't apply only to temperature.
It applies to water, to oxygen, to salt, to sugar,
to blood pressure, to all sorts of things about our bodies.
They have to remain within very narrow ranges
that are viable with the preservation of our living state.
If we move outside of those ranges,
in other words, if we explore all possible states,
then we die.
So we have to work against that dissipative trend.
As I said, that is this entropic trend.
We have to resist entropy and remain within our viable states.
Very narrow, specific ranges of viability
across these multiple dimensions of our physiology.
And this is why I say that homeostasis is what keeps us alive.
Now, a deviation from that settling point then becomes a demand for work.
The organism has to do something to return itself to its viable bounds.
And that's the basic mechanism of homeostasis.
That's how all of those autonomic functions I was talking about earlier,
like core body temperature and blood gas balance and so on,
that's how they work.
If you're moving outside of your range,
you have to do something to return yourself into the range.
That is what homeostasis is.
It's the mechanism that returns us back to our viable range.
Now, what I'm saying is that affect is an extended form of homeostasis.
And how it extends homeostasis is that when we move out of our viable range,
we feel it.
We feel an unpleasant quality.
That means I am moving out of my viable range.
And by contrast, if you're moving back towards your viable range,
you have pleasurable feeling.
This seems to be the basic function of affect.
It enables the organism to know how it's doing
in terms of its organismic viability.
So the organism feels when it's moving outside of its viable range as unpleasure,
which means this is bad.
And it feels moving back towards its viable range,
back towards its ideal settling point as pleasure,
which means this is good.
This predicts my survival.
This predicts my demise.
feelings are rooted in a value system.
In other words, that there is something good and there is something bad.
And what is good is to survive, and as it happens to reproduce.
And what is bad is to not do so.
This is, of course, the basic value system that underwrites all of life.
This is the value system that underwrites natural selection.
So feelings are rooted in that value system.
And what they do is they enable the organism subjectively,
the organism itself, to know whether it's moving out of its viable bounds.
In other words, whether it's doing something bad within that value system
or something good within that value system.
That's what feelings do.
They enable the organism to know how they are doing within that value system.
Now, why does this get added to homeostasis?
Because not all homeostasis is felt.
Most homeostasis is entirely autonomic.
I was mentioning earlier blood pressure, for example.
When you move out of your viable range,
your heart rate changes and your blood vessels dilate,
in order to return you to your viable blood pressure.
You don't need to know.
In fact, you do not know anything about it.
In fact, it's clinically notorious how blood pressure regulation works,
because you can be way out of your viable bounds and know nothing about it.
And I'm just using blood pressure as an example.
There are many, many, many ways in which your autonomic nervous system
maintains you within your viable bounds without you knowing anything about it.
So why do we need to feel it?
Well, what feeling adds is when you're in a situation of uncertainty,
a situation where you do not have a readily pre-prepared reflex,
which returns you to your viable bounds.
So you don't need to feel how you're doing if you don't have to make any choices.
If you have automatic predictions, which return you by reflex,
like in the case of blood pressure regulation, to your viable bounds,
then you, the sentient being, have no part to play in the process.
Where feeling comes into its own is where the organism finds itself in a state of uncertainty.
For example, in a novel situation for which its innate pre-wired, as it were, reflexes have no preparedness.
You find yourself in a state of surprise.
And now what you're going to do, if there's no reflexive solution available,
then feeling enables the organism to make choices.
Choices have to be rooted in a value system.
There has to be a good choice and a bad choice.
Otherwise, it's random.
So whether you're doing the right thing or the wrong thing is announced to you by how it feels.
So this enables voluntary action.
I really must emphasize that.
This enables you to choose.
It enables you to decide for yourself what to do.
Things are getting worse.
So I'm going to change my mind.
Things are getting better.
I will stick with this policy.
This is working.
So these are not hardwired.
These are not innate predictions.
These are choices made on the fly by the organism here and now.
And they enable the organism to survive in states of uncertainty.
In other words, in unpredicted situations.
In other words, in novel situations.
And God knows there are many of those in life.
So just to put flesh to those bones, let me give you an illustrative example.
Normally, respiratory control is autonomic.
You don't need to make any decisions about breathing.
It just happens automatically.
So you automatically remain within your viable bounds in terms of the ratio of oxygen to carbon dioxide.
But that's only when the normal autonomic reflexes manage the situation.
Because you are in predictable circumstances.
Now, imagine that you are in a carbon dioxide filled room.
Now, suddenly you move out of your viable bounds.
And breathing normally, normal reflexive regulation of your respiratory system doesn't work.
Because ordinary breathing in this carbon dioxide filled room is going to rapidly lead to your demise.
So now you've got to do something.
You've never been in a burning building before.
Let alone this particular one.
So you have no reflex or instinct.
No innate prediction as to what to do.
So you feel your way through the situation.
And please note at this point, at the point when you find yourself in this unexpected situation,
this is where your need for oxygen becomes conscious.
So this is a very important point.
An otherwise autonomic function now becomes a conscious function.
You feel what we call air hunger or suffocation alarm.
And you now move about in this building, deciding which way to go.
Remember, you have no prior knowledge of what to do.
And it's only on the basis of how it feels.
So if, for example, you go upstairs and the oxygen supply diminishes, you feel worse air hunger.
If you go downstairs and there there's a greater provision of oxygen, then you feel better.
You feel relief from the suffocation alarm.
And so the feelings tell you whether what you're doing is working or not.
And so your choices are based on feeling.
And so you are able to feel your way through this problem and survive.
This is not a small advantage.
The ability to survive in unpredicted environments is an enormous adaptive advantage.
And so that, we believe, is what the function of feeling is.
That's why, in this narrow example, why respiratory control suddenly becomes conscious,
that it dramatically intrudes on consciousness suddenly, your need for oxygen.
And the purpose of this is to enable you to calibrate your choices, to change your mind about your policy,
your current policy, on the basis of whether it's working or not, which is exactly what feeling announces for you.
In the absence of feeling, you would behave randomly and one in a million will do the right thing.
And that one will survive and reproduce.
And the rest of you have had it.
So this enables us to make choices within our own lifetime.
We don't have to let natural selection do it.
Within our own lifetimes, we can adapt to unpredicted situations.
Of course, once you've done that, you then also can learn from the experience within your own lifetime.
And so the next time you find yourself in a burning building, you might, on the basis of learning from experience,
you might have somewhat less uncertainty about what to do.
So, again, let me just make sure that I'm getting across my main point, because this is the mechanism of feeling.
This is the function of feeling.
This is what feeling does.
This is why the organism must feel it.
Now, remember what Chalmers had said, that, you know, why doesn't all this information processing go on in the dark and so on?
That was built upon an earlier argument by Tom Nagel, who said, an organism has conscious mental states if and only if there is something that it's like to be that organism, something it's like for the organism.
Then he went on to say, if we acknowledge that a physical theory of mind must account for the subjective character of experience,
we must admit that no presently available conception gives us a clue about how this could be done.
So, this is what I'm trying to do in this talk.
I'm trying to give us a clue about how this could be done.
This is Nagel's way of formulating the hard problem.
Why and how is there something it's like to be an organism, something it's like for the organism?
My point is that that question only makes sense in relation to things like visual information processing,
which it does not have to be something it is like to see.
There does not have to be something it is like to discriminate red from blue.
You can do that unconsciously.
The cortex can do that automatically.
That kind of information processing can go on in the dark.
But would Chalmers even have asked, I mean, Nagel even have asked this question if we were talking about feeling?
I've just explained to you what the function of feeling is.
And it makes it kind of absurd to ask why and how is there something it is like to be an organism,
something it's like for the organism.
I hope that you can see what I mean.
Why and how there is something it is like to be an organism,
something it is like for the organism, has everything to do with feeling.
Feeling is what it is like to be an organism.
How you are doing as an organism.
How much longer are you going to remain in existence as an organism?
That's what feeling is like.
And this is why and how it exists.
So if we can get to what the physical mechanism,
going back to what Nagel was saying here.
He said, if we acknowledge that a physical theory of mind must account for this something it is likeness,
then he's saying we have to admit that we currently have no clue.
I'm saying it's because we've been looking in the wrong place.
I think if we look to feeling and we seek a physical theory of feeling,
this will account for the subjective character of experience and we will make some progress.
This will provide us some clue about how we might go about solving this heart problem.
Now, my next point.
Oh, so let me pause at that point.
Having said that affect is an extended form of homeostasis, that's my next claim.
So let's see if anybody wants to argue the toss or make a comment or ask a question.
Yeah.
So, Stephen, there's no need to raise hand.
After each point, we'll take any questions.
So go for it, Stephen.
And then Dave, if you have anything.
Thank you.
Yeah, thank you.
No, I'm really, really enjoying this.
I'm interested in this awareness that leads to the homeostatic sort of correction.
And if it's where the awareness is with the actual cells or organs struggling in some way to act or enact upon the surprisal,
be that in the environment that they're encountering at the different scales.
So this issue of actually acting or enacting and when that action and inaction can functionally correlate up the nested hierarchies,
then it's those actions or the inability to act in the way that cells would like that then is becoming the signal of what or where action is failing,
rather than necessarily a signal of that actually contains information inherently in it.
I wonder what your thoughts would be on that.
Yes, I agree.
If I'm understanding you correctly, I agree with the emphasis on action.
So I'll slightly run ahead of myself if I say this.
Obviously, a homeostatic deviation can also be construed as a prediction error.
In other words, what you're doing has not led to the outcome that was expected.
And there are two ways of correcting prediction errors.
You can either change your prediction or you can change what you're doing in order to bring about the prediction that you had originally.
In other words, when it comes to prediction error, you can either update the prior and have a posterior prediction,
or you've got to do something differently in order to confirm the prior prediction.
So that's where the emphasis is on action.
Now, why this is so important in relation to homeostasis is that you can't change your prediction about what your viable bounds are.
You know, if you expect to be between 36.5 and 37.5 degrees Celsius on the basis of acting in a certain way,
in other words, firing an autonomic reflex, and you then find yourself to be at 39 degrees Celsius,
you can't say, okay, my posterior prediction is that by doing this, I'll be 39 degrees Celsius.
Because if you do that, you're rapidly on the road to death.
So the prediction error has to be corrected on the basis of changing your action policy,
doing something different in order to confirm your prior prediction.
So the emphasis is very much on action when it comes to these organismic predictions,
these phenotypic, the viable states for your phenotype can't be changed.
So you can't just change your mind about what you expect will flow from your actions.
You have to change your actions in order to bring about the expected or preferred state of your phenotype.
Thanks.
Thanks.
Can I just add one piece to that?
I think that's really helpful.
And also in terms of like multiple scales going down to smaller scales.
So for instance, if I actually feel heat in my body and my body might be,
my cells are trying to act to find a better state.
That can be seen as oppressive and claustrophobic.
If I then read that as being me getting into an uncomfortable state,
it could also be me basking in the sun on a beach, you know,
in the same way that if I taste something that's very sour,
there's some sort of action at the cell or the organ level reacting to that sourness or that sweetness,
which could be like a nice confectionery suite for a child, you know,
like one of these gobstoppers, or it could be quite a problem.
So I think I like what you're saying with action.
I'm almost wondering whether that action piece is the inaction is the prediction error
in terms of how it can go up in terms of these nested hierarchies of physical scale.
Yes. So again, I must be careful not to run ahead of myself too much.
I mean, inevitably, you know, you must ask whatever question comes into your mind at any point.
But I'm aware that as I go down this list of arguments, I'm going to be addressing those points.
So I don't want to make all of those arguments in one go.
So I will just say that for now, that what you've just asked has, first of all,
a lot to do with the fact that we have multiple needs, that there's not only one need,
that they have to be balanced in relation to each other.
And also, very importantly, that we're talking about a predictive hierarchy,
that this is what you're speaking about with reference to scale,
that what applies at the sensory periphery,
and what applies at the core of the predictive hierarchy,
have different implications for the way that affect works.
So I'm just saying those very kind of vague and abstract things for now.
And I hope that the picture will become clearer as I proceed.
Thank you, Mark.
Yes, Dave, go for it.
Yeah, I don't know how to state this clearly.
This is some thinking that I got into from listening to a very recent interview you did
with a young man in another part of Cape Town.
We're talking about perception.
And I think there, and maybe this has already been done,
I just haven't run across the research,
that there's a larger framework in which these notions of what can be perceived,
what can be perceived consciously,
what is a sensory modality,
what we don't call a sense.
It seems that there are, on the one hand,
conditions, we've been calling those homeostatic conditions,
that you can't do anything about.
Your body either adjusts the blood pressure internally,
or it goes haywire, but you can't be aware of it.
So we don't think about this as something that we can consciously perceive,
and we don't call the mechanisms that are sensitive to blood pressure
and core temperature and other things as matters of sensation,
matters of perception, matters of consciousness.
On the other side, the other side of the mapping,
there are single object influences.
A mechanism that is sensitive only to blood pressure
presents another reason not to call this a sense.
An eye spot just tells certain kinds of worms,
there's light around here, or there isn't light around here.
No directionality, just it's daytime, or it isn't.
I'm under the mud, or I'm not under the mud.
Whereas even a little more information,
more kinds of information,
qualify this more as a sensory modality.
And in things like hearing and vision and smell,
we have this very rich many-to-many.
There's many things you can do about a burning smell,
and there are many kinds of odors out there.
Does this tie into anything you've been thinking about?
Yes.
So the first thing that you're touching on there
is the fact that homeostasis is only part of the story.
In fact, the example I gave earlier
of the person who finds themselves
in a carbon dioxide-filled room in a burning building,
they need to maintain their homeostatic blood gas balance.
But there's nothing that their autonomic nervous system
can do about that.
They therefore need to turn to action in the outside world.
So when I said that the person starts moving about,
upstairs and down,
and then feels,
is this working or is this not?
Is this good or is this bad?
That we call allostasis.
It's acting in the outside world
in order to return myself to my homeostatic balance.
So that's the first thing I just wanted to make clear.
I know it's implicit,
and I know I'm telling you something that you know very well,
but I just want to make that explicit
for our participants
that the importance of the outside world
for these internal bodily states,
the bridge from homeostasis to allostasis
is how we conceptualize that.
So then it moves to the next point,
which is that think about those kids
that I showed you earlier
who have no cortex
and all they're capable of feeling
is their affect.
They can't consciously think,
I feel like this about that.
In other words,
they don't know what the about that is.
They just feel things
and they can't include
within their consciousness of the feeling
what the thing in the outside world is
that contextualizes that feeling.
the context doesn't become conscious,
only the feeling itself.
To be able to extend the feeling onto the context,
to be able to say,
in effect,
I feel like this about that,
incorporates the context
within that terrain of uncertainty
where one's navigating,
one's palpating the uncertainty
in order to make choices,
not only on the basis of blind feeling,
but also on the basis of what kind of object
brings about this change in my feeling
and what kind of object brings about that.
For all of that to be incorporated
within the realm of consciousness,
I think is a further leap
and clearly another enormous adaptive advantage.
So the first leap is just to be able
to feel the consequences of your actions.
The second leap is to be able
to picture, as it were,
those actions within the sphere of consciousness
and in this way
to bring the context into consciousness
and extend the realm of choices enormously.
Thank you, Mark.
And I'll just chime in with a third question.
So you mentioned homeostasis
is only part of the story.
And in the chat, Brock asked,
what part of the story is hormesis?
I don't know that word.
So a small stress inducing,
like some kind of benefit
over the integrated time horizon,
like an exercise stress
that leads to improved strength.
You mentioned allostasis,
kind of an anticipatory movement
towards a set point.
But where does, for example,
induced stress, mild stress,
and recovery play into this extended homeostatic
or generalized homeostatic framework?
So, sorry, I didn't understand what you meant.
So, you know, I think, again,
when one gives an overview
of an argument like this,
one always oversimplifies,
one sort of has to simplify.
And, you know,
when I say that homeostasis,
that, you know,
you always have to confirm your prior prediction,
that's not entirely true.
There are also ways in which
the homeostatic range can be extended.
The homeostatic ranges,
I mean, like, for example,
you know, what I was saying about oxygen,
you can, if you're a diver,
you know, you can learn
how to hold your breath
and how to manage the stress
of being out of your viable blood gas range
in a way that a naive person like I cannot.
So there are mechanisms whereby
these things can,
in very narrow limits,
these things can be changed.
But I think the emphasis there
has to fall on the narrow limits.
Ultimately, there is an outer limit
to your viable range.
And, you know,
this is the driving mechanism
of the story that I'm talking about here.
Thank you.
Of course, so much more to say
and learn and add,
but please carry on.
Thank you.
Well, you can see highlighted
on the screen now my next point,
and it might seem like a small point.
It might seem like an obvious point
that complex organisms require
multiple homeostats.
And in fact,
I've more or less said this already,
but I want to make explicit,
and here is the same slide
that you saw a moment ago,
where I've just added the point
that I'm now making.
The importance of this point
is that we have multiple needs
which must be categorically distinguished
from one another.
In other words,
we can't have a continuous variable
called need.
That variable has to be factorized
across a number of different categories.
So let me be clear
what I'm talking about.
Imagine you have,
if we quantify on a continuous scale,
how much deviation there is
from where you need to be.
Let's say,

okay,
I've got six out of ten
of thirst,
and I've got four out of ten
of sleepiness,
then all I,
that means I've got
ten out of twenty
of total need,
and so all I need to do
is sleep.
I don't need to drink.
If I can generalize
from that little example,
the point that I'm trying to make
is that,
no,
that's not true.
You have to sleep,
and you have to drink,
and you have to eat,
and you have to defecate,
and you have to breathe.
You can't just summate all of these
and bring down the total number.
If you did that,
you would die.
So,
we have to recognize
that each one of these needs
has to be met
in their own right,
and that means
we need to know,
we can't just have
a total variable
called need.
We need to know
which need
are we talking about,
and this is why
they have to be treated
as categorical variables.
In other words,
this,
here we're talking about
how much water
I'm lacking,
here we're talking about
how much oxygen
I'm lacking,
here we're talking about
how much sleep
I'm lacking,
et cetera,
so that they can be,
so that the category of need
that the organism
finds itself in
can be addressed
appropriately.
The appropriate category
needs to be addressed.
And now,
I know what I'm saying
sounds absolutely obvious,
but why it's important
is that
it's because of this,
because of the point
I've just been making,
that hunger feels different
from thirst,
and thirst feels different
from suffocation alarm,
and suffocation alarm
feels different
from sleepiness,
and sleepiness feels
different from pain,
and so on,
because each one
of these feelings,
the quality of the feeling,
tells us which need
is at issue.
And categorical variables
are distinguished
qualitatively.
So we're not only
talking about valence,
goodness or badness,
and arousal,
how much or how little.
We're talking also
about qualitative categories.
And I think that's important
when we come back
to the whole point
of what I'm talking about,
namely qualia,
namely,
the qualitative stuff
of what it is like
to do anything,
be anything.
Those qualitative distinctions,
it's of the essence
of consciousness,
that it is qualitative,
it has qualitative
differentiations.
It's not just some
total quantitative,
some total continuous
matter of need.
It's a matter of different
categories of need,
which therefore
are different qualities
of need.
And I think that's important
in terms of understanding
what an affect is.
An affect is a state
of the organism
registered by the organism.
In other words,
it is intrinsically subjective.
It has intrinsic value,
valence,
goodness and badness,
which has existential consequences
for the organism.
And in addition to that,
it has quality.
It is inherent
in the nature of affects,
that they are qualitatively
distinctive from each other.
And I hope that
this very simple
functional mechanistic reasoning
that I've given you
as to why that needs
to be the case,
why that must be the case,
helps to make clear
why affects take the form
that they do.
Remember,
what we are doing here
is addressing
Nagel's question
about,
you know,
why is there something
it is like
to be an organism?
And how does it come about
that there is something
it is like
to be an organism
for an organism?
That something
it is likeness
is not just
a valence,
goodness and badness,
but also a qualitatively
differentiated state,
subjective state,
of the organism.
So I think that
by reducing
the mechanism
of affect
to these essential features,
we begin to see
why it takes
the form that it does,
why it is
a necessarily
conscious something
in the sense
that I'm,
the rudimentary sense
that I'm defining
consciousness.
So that's why
this point is important.
That's why
I wanted to make
the point clearly
that complex organisms
require multiple
categorical homeostics,
stats.
They need to be treated
as categorical variables.
They need to,
therefore,
be,
they need to be qualified.
Each of these
different factors
of need,
each of these
different categories
of need
have to be
qualitatively
differentiated
from each other.
And this is,
I think,
the ground zero
of where
qualia come from.
Now,
I'll go on
to my next point.
which is that
these different
categories of need
must be prioritized.
Again,
I think this is,
in a way,
an obvious point.
But I want to just
dwell on it
for a moment
to draw out
some of the
implications of this.
I said earlier
that our
autonomic
homeostats
run,
well,
autonomically
most of the time.
In other words,
there are
automatic,
automatized predictions
which we call
reflexes
that are,
when the
organism moves out
of its viable bounds,
then it fires
these reflexes
which bring it
back into its
viable bounds.
And then I told you
that not all
of our needs
can be dealt
with that way.
Some of them,
as we move
outside of the
range
of what
the
autonomic reflex
can achieve,
like,
for example,
when it comes
to thermoregulation,
you start
to perspire
if you get
too hot.
This is a reflex.
You start
to breathe
more shallowly
and rapidly.
Panting,
in other words,
that's a reflex.
These are
autonomic responses
to overheating.
Then they reach
a certain limit
that they
haven't cooled
you down
adequately.
So then you've
got to do
something.
You've got to do
something like
leave the kitchen.
And that is
what I've just
said applies
to one
of your
multiple
homeostats.
In other words,
one of them
now requires
allostatic action.
You now need
to do something
in the outside
world.
And clearly
you can't do
something in the
outside world
in relation to
all your needs
simultaneously.
So all the
time you're
sliding,
you know,
your hydration,
your water
in relation
to salt
content,
of your body
sliding all
the time.
It doesn't
mean that you're
thirsty all
the time.
You're burning
up the sugars
in your adipose
tissues all
the time.
It doesn't
mean you're
hungry all
the time.
so the question
is, you know,
what gets
prioritized?
And there
must be some
prioritization
because you
can't do
everything at
once.
When it comes
to voluntary
activity in the
outside world,
you have to
prioritize.
There's an action
bottleneck.
And the point
I'm making
here is,
first of all,
just simply
that, that you
do have to
prioritize.
And secondly,
that what is
prioritized is
what becomes
conscious.
In other
words, as I
gave in the
example of
suffocation
alarm, that
business carries
on unconsciously
until it becomes
prioritized.
At that point,
it forcibly
intrudes on
consciousness.
My priority
now is I
need oxygen.
And that's
what you feel.
The other
needs, this is
the other
point I'm
making, the
other needs
don't disappear
at that point.
They continue
to be
regulated, but
they are
regulated
automatically.
So the
prioritization
of a need
brings that
need into
the realm
of palpating
uncertainty.
In other
words, into
the realm
of feeling
your way
through the
problem.
And this, I
think, is an
important part
of how
feeling works.
So let me
hear, remember
I said I was
going to talk
about the
periaqueductal
gray.
And I was
going to tell
you how this
plays as
important, if
not more
important,
role in
the basic
machinery of
consciousness of
the upper
brain stem than
the reticular
activating
system.
The
periaqueductal
gray, which
is just a
14-millimeter
long
structure,
columnar
structure around
the central
canal of the
midbrain,
all of our
homeostatic
mechanisms, in
other words,
all of the
multiple
homeostats, and
we have
many, all of
the multiple
homeostats, all
of them send
their residual
error signal to
the periaqueductal
gray.
The periaqueductal
gray is like a
final common
pathway of all
of these
homeostatic error
signals.
And it seems
that this is
where the
prioritization
must be going
on.
The determining
which of the
current error
signals is the
most salient
then gives
rise to, and
this is an
argument I must
again make
clear, this is
not my own
novel insight.
This was
beautifully
argued on
comparative
anatomical
grounds by
Bjorn
Merker in
a brilliant
paper in
Behavioral and
Brain Sciences.
So he
recognized that
the periaqueductal
gray, together
with the
superior
colliculi that I
showed you
earlier,
and the
midbrain
locomotor
region, they
form what he
called a
midbrain
selection
triangle.
In other
words, this
is where the
need that is
to be
prioritized is
selected, and
this gives
rise to a
feeling, the
feeling being,
as in the
example that I
gave with
suffocation
alarm, the
need that is
prioritized, the
need that is
currently most
salient, the
need that is
going to now
color your
consciousness,
qualify your
consciousness in
terms of its
most rudimentary
property, in
other words, the
feeling, the
affect, what
state, what
organismic state
am I in, I'm
in a state of
respiratory distress,
I'm in a state of
suffocation alarm,
that's what I
feel, why?
It's because
this is where
choices need to
be made, this
is where the
creature needs
to feel, the
person in that
example needs to
feel their way
through the
problem.
The other
needs remain, but
the other needs,
the non-prioritized
needs are not
raised to the
level of feeling
and I hope it's
clear why.
And we need to
understand
mechanistically how
does all of this
work and that
leads to my next
point.
So before I go to
that next point,
let me just pause
again in case there
are any comments or
questions about this
prioritization
function performed
by the periaqueductal
gray, which is
what determines
what affective
state you are
going to be in
from one moment
to the next.
In other words,
which need is
going to qualify
your affective
state.
Thank you,
Mark.
Dave, Ben,
Stephen?
Yeah, I just
want to throw
out there, in
Sylvan Tompkins'
later work, that
is after 1970,
he came to
elevate
reset
to the status
of a
fundamental
emotion.
And I think
it's very relevant
to this, the
notion of
suddenly shifting
from one
conscious
emotion or
one conscious
activity or
world attitude
to another.
I believe
Yak Pongsep
drew pretty
heavily on
Tompkins, and
the reason that
he doesn't cite
him in a lot
of detail is
that he accepted
so much of
it, kind of
like what you
said about,
I agree almost
totally with,
oh, the
Britisher whose
father's from
India, I'm
sorry, I'm
blind for
knowing his
name, you
had a dialogue
with him just a
few months ago.
Am I
completely wrong
about that?
Neil Seth are
you talking
about?
Yes, thank
you.
Am I
completely
wrong?
Did
Tompkins
simply agree?
No, I agree
with that
completely.
Tompkins, the
reason that
Pongsep doesn't
cite him, or
barely ever, he
cites him
usually in the
beginning of a
kind of a
general
discussion, you
know, just to
say this is the
tradition I belong
to, and then
carries on
building on his
shoulders.
I agree with
that very
much.
Thank you.
Stephen?
Yeah, I
liked when you
talked about
palpating
uncertainty and
the salience
around that, so
that's a nice
term, and I
think that
relates to
what is going
on, so to
speak.
So what about
what's going
on, and then
now what
happens next?
And I'm
wondering,
though, as
well, if the
idea of
where, which
I think is
often left
out, there's
a lot of
categorization of
what things
are, but
where is it
happening?
That makes a
difference in
terms of how
significant it
might be in
terms of
prioritization.
So I was
wondering how
much the
risk of the
awareness of
some sort
of disequilibrium
happens, could
be featured in
this, and
maybe that's
where the
physicalization
and the
spatialization
becomes much
more significant
than when you're
just dealing
with the
brain.
Yes, so
well, all of
these homeostatic
mechanisms, of
course, the
physiological
processes that
they regulate are
widely distributed,
but the
control centers
of these
homeostats are
for the most
part in the
brain stem
broadly defined,
and I say
broadly defined
because there's
some that are
in the medulla
oblongata and
pons, but
there's some
that are in
the midbrain,
there's some
that are
diencephalic.
For example,
I mean, to
mention the
most outstanding
example, the
hypothalamus is
full of
homeostatic
control centers.
But, you
know, so
hypothalamus,
circumventricular
organs, the
parabrachial
complex, the
area postrema,
the nucleus
solitaris, these
are all
homeostatic
control centers,
but of
fundamental
importance, and
I think it's
not sufficiently
recognized,
although Marcus
certainly made
much of it,
that all of
these nuclei
that I have
just enumerated,
they in turn
project to the
periaqueductal
gray.
The periaqueductal
gray is, in my
view, a
metahomeostat.
It's sort of
the control
center of the
control centers,
and the
center of the
prioritization
function.
And by being
able to
physically locate
these mechanisms,
bearing in mind
where I
started, I
started my
answer to your
question by
pointing out that
ultimately these
homeostats regulate
physiological
processes which
cannot be
localized.
localized.
They are
distributed
processes,
par excellence,
but the
center, the
control center,
can be
localized, and
those control
centers are,
there are
numerous ones,
and they in
turn, they all
send the
residual error
signal to
periaqueductal
gray.
That is really
important.
Now what that
enables us then
to do is to
test models like
the one that I'm
describing to you.
What happens
when one or
another of these
individual
homeostatic
control centers
is lesioned?
What happens
when the
periaqueductal
gray as a
whole is
lesioned?
What happens,
I might as well
just insert that
here, is you
get a
persistent
vegetative
state.
In other
words, you
get that
condition that
Magoon and
Maruzzi led
us to
believe
is a
theoretical
possibility.
In other
words, blank
wakefulness.
Remember I
said earlier
in my
summary of
what I
said last
time I
spoke, that
the idea
that the
reticular
activating
system provides
merely a
quantitative
level of
consciousness
and not
any quality
or content,
that
fictional
state of
affairs, of
blank
wakefulness,
the thing
that the
reticular
activating
system was
supposed to
be producing,
which as I've
showed you
is not the
case because
all of those
different lines
of evidence
that I
summarized show
that what the
reticular
activating
system is
producing is
anything but
without quality
and without
content, that
this is in
fact the
foundational
form of the
qualities and
contents of
consciousness,
namely the
different
affects.
if you
lesion the
periaqueductal
gray, then
you get that
fictional state,
that artificial
state of
blank
wakefulness.
In other
words, these
patients show
non-responsive
wakefulness.
They still have
the autonomic
sleep-waking
cycle.
In other
words, they
wake up in
the morning and
go to sleep
at night like
those hydran and
cephalic kids that
I showed you.
But unlike
those kids, they
show no
emotional, no
affective, no
response to
their situation
and no
intentionality
either.
And so, you
know, that's
what you would
expect would
occur if the
periaqueductal
gray is where
the affects are
actually being
generated.
Because remember,
that's what I'm
saying.
I'm saying that
the prioritization
of a homeostatic
error signal is
the feeling of
that signal.
It is the
rendering conscious
of that signal.
And that is
what we mean by
feeling something.
It means now
this need is not
just a need.
Now this need
is a drive.
Now this need
is driving my
voluntary behavior.
And that is why
it becomes conscious
because as I said
to you earlier,
voluntary behavior
can be defined as
the making of
choices as
opposed to the
executing of
automatized
predictions.
Just to add
two notes on
that, when
hearing Stephen's
questions about
spatial localization
and how that
can refer to
brain localization
as well as
like in the
peripersonal space,
it made me think
about how
awareness,
a-wareness,
it could be
without awareness,
awareness could
be spatially
dislocated,
or awareness
might be a
highly spatialized
percept.
And then the
other note that
I wanted to
make was as
a researcher of
distributed
physiology in
the eusocial
insect colony,
this extended
homeostatic
perspective leads
to many
interesting
connections when
we think about
extended social
homeostasis as
well.
But just two
notes and we
can carry on.
Very good
points.
So you're
saying we can
carry on,
meaning I can
carry on?
Whichever way
you'd like to.
Okay, great.
So I'm now
going to move
to my next
claim, which
is, I see
we have half
an hour left,
so I mustn't,
it's really
quite amazing,
you know,
because you
are so generous
with giving
your speakers
two hours,
you lull us
into a full
sense of security
and thinking,
well, I can
just elaborate
as much as I
want to,
there's plenty
of time.
And now we're
down to our
last half hour
and I've still
got three
points to go.
It's like no
one goes there
anymore, it's
too busy.
Yeah.
Well, I'm
again, grateful
for the time
that you're
giving me.
So let me
move to this
point.
And this has
everything to do
with the
relationship
between affective
consciousness
and cognitive
consciousness.
I spoke earlier
about, I feel
like this,
about that.
In other words,
the incorporating
of the
cognitive domain
within the
sphere of
feeling.
And so this
is the point
that I'm
making now.
This is a
drawing that,
a diagram that
comes from a
paper that I
wrote with
Carl Fristen.
And here,
the important
equation is
the third
one.
And here,
this diagram
basically is
just trying to
spell out in
a visual form
what these
equations are
saying.
So when I
said earlier
that we
have two
ways of
reducing
prediction
error,
when a
prior prediction
does not
lead to the
sensory state
that's
expected,
then we
can either
change our
perception,
in other
words, we
can change
the prediction,
or we can
change our
action.
We can do
something
differently in
order to bring
about the
prior prediction.
So that's what
these two
equations describe,
that we have
a generative
model which
generates
predictions as
to what
sensory state
will flow
from our
actions.
And so
here, there's
an action in
the external
world which
is predicted
to bring
about a
certain sensory
state, and
to the extent
that it does
not bring
about that
sensory state,
in other
words, the
difference here
is the
prediction
error.
And of
course, the
prediction error
is then used
to update
the generative
model in
order to
give rise
to better
predictions, in
order to
better maintain
your expected
sensory states.
I need to
emphasize here,
because this
was not the
case in the
early days of
the predictive
processing
paradigm that
Carl Fristen
and his
colleagues
unleashed upon
the world,
sensory states
do not
necessarily mean
extra-oceptive
sensory states.
So in the
examples that
I have been
giving in this
talk so far,
this would be
the equivalent
of, for
example, core
body temperature
or blood
oxygen level,
et cetera.
The most
important sensory
states for the
organism are
its viable
states in terms
of its
homeostatic
expectations.
actions.
So please
remember that
when I speak
about actions
in the world,
the world that
we're talking
about here
can be the
visceral body
and it can be
the external
world.
The body,
the Markov
blanket,
the body is
as much
external to
the blanket
blanket as
the external
world is
external to
the blanket
of the
nervous system.
I think we've
got some,
we're in
somebody's
kitchen here,
which you
must put,
you must
put your
mic,
whoever is
doing their
dishes there.
So,
what this
equation here,
which is
written in
words here,
the rate of
change of
precision,
precision,
which is
omega in
the equation,
the rate of
change of
precision over
time depends
on how much
free energy
changes when
you change
precision.
This means
that precision
will look as
if it's trying
to minimize
free energy.
The rate of
this free
energy
minimization
process is
the difference
between the
inverse
precision and
the sum of
squared prediction
errors.
So that's
this equation
here put into
words.
And it's
foregrounding
the central
role that
precision plays
in minimizing
prediction error.
So I
want to be
clear that
this is
precision
modulation
is in
physiological
terms the
modulation of
post-synaptic
gain.
So the
message passing
going on
here,
between
error
signals
and
prediction
signals
is
modulated
by
posts.
It's the
reticular
activating
system's
modulation of
that message
passing.
So it's the
increasing or
decreasing of
the gain on
the error
signals.
That's the
role of
precision
modulation,
which is just
the same
thing as to
say that is
the role of
the reticular
activating
system.
It is
modulating
the gain
in the
message passing
to speak
physiologically.
To speak
computationally,
it is a
matter of
increasing
or decreasing
precision values
attached to
the predictions
over the
errors.
error
is bad.
If
things are
turning out
as expected,
that's good.
If
uncertainty
prevails,
that's bad.
So increasing
confidence in
a prediction
is good.
In other
words,
increasing
precision in
a prediction
is good.
Increasing
confidence in
an error signal is bad. In other words, the more uncertainty, the more you become clear that things
are not turning out as expected, to that extent, of course, your confidence in your current policy
is reduced. In other words, the precision in your current policy is reduced, and that just is bad.
So the goodness and badness, the pleasure and unpleasure function of precision modulation that I described to you earlier,
it has this enormously important contribution to make to the whole of this mechanism by determining
the influence of the error signal over the predictive model.
So to the extent that precision is reduced in the error signal, and thereby confidence is maintained in the policy,
to that extent, the error signal will or will not have influence over the parameters of the predictive model.
And so this is trying to illustrate the crucial role that EPIC plays in this whole predictive mechanism.
So this is, as it were, the role of the reticular activating system, of the modulation of the message passing
that goes on. These are, as it were, the synaptic transmission mechanisms,
and these are post-synaptic modulatory mechanisms. And so I'm just wanting to link these formalisms
to the affective role that the reticular activating system plays.
So this, so just to go back to the statement here, the mechanism of perceptual and cognitive consciousness
is precision modulation of allostatic prediction errors. In other words, it is the modulation of confidence
in a current policy. In other words, the perceived consequences of a current...
So as you, as the, as the, a particular need is prioritized, that need is felt.
This generates a category of predictive policies. In other words, this is what I will,
this is what I do in this situation, in this context that I find myself in.
This is what I expect the consequences will be. In other words, these are my expected...
And there's an expected precision attaching to the error signals, of course.
All the other domains of need, remember what I was saying earlier here about the needs must be prioritized.
The other domains have monotonous precisions.
So the crucial mechanism in terms of voluntary action is that, to use the phrase that one of you said you liked earlier,
is the palpating of the uncertainty. In other words, the palpating of the precision
and the adjustment of the confidence in the current perceptual and cognitive, in other words, the allostatic aspect of what I must do about this need state.
Because there's a state of uncertainty that's been prioritized there, there's a changing of one's mind on the fly.
This is what this mechanism makes possible.
So it is the affects are, as it were, a drive for or a demand for predictive work, for mental work.
And this, the modulation, the palpating of the confidence in the policy over the error signals is the predictive work so demanded.
So in other words, the work of updating one's policy, of changing one's mind, it is all of it underwritten by the affective demand.
So the affective demand for predictive work is what gives rise to the predictive work itself, which is the palpating of uncertainties in the current policy and the sensory states that it gives rise to.
And so this is changing your mind. In other words, in other words, voluntary action.
In other words, the capacity for choice. This is the crucial role that precision modulation plays.
In that process.
So that's, oh, okay, good.
So I think, let me just pause for a moment to see if there are any questions about that, because I wanted to illustrate it with a case, which I think is going to pretty much take us to the end of our time.
So before I launch into this last case, let's see if anybody has any questions or comments about that mechanism.
I think we'll go to the case and then there's always so much to unpack with defining the
variables and understanding what the edges mean and so on. But I think the case is a good way to
close this. Okay. So this is a patient of mine, Mr. S. And he had a meningioma here
at the base of his frontal lobes. It was an olfactory sheath meningioma.
And it pushed on his optic nerves. And as a result of that, his vision was impaired. And this is how
the tumor came to attention. And it was successfully surgically resected. Now, because of its location,
in relation, in fact, to the optic nerves, there was some nervousness on the part of the surgeon to
remove it in its entirety. In fact, he felt it was not possible to remove it in its entirety.
So he left a little nub of the tumor. And this re-grew. And so the patient again
noticed these visual difficulties, returned to the surgeon, and the operation had to be repeated.
Because of scar tissue, the second operation is always trickier than the first. And unfortunately,
in the second operation, there was a bleed. And that bleed was into the basal forebrain nuclei. Small
bleed, but the basal forebrain nuclei are crucial. These are the upper end of the, of the, remember I was
saying earlier that these different parts of the ascending arousal mechanisms of the, of the brain,
that they, that they are the source nuclei for these different neuromodulators. And I spoke of dopamine
and noradrenaline and serotonin earlier. Well, the, these nuclei are the source nuclei or, or, or, or,
there are other source nuclei for acetylcholine here too. But these are very important source nuclei for
acetylcholine. Now remember, all of these, what I was saying earlier about these, these neuromodulatory
systems is that they are modulating postsynaptic gain, which is just the same thing physiologically as,
to say computationally, they're modulating precision. That's what they do. They up and down regulate
the precision in the message passing. And this, as I said earlier, it, it dictates, you know, which,
which messages are going to, are going to be selected and, and which not. So it's a, it plays a
crucially important role, does precision modulation in cognition. And, and I'm now wanting to show you
this relationship, the relationship between the affective mechanisms that I'm talking about,
that is the affective functions that are performed centrally by periaqueductal gray, and then how this,
it gives rise to the modulation through these arousal systems of these different neurotransmitter
systems. And I'm going to now show you how this worked in this case. Acetylcholine modulates the
confidence in error signals. And so, let me just quickly tell you a little bit more about this
patient. He was, he was 56 years old, at the time of the second operation. And as a result of the damage
to the basal forebrain nuclei, from the second operation, he woke up from the surgery with a
condition called confabulatory amnesia. So although the tumor was resected successfully, and the visual
problem was, was, was corrected, he now had this devastating new condition called confabulatory
amnesia. Confabulatory amnesia, the patient is, is, it's not only that they are amnesic, in other words,
that they're unable to remember, particularly recent events, but there's also quite a long retrograde
extension too. In other words, there's quite an impairment of the retrograde memory too. Not only
do they have this, but they also are not aware of their, of their memory problems. And so when they draw up,
when they attempt to retrieve a memory, the memory that they retrieve is not the correct one. And they
don't realize it's not the correct one. And so they have what appear to be false memories. These are the
confabulations, they frequently are related in, in, in some semantic sense with the target memory with the
memory that they're looking for, that there's some semantic relationship between the memory they find and
the one they're looking for, but they can be grossly mis, misplaced in space and time. And so these are what
we call confabulations. And the patient is not sufficiently critical of these misrememberings, as a result of
the, the damage to these neuromodulatory mechanisms. So this patient, Mr. S, just to give you one example, I mean, an, an, an, an, an
extreme example. He, he had his operation in Johannesburg, which is in South Africa, which is where I hail from. But at that, at the time, I was living and working in London. And so the surgeon who I knew well, sent the patient to see me to consult me in London.
And because I was doing work with this, with this condition, confabulatory amnesia. So the patient arrives in London on a Friday, and comes to me on the Monday, and, and has no idea that he's in London, because of course, he doesn't remember the journey, that he can't remember anything from one minute to the next. And so I say something about well, you know, the, the surgeon, whose name was Mr.
Miller, the surgeon referred you to me because of this memory difficulty that you're having. That's why he sent you to London. And he said London. What do you mean London? And I said, Yes, you know, you're in London, you don't realise it because you don't remember the journey. You know, that's the whole point. This is the kind of problem that you have in London.
He said London. He denies it. He says he's not in London. Now it's certain that so that's the confabulatory aspect that these patients that he is memory, he's in Johannesburg. And so he believes he is in Johannesburg. So I point out to him, it was winter.
he says he's not in London. Now, so that's the confabulatory aspect that these patients,
in his memory, he's in Johannesburg. And so he believes he is in Johannesburg. So I point out
to him, it was winter. And it was it was snowing outside, I point out to him, the the wintry
conditions outside, you never, by the way, have snow in Johannesburg. So I say, look out the
window, he looks out, he's absolutely shocked. But then retorts, no, I know I'm in Johannesburg,
just because you're eating pizza doesn't mean you're in Italy. That's what he says to me. So
in other words, you know, you don't have to, you know, you mustn't overrate the evidence of your
senses. And so that's just an extreme example of what I mean by how these patients, how, how,
how them, their amnesia, it's not just a lack of memory, it's also an excessive confidence in the,
in the incorrect memories that they draw up. So that's the that's the background. And I saw this
man, the whole point of him being referred to me is because I treat such patients. And so I then saw
him six days a week. At the same time in my outpatient clinic, at the Royal London Hospital,
same time, same place, he came with his wife to the waiting room, I would then go collect him,
take him up to my consulting room, spend an hour with him, take him back down to the waiting room. And
then I would talk to his wife, because he was so full of confabulations, I needed to verify things
in order to get some sense of what was going on. And there were certain themes. And this is an
interesting thing about these patients, these confabulatory patients, there's certain themes
that returned again and again, that the patient was an electronic engineer, but but he,
in reality, he was, but he thought the reason he was coming to me frequently, he thought he was coming
to me to, to, to, because I was consulting him about an electronic problem. And, or otherwise,
he thought that the two of us were electronic engineers together, working on some electronic problem.
Also frequently, he thought that he and I were in some sporting team together that we played rugby
together, or, or we, we were in this rowing team together. Now his wife told me he had played rugby
at university, a good 30 years or more before. And likewise, he had, he had been a keen rower. But this
too, was at university more than 30 years before. And so these are, again, good examples of confabulations,
you know, the patient, you know, the patient, mislocating in space and time, a memory that, that
he draws up now, and he has too much confidence in that, he's too, too, too readily accepts the
veracity of the, of the products of his own memory search. So that's the, that's the background. Now,
on this particular day that I want to give you a little snippet of a session from, he, on this day,
when I came to the waiting room, he touched the scar on his head, the craniotomy scar on his head.
And he said, Hi, doc, to me. So this was progress, you know, for the first time, he was associating me
with medicine. And he was associating me with the surgical scar on his head. And so I thought this was
great progress. And so when we got into my consulting room, I said to him, you touched your head when we
met in the waiting room. And he said, I think the problem is that a cartridge is missing. We must,
we just need the specs. What was it, a C49? Should we order it? So I said to him, what does a C49
cartridge do? He says, memory, it's a memory cartridge, a memory implant. Oh, sorry, I should
have mentioned this. His wife told me that he had had dental implants. He'd had serious problems with his
teeth. And these had been for many years, but these problems had finally been successfully treated by
implants, teeth implanted into the into the jaws. So when he said that that C49 cartridge is a memory
cartridge, and that it's a memory implant, it brought that operation to the dental operation to my mind.
He said, But I never really understood it. In fact, I haven't used it for a good five or six months now.
It seems we don't really need it. It was all chopped away by a doctor. What's his name? Dr.
Solmes, I think. But it seems I don't really need it. The implants work fine. So I said to him, you're
aware that something's wrong with your memory, but and he interrupts me. And he says, Yeah, it's not
working 100%, but we don't really need it. It was just missing a few beats. The analysis showed there was
some C or CO9 missing. Denise brought me here to see a doctor. What's his name again, Dr. Solmes or
something. And he did one of those heart transplant things. So this is referring to another operation
that he'd had, which is clearly also being referred to here, which was that he had a cardiac arrhythmia.
And so he had a pacemaker fitted, a cardiac pacemaker. So he says, So he did one of those
heart transplant things. And now it's working fine. Never misses a beat. So I said to him,
which is what I actually thought, I said, You're aware that something's missing, some memories are
missing. And of course, that's worrying. You hope I can fix it, just like those other doctors fixed the
problems with your teeth and your heart. But you want it so much that you're having difficulty
accepting that it's not fixed already. So he goes on and says, Oh, I see. Yes, it's not working 100%.
And he touches his head. He says, I got knocked on the head, went off the field for a few minutes.
But it's fine now. I suppose I shouldn't go back on. But you know me, I don't like going down. So I asked
Tim Noakes, Tim Noakes, by the way, is a sports physician in South Africa. He says,
So I asked Tim Noakes, because I've got the insurance, you know, so why not use it? Why
not go to the best? And he said, Fine, play on. So that's the end of the snippet that I wanted to show
you. But by the way, before I show you about that, so so this is a case in which due to damage to one
of the precision modulating nuclei, or sets of nuclei, the in this man's case, the basal four brain
nuclei, due to the damage to the acetylcholine modulating mechanisms that I that I showed you
earlier, he has too much confidence in his predictions, and too little confidence in the
world. He does not up the game on the area. So he looks, I say to him, his predictive model tells
him he's in Johannesburg. I say to him, No, you're in London. Look out the window, he looks out the
window, he sees snow. You know, clearly not something that could possibly be associated with
Johannesburg. But he sticks with his prediction. He says, No, I know I'm in Joburg. Just because you're
eating pizza, that doesn't mean you're in Italy. And likewise, in the case of the these memory
processes that I showed you in that session, each time that he starts to feel the unpleasure of the
mounting error signals, the mounting that the things are so just think about it, he has, he touches his
head is he's on the brink of being aware that he's he's had a brain operation, that the brain operation
has resulted in loss of memory, I hope you can see that him saying that I he says, we just need to order
the specs for this module that's missing, what does the module do it does memory, you know, so touching
his head, speaking about operations. So he's on the he's on the brink of recognizing that things were not
as he expected, that things are, in fact, quite different. My point being that this evokes feelings,
that this is bad. This is a this is a panic inducing situation. And because this man has damage to these
precision modulation mechanisms that we've been talking about, that he what he does is he simply
upregulates the or maintains his confidence in his prediction, and in this way, maintains his his
emotional equanimity, rather than allowing the unpleasant affect to dominate and the unpleasant,
unpleasant affect to update to doing to to upregulate the error signal, and and which would which would
normally update the predictive model. So I'm hoping that in this case, you can see something of the
role of affect, the role that the feelings involved in this man's case, in relation to his predictions,
and the prediction errors, in other words, the cognitive business of what he perceives, and what he
believes, and how what he perceives, changes what he believes, and the role of feeling in all of this,
I thought this was a succinct case to be able to illustrate, illustrate all of that.
The because it's only one case, I thought I should just show you some of this. These are several papers
that we've written on showing how these mechanisms work in confabulation. We it's not just this one case,
we were able to show that affect regulation, that that the confabulation, that confabulation has a
wishful quality, in other words, it has a down regulating of error signals quality and an up regulating
of predictions quality. And we were we were also able to show that by analysis of transcripts of cases like
this, we studied many cases like this, how the affect actually improves with each confabulation. So
there's an increasing negative affect followed by confabulation, followed by an improvement in the
affect. So I see I'm right at the end of my time. I just want to, I don't have time to go into this
point. I'm sorry. This is this is not such a fundamental point. It's just a slightly different
way that I see the predictive hierarchy. If we if we take seriously that what we're talking about here,
fundamentally, we're talking about homeostatic systems, and that the most important predictions
have to do with maintaining your phenotypic prior preference distribution, that this has implications
for how we conceptualize the predictive hierarchy. But as I say, we don't have time to go into that.
And then the last thing is just to say that these models that we that I've together with my colleagues
derived from the study of of the neuroscientific evidence
on the basis of this well known statement of of Richard Feynman's, what I can't create, I do not understand.
We we are trying to instantiate these mechanisms that are described to you earlier in an artificial consciousness.
I'm working with a group of really great guys,
scientists and computer scientists and applied mathematicians. And we presented our preliminary findings
a few months ago at Carl Fristen's theoretical neurobiology meetings. And so watch the space. We are
we are we are we are we are we are saying that if we have identified the mechanism, the causal mechanism, where
whereby affects are generated, what they actually do in relation to a self organizing system,
then if this really is how affect is is generated, if this really is how it is caused,
then we should be able to instantiate it in a in an artificial system. And that's what we're what we're
trying to do at the moment. I'm sorry to have rushed at the end. But if you'll indulge me, I will wait for
if there are any questions, comments. I just wanted to show you my so this is I'm saying these questions can
be that they look quite different. If we look at it through the lens that I've tried to encourage you to
look at it with me through, in other words, through the lens of affect, these questions, why and how is
there something it's like to be an organism, something it's like for the organism, and questions like, why
is the performance of these functions accompanied by experience? This is Chalmers' question. Why doesn't
all this information processing go on in the dark, free of any inner feel? I'm saying that these questions,
questions, I've tried to provide you a clue as to how we might be able to address them differently.
Oh, what happened there? I've lost my
Oh, my good. Okay. Ah, there I am. Yes. How we might be able to address them differently, but
get them through this lens. Sorry to have gone on my word. I can't believe I've spoken for two hours
again. But if you'll, if you will allow me, I'll be happy to wait for any further comments and questions
before we end. As we have actually a whole document of questions and many questions in the chat, I think
it's a perfect place to end the live session. And whenever the affordance presents itself, we're always
happy to have a dot three, the numbers keep counting, and we'll keep hosting the sessions because this was
very fascinating. And I hope people got a lot out of it and very tantalizing.
Thank you so much for inviting me and apologies for going on for so long.
I really enjoyed what little interchange we had over these four hours. I really enjoyed. Thank you so much.
Maybe one nice future event could be picking up on those last two, which are
extremely interesting and important. And then starting with those two with the dot one and the
dot two as prerequisite, and then sharing more about those two when the time is right and having
that as more of a full discussion. Very good. Thank you, Mark. Thank you, Steve. Thank you, Dave.
Thanks, Stephen. Thanks, Dave. Thanks, Daniel. Peace. Take care. Bye.
All right. Thanks, everybody for watching. Hope you enjoyed that. See you later.