SPEAKER_02:
all right welcome everyone we're in on seven seven for what it's worth part one review and code later this week will be another part one review session with fraser then we will be heading into part two of the book

So today we'll do sort of some mixture of two things, depending on what people are curious about and want to see.

I'm going to start with a brief, just agent July, 2026 overview free mode.

And then we can talk more about the idea and the flow of the whole book.

Look more at the code if we want, or go to the questions.

So I just wanted to start with cloning the fundamentals repo.

So Active Inference Institute, fundamentals, GitHub repo, and clone and open that folder, and I'm using cursor.

Then I'm gonna hit Hermes update in the terminal.

And while that's, and there are commits every few minutes, so it's a good practice, but while it's updating, you can get the Hermes agents open source harness for LLMs, or use any other,

LLM harness if you already have one that you like.

Right now, the model called HY3 is free, but it's just an example of free, quite good modern models that are constantly on offer from OpenRouter.

Just go to models, prompt pricing, set it to free.

These are all free models.

Sometimes they have some limits for how many things you can do.

OK, Hermes is installed.

So in Fundamentals repo, there's two ways to interact with it.

And there's a web interface.

And then there's interacting with it more like through an agent in the terminal that we'll look at or through Cursor.

The web interface pops up this list of chapter by chapter animations and visualizations.

and a bunch of other visualizations and animations for different topics.

And we can keep on building out more topics that people see relevant for the book.

Or you can say, prompt, make an interactive simulation for deep generative models.

And we'll have the chapters up here.

And then the extras, we can have a ton of different pages.

So that's cool.

There's animations you can look through.

We can develop out that web interface.

But on the developer side, and what's really fun to explore with agentic coding is using some kind of harness and an LLM to interact with the code base.

But just to run the code base from the root layer, just do dot slash run dot sh.

And then you can choose to run the simulations for a given chapter or launch that web interface.

And then when you,

run it you get logs of the website ongoing but with hermes we have that open source harness and a free llm model so yeah this is something that doesn't cost money and say explain where and how variational free energy

is calculated in the code base i'm just going to ask it both to cursor in this kind of chat window format and hermes in the terminal format which is largely pretty similar um and anyone want to add any comments or or questions or anything

or just share from their experience of working with different coding methods with Active Inference?


SPEAKER_03:
Maybe just briefly, I mean, I've used Py,

So for exploratory work, it's very good if you want to quickly get the lay of the land of a repo.

But these tools here are not necessary for you to explore the repo itself, I take it.

You can just clone the repo and have a look through the code if you wanted, or go through the web interface.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Like the docs themselves are Markdown files.

So you could just use this as a knowledge base itself, or you could look at it just on the GitHub.

Or you could just download it and run the local interface with all of the pre computed outputs, or this is like the next step into like we can say use those methods to implement X Andrew.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thanks.

I would just say for any participants who are wanting to learn something more specific or they would really like to see a particular kind of demo, definitely feel free to either add a question into the discourse on the CODA in the same way that we had other questions or ask them here in the chat.

I mean, from having talked to others at the Institute who are still new to coding itself and coming to this from a direction where they have no idea what cursor is and like a dozen other things that just happened here, I would completely understand if someone wanted something more

Focused and kind of like centered on, you know, just being able to maybe just run something in your browser.

So, yeah, please request those for anyone who more wants something in line with with that.

Otherwise.

Yeah, this is a very interesting code repo that Daniel is building out.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so.

That was starting with the question like format and depending on like which model you're using and various other factors, the latency to the first part of the response to the completed part of the response can be quite long.

Like different models give you different visibility into their so-called chain of thought, like their thinking steps, so-called for now.

And also their tool use, which over the last one plus years has been one of the major domains of tool and skill improvement.

So we can see it's not just doing next token completion in the sentence, it's doing tool search like grep.

then it's listing different terminal outputs so in a way it is inputting tokens of text into the terminal it's just that those are on a computer so it ends up doing things on the computer that return text that are valuable for informing its next steps so this is just happening at different speed but both the hy3 model through the hermes harness in the terminal

and the cursor side chat style, which can also be dispatched from the terminal, have given like different types of responses.

This one was kind of plain text in, plain text out.

In the cursor, we get some more multimedia, like visualizations like this.

So play around, find out what representations are useful and harness tool skill improvement

is one area where there's a ton of development, so it could look different for you in a different setup.

So that was more of an investigation question, like where and how is free energy calculated here?

And you could continue kind of associatively from there, like explain that like to this type of mood or person about this setting, or how would that apply to this?

Or what would be the steps to model this kind of situation?

um if it were talking to an agent that has like a web search tool like a perplexity tool or just yeah web search essentially you could ask what research has been done that relates to this area and it could kind of reference the code base in um by looking what locally was on the computer

Like this left panel, which might be subliminally obvious or not, depending on how much familiarity with this format, this is just the files in the finder.

So this is just a horizontal way to look at this.

So that's also related to Git.

which getting an intuition for can be helpful, but again, for another situation focusing on this repo.

So we've asked these two different instances of different harnesses, different interface, different underlying language model, questions about the code base.

They go about it in some different ways that are pretty interesting.

Now let's go into building something from the components that are here.

So we could look at a pre-existing example, or I've kind of started this prompt.

Yeah, many good comments.

I'm not even reading them all in the chat.

We'll check at the end.

I'm giving a prompt here to the cursor agents.

Let's add a top-level folder called demo.

Putting it all in one folder is just going to keep it clean for us versioning this or if I decide to push it or if you want to keep your experiment or something contained like in a sidecar, which is like a standalone folder inside of a repo or to the side of a repo.

So let's add a top level folder called demo with subfolders for different demo examples.

And there's matters of preference and taste in terms of systems engineering and interface engineering for software repos.

So I'm just walking one path through.

There's many ways even something of this relatively straightforward kind of software package could be done.

So I'm just laying out one way to do this, but test and explore other ways.

There's going to be this top level demo folder, and then there'll be different demos inside of it.

Like situation one, two, three.

So maybe in the chat or verbally, like let's pick two or three different examples.

Just write them in the chat now.


SPEAKER_04:
Sorry, I like example 2.3.

I think that's a really fundamental example.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

I think we have the book examples.

I'm just going to prompt it to do some other situational example.

But yes, let's look at 2.3.

So the demo folder, and then like, you know, baseball game, person walking, thermometer with humidity sensor, like whatever situations.

And those will be each in their own folder under demo.

And then I'm saying, start with using the core methods of source to make it.

SRC is kind of a shorthand for where the source code methods are that get modularly tested by the tests repo or test folder.

So that's kind of like the atomic or nuclear components, components.

Then scripts or orchestrators call and configure sets of methods, but they don't necessarily define new or complex logic by themself.

So that's just one separation of consideration to have the underlying methods in source or something similarly named, tested,

at the unit test level with tests and then get called and invoked by thin orchestrators or scripts, which make it so that you can improve and version the underlying methods and kind of keep a level of abstraction in terms of like, we want to be able to call, um,

example 3.3 with our most updated versions of the configuration and the implementation and the logging and the visualizing whereas if chapter 3 was just scripts for just chapter 3 then we could get divergence with the same method from different chapters um but using demo we can just kind of make some other random things so just type type a random situation or something for uh

that we'll make them.

And then while it's making those demos, we'll look at one of the examples that Frazier mentioned.


SPEAKER_04:
I'll put something in the chat myself for that.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

How about isocades?

Riding a bicycle.

Someone add one or type one.


SPEAKER_04:
Simulating active inference processes by message passing.

They have a cool Bayesian thermostat agent.

I'll paste that in the chat.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Drone flight.

Could take learnable loop, paste the blog in, say transpose this to this framework.

Okay.

All right.

I'm going to switch from agent mode just to show one mode.

Different harnesses, again, have different features, but I'm going to switch it to plan mode, which is that it's going to set off to make a work plan for how to do this request, which, as far as I understand,

is usually as good or better.

There's rarely a situation where simply launching into it immediately seems like it'd be better, except unless it's going to cost extra tokens for something that's irrelevant.

But it's kind of fun to see, and then we'll have the opportunity to look at the plan.

But things like plan, loop, goal, memory layers, these are having a lot of impact in long horizon task planning.

and more agentic orchestration methods because it's not like it's a rolling window of memory and it forgets where it was.

If it knows where the work plan is, then a hierarchically organized work plan, even that has hundreds or tens of thousands of task items with the right kind of harness and listener environment, you can just continue to go for.

Okay, so while it's making its plan, let's look at

Example 2.3.

Yes, go ahead, Frasier.

Introduce it or what's important about it.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, actually, I just want to mention, I just cloned the repo on my local machine.

I used UV to install everything and I ran, I ran chapter, you know, 2.3, the precision example.

I'm just wondering where the outputs would have gone.

I didn't run it in interactive mode.

So I just kind of ran it through the, through the terminal.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

Yep.

Yep.

Here's, here's what that looks like.

So I'm in the top level of fundamentals dot slash run.

I'm going to,

hit option A, run, yeah, option A or X. I'll run the chapters.

And then it's gonna log where it saves things.

So output slash figures slash chapter.

So output slash figures slash chapters.

And that's just this folder, like example 2.3

Here's just that image.

Yeah, Sebastian wrote, if you don't have video RAM for your own LLM, I can advise to try Chinese models like Minimax.

Yeah, again, on OpenRouter, there's always, or News Portal, there's always free models.

Those are getting better and better.

And, or you can run

local LLMs or go to a friend's server, but like Ollama or other methods.

Giacomo wrote, does it log to a timestamped file?

Definitely in the terminal, you'll get a timestamp and in the metadata of the file, you'll get a timestamp.

Okay, so here we go.

Back to this cursor chat.

So we asked it to go to plant mode.

And then this is another area of both utility and frustration for the human side.

It's like, it's asking questions.

So again, at that sort of qualitative level, putting aside all that we're learning about energy based methods and all that, this is like an active inference.

Like it identified somehow that it had enough of an uncertainty to cross the threshold

to break a loop and go into asking us a question.

So, should the new demo folder be first class, like chapters and extra, menu, web, smoke, orchestrator, save, or standalone scripts only?

Full integration.

This is kind of like one reason why having a modular, signposted, composable software package, even from the beginning, is super effective, because it's like, now we can wire a whole new

format or a whole new media type because there's already multiple things ongoing.

And yes, that can be like in overkill or overly restraining mode of software.

However, finding that balance of like structural plasticity and form, that's kind of the art and the science.

All right, so here's what the plan looks like.

There's the plan and the to-dos.

At this point, we could give feedback or we can just hit build.

Okay.

Okay.

So that was all this, that was just the scripts running from that run.

So it logs what was output, right?

Click kill terminal, right?

Click kill term.

That's the, that's the terminal that's running the website.

This is that high three model.

So can you review the repo?

and give me a learning path given I have taken frequentist but no Bayesian statistics.

Okay, then on the right side,

We can see that plan getting built.

Because we, yeah, Fraser.


SPEAKER_03:
I was just gonna say, it is nice to be able to have this ability to query your, you know, LLM assistant here to be like, all right, well, you know, I'm working on this, but really how does this relate to this other thing I'm thinking about in much the manner you did just then?

um that is that's a nice workflow for someone who doesn't know as much about active inference as they would like but maybe already knows some their way around a code repository or something like that so it is it is a powerful way to do things yeah thank you yeah totally agree some of you probably will be very familiar with an ide and use it in a similar way or very familiar with ide not seen it used in this way or have your own


SPEAKER_02:
more ergonomic way for using it, or maybe you haven't used an IDE, but there's a variety of free ones for that too.

So because in that demo ask, we went for the full integration.

We could have like, even without much software engineering, you could imagine like, okay, we're gonna have this demos zone.

Is it gonna be like its own self-contained sandbox?

Like have all the methods it needs so that it can be picked up and moved outside and still work?

is it gonna make like light use of some aspects of the package, which would have like kind of demo specific logic in the package or in the demo folder, and then like more core methods from the main package, but then it would require that package.

or the demo could be fully integrated like the extras where they're only thin orchestrators and all the core methods go to the core software package.

So that's a good question of how integrated do you want that time cone kind of software blanket to be?

So, because we want more integration, it is writing these demo methods,

under the main src so it's most integrated you can still extract some methods but but it's connected with the core testing architecture it's not just like standalone but you could have also just gone to a blank folder and say like from scratch make me a standalone active inference drone example

Now, that's very possible now, but part of the reason for having reusable software is so that we can validate, benchmark, all these kinds of things and know that we're not just making a method that says one thing and does another.

So it's going through.

The green are additions.

The red are subtractions of numbers of lines.

So just showing its sequence of tool use and file modification.

And then it's showing here's 27 files that it's modified.

We can see those are those three examples and it's three of six done on the plan.

Okay.

Now back over here to this and like Frazier brought up, like that's what is so fun to explore and figure out the right attention allocation, regimes of attention.

Like,

Do you want to focus more on just following one conversation like that prompt that we asked about a learning path for Bayesian statistics?

Or are we going to be like switching between different projects and kind of like another layer of attentional move?

I'm using the cursor IDE.

However, even this side chat AI functionality is available through a plugin, even if your IDE is not AI-based.

It's a dark mode theme.

But this kind of represents two modes

two points on that continuum in that cursor window, we're basically doing, we're modifying the core package.

Like, we're modifying surfaces and functions of the core repo.

And then in this chat window, we're not even modifying the repo at all.

We might not even be asking something related to the repo.

We could just, like...

spin up a Hermes and ask it some other question and it may or may not even use the repo for for context um and then in the middle is like you're leaving the core logic of the repo intact but you might be doing some side experiment that's an important access is like where are you actually chipping away or adding to the repos code base versus where are you just

using the repo for context or not to make some other point.

Okay, so here it ended its response.

We asked, we know about frequentist stats, but not Bayesian statistics.

This that just popped up is a terminal window that cursor spins up.

where it's gonna run the scripts that it wrote in the demo sections.

How about just report the learning path in a sequence of 50 creative song titles from the 1970s?

See where that goes.

Anyone want to add a question or anything else about how they're using coding agents or like where, what parts look familiar or would they add in, or, or it could be useful for somebody who's learning how to use this.


SPEAKER_03:
Certainly for people who maybe don't have much experience, it can look a bit massively confusing, especially for a virtuoso like Daniel.

But it is actually not.

It doesn't have to be as sophisticated as this or, dare I say, as confusing.

But basically, the repo is just placed where we host our examples.

and whatever other examples, and your workflow, your chosen way of interacting that is totally up to you.

So this is definitely a powerful modern way to do that.

But you can do more traditional, you know, I'm just going to clone the repository and have a look manually.

That's totally up to you.

So don't feel like this is like Howard saying you have to do things if you want to interact with the repo.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

Totally agreed.

This is just one way of working kind of in the engine room, as it were, and help us and collaborate with everyone to co-create the interfaces that would put you in like a flow learning state.

And maybe you'd get familiar with things that don't even exist today, but in six months, they could be a super effective way to learn.

Andrew?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thanks.

Yeah, I, on Fraser's point earlier, I did, you know, I haven't had the time and haven't received enough participant feedback quite yet to know how to build this out further.

But there is one demo for chapter two that I made some time ago, and I dropped the link to that in the chat.

And that's a very, very different approach, which is simply you open it up in your web browser.

There's no installation required.

There's no prompting LLMs.

There's none of that.

And it's just a very direct, like you can just click run all at the top and it runs all the code in your browser for you.

And then the big thing is that it has these like sliders that you can interact with.

And so the code that's there currently can just show you like,

here's what happens whenever you change the mean of the prior versus the mean of the likelihood, things like that, all the things we talk about in chapter two.

And then it also has maximum likelihood estimation with gradient descent, as well as map with gradient descent.

And so I made that with the intent of, you know, there are many people who are new here who are

coming in they're learning coding they're learning things like that they want to know how to get involved in active inference and then very quickly they get swept away by a lot of like difficult you know sort of different things to to understand and so um yeah that was the focus of that demo so if anyone you know finds that to be useful or they want to see like another more directly like interactive without necessarily like having an llm handle a bunch of

things for you and just bearing in mind that all lms are kind of prone to error so um you know there's just different ways to do things um so yeah just wanted to have that known that that's an affordance thank you magdalena um yeah my question is um i'm sorry that i don't know the answer but um does do you have a link


SPEAKER_05:
To a site in the active inference Institute that walks people who are really, really super new to coding and everything.

where it describes what are the basic skills that you need in order to engage with these models, right?

So what I guess I'm asking the experts is, as a beginner, I don't have an idea as to where I can stop in my basic learning and then proceed to use these models.

So is there something already in the Active Inference Institute that can walk us through that?

phase of our learning.


SPEAKER_02:
It's an important question.

I think there's kind of a step zero right before this video picks up with downloading cursor or an IDE and installing Hermes, installing Git and cloning the fundamentals repo.

So that is some information that somebody could either ask about or search to install the IDE.

install GitHub okay and install Hermes agent to recapitulate this exact material and then pick up right at the beginning of this meeting um and I think like we can continue to explore what artifacts and and onboarding material it just there are so many onboardings to programming because

there's an infinite number of places to come to and go to.

This in terms of like the time that I've been learning these topics, this is like on multiple orders of magnitude, different setup and applicability duration, like in a mind boggling fashion, just getting things like the packages installed

was like a quite challenging situation, let alone the natural conversation with a code base and the ability to like convert a sort of question like Giacomo's, how much of it could be ported to Jupyter Notebooks?

It's just like all of it.

Make that transformation.

That's it, it's not a huge cognitive lift.

No harm in trying.

Building expertise in what you can ask and what is like trivially tiny, it's gonna finish in 15 seconds versus what would require like a structured work plan.

or an even more advanced way to do task allocation.

That's the art and the science of understanding how to work with these synthetic intelligence systems.

But just watching what's happening right here should put a few dots down.

And then how you want to allocate your regime of attention.

Do you like one chat

looking more like a chat window.

There's a lot of different user interface services for this in terms of the more generative AI end.

You could paste the link into Perplexity or Google search on your browser with no software and just say, what is this?

perplexity and just what is this?

Or you can read the GitHub static documentation or paste it into something.

And then we're making the notebooks, which gives a good intermediate level because it's browser based, but runs the code on through running it locally.

which has the most configurability and resilience, and whether your drone demo is ready to be relied upon.

That's a second question or a fifth question or something, but is it one prompt away to make an Active Inference-esque drone?

Yeah.

and like just what was a bigger or a smaller jump and making visible some of these computer scientific steps that otherwise are like pretty down the road.

It just flips that.

Fraser?


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I just wanted to say real quick, I guess there isn't yet a good resource

the Active Infants Institute ecosystem itself yet, which would maybe walk someone through a program, a way to learn the fundamentals in terms of the technological skills and

out there that you can interface with.

The problem that you have is that there's so many of them that do exist already.

So in some sense, you just need to choose one and go with it.

And it obviously depends on who you are.

I will just say that the way that I learned Python, I obviously went to university to do computer science and maths.

There's a lot of programming there.

But the way that I actually learned Python was through this course here.

millions of people have done and they really like.

It's on a platform called Udemy.

So that would be, if you don't know any Python programming and you want to learn some Python, that's an excellent resource.

There are, in terms of skills that you would need, really you need probably some basic familiarity with Python and some basic familiarity with .

You know, that's pretty much it.

And then everything from there is really up to you in terms of the agential workflow.

This is really quite cool what Daniel is showing, but it is only one of the interpretation as to how it is that you can interact with this material.

So you basically Python syntax and like what is GitHub and how do I use it?

Really, those are the two things you need.

So there isn't yet a place that I'm aware of.

Although, Andrew, maybe you've got your hand up if there's anything you'd like to say on that.


SPEAKER_01:
Sure, thanks.

Yeah, I just wanted to add to sort of the list of affordances there because I, you know, I also went to university for like, you know, economics and stats and various other things that have been helpful.

But in this context, as far as coding and programming, you know, there's some free resources like W3 is a website that has a lot of common functionalities for programming languages like Python and R and probably Julia by now.

And then Datacamp was very helpful for those who need kind of a gamified approach.

And then there's Coursera, which is very helpful.

that you can kind of earn certifications from university designed online courses.

So some find those useful.

It leads to something you can add sort of to your CV while along the way, like doing hands-on projects.

But then from there, the big thing is like, can you actually directly interact with the

The inputs intermediate outputs and final outputs of the code that you're creating.

So, for those who don't know what a notebook is, a notebook is something that allows you to sort of run code.

Chunk by chunk sort of or cell by cell and that's a really nice way to both demonstrate how code works as well as, like, incrementally on your own build up.

Sometimes a lot of motivation comes from choosing some kind of project that is interesting to you.

And then from there, just sort of building up from there, including learning about all the trials and errors that come along the way.

So, because it's just the thing with LLMs is that there's a lot of, you know, the catch word of the day is vibe coding.

And it was interesting.

interesting point made in the chat that yeah the while a lot of these things look look interesting i just you know it's sometimes one can miss the forest for the trees um whenever they they do this kind of um llm based coding but yeah whatever whatever suits your style yep yep so first on the notebook question it was like we just saw it happening


SPEAKER_02:
from the question to this, it landed the plane on all the chapter notebooks.

Now, maybe some of the scripts need to be slightly updated in order to run in the notebook format.

But like, it is running the notebooks using the methods from the package.

So it's like, that would have been, it would have been like a semester ending discussion.

Are we gonna allocate our TA's effort?

How many hours per week is this gonna take to, are we gonna choose to do this or that?

Like just having a calm position and knowing your affordances and those kinds of topics become really important when stuff like what we just saw happens in the setting of a software package that has methods that are tested.

That is the kind of speed that you can get.

So you can be having a conversation with people with different perspectives and skills and like desires for different interfaces to work with active inference and just sit there with your laptop and work through it.

Then the second, and I think that the deeper question Gcoma wrote,

I want to do it by hand.

LLM cannot make me learn.

Yeah.

Like there's so much to that question, which is like, how are we going to make our perceptions, cognitions and actions support our learning and flourishing and alignment over multiple scales when we only have partial knowledge of even some of the scales.

So like,

There's a lot of ways to use the amount of different AI and the fact that this exists as like pheromone in our niche doesn't mean that you don't want to forage.

It can be like signposting.

It can be something to ignore.

Figuring out though, and then also that process of, okay,

just copied that question in i want to learn by hand you have that kind of that kind of conversation around like it's like oh i don't know what uv is okay but now you're in the game or here's a learning loop that it suggests

I mean, how about copy an example and then render it by hand into assembly code and do the CPU additions yourself?

It's like, okay, but you didn't mean that by hand.

So what did you mean by hand?

Did you mean draw something until you have a convergence understanding with the code?

Did you mean type the Python syntax yourself?

like working and kind of zigzagging to find that out, which might not even be, it might be something about refining and operationalizing a strongly held belief that you have about how you ought to learn in that moment.

Or it could be being open to like streams of action and information that, um,

are novel in terms of what you have seen.

Oh, yeah.

I mean, it's not even tongue in cheek.

I hear you on that though, Giacomo.

It's like, that is literally the question.

It's like learning and application, epistemic value and pragmatic value.

Like in your setting, are you an intern or someone in a student's role or season of their life?

and you're looking to like learn on multiple levels about the topic and breadth and depth and tooling and metacognition, or is it like a time bound deliverable where you need to do some kind of model performance or a given system, totally different modes, but like the palette and the canvas with active inference is really big.

So then we kind of entrench that learn by hand into this documentation file, learn by hand.

We can point people to that.

It's a stable link.

They can contribute.

So that kind of brings in the open source and the open science component is like that becomes somewhere that we can reference.

Yes.

Good, good comment, Andrew.

I never know exactly which one to add, but I will.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, sorry that yeah, that wasn't to you.

Someone else is sharing their repo in the chat and I just it.

It's very cool that people want to contribute more learning materials, but it's just yeah, whenever you put out a repo, you should add a separate license.

I saw that a couple of scripts like half the phrase MIT license tucked in there, but still presents potential legal issues.

So for whoever is posting about that, I would strongly suggest you add a separate like license file to the repo and then that way people can properly.


SPEAKER_02:
use and contribute as as you seem to be wanting them to thanks yeah that's what this one that's what this repo is mit license but but i'm i'm um not i i don't know all the situations involving different licensing but it's a key it's it's an it's a key aspect of that previous point on like open science and participation for sure um okay so again we've like looked at a bunch of different modes ranging from

browsing the fundamentals repo as a website to pasting in the URL into a search browser, looking at the code and the outputs, looking at documentation, different topics.

And then if you kind of want to break the fourth wall, you clone the repo, which is to say you bring it locally.

And even if you don't have GitHub installed, you can still go to code

and then download zip.

So technically, you don't even need Git, especially if you're not going to push back.

You can just download the zip file.

It'll be a few megabytes.

Open that folder, and then you're going to be in this setting.

Open that folder in an IDE, like Cursor or VS Code or any number of other

And then you can either just right away open the terminal and do dot slash run, or you might hit a few speed bumps depending on your environment.

And for those, it may be very useful to have a coding agent who you can say, paste in, I got this error, what do I do?

Say, oh, you need to install UV or, oh, you need to install Python or something like that.

Let's see where we got with the demos.


SPEAKER_03:
Just one quick question, Daniel.

I saw somewhere there was some .ipymb notebooks.

I looked through the repo.

I couldn't find them.

Am I blind or something?


SPEAKER_02:
I just haven't committed at all.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
All right.

Yeah.

Okay.

Yeah.

It will.

We'll look at what it looks like on GitHub.

It's in output notebooks.

Just some types of things like that, like work in the Kinevin sort of complicated and simple quadrants where it's like, I mean, if there were 500,000 hours to do this, then it would be possible to port it over.

It's like, well, and then there's a few little connections like, oh, it's possible to export a thin orchestrator to a notebook.

Now you know, and it's possible to transform this into that.

And that can be done on maps.

So then it's like, can you do it once?

Because if you can do it once, it's just going to be a question of, is it going to be just as fast to do it a million times or will it take a million times as long?

But if it's a million times, a millionth of a second, then that's not going to be too bad.

Um,

Okay, so here, run the demos, output, figures, demo.

So let's look at it in Finder.

Balance on a bicycle.

we can say we want to see the animation of the bicycle um or we want to specifically be looking at these two factors or we want to study um acquisition of primary bicycle riding or we want to look at you know it's like you go from there drone flight

You know, especially if you just dashed off the prompt and looked at an output like this, like part of the metacognition is how much confidence should I have that it really did do a discrete expected free energy based plan?

And if you're in an environment where those methods are really well signposted, really flexible, really clear, really documented, really used in a lot of other examples, it will likely be that method.

But if you do this in a blank slate repo or a repo that has like sort of a mosaic of different experiments at different stages of speculative functionality, then you're more likely to get a method that meets that repo in its sort of mosaic nature.

And another way to say it would be like, it's not really gonna be doing EFE.

at least EFE in any specific sense.

Maybe that zero to one draw from the center of the distribution is exactly what you need.

But if you're looking for like a specific active inference ontological relationship with your code, you would want to investigate it at great depth, but this is just a short overview.

And then isochade.

This is a path.

And like, this is actually the relationship between the pottery visual culture

constant et al paper and the active infrared paper in 2020 and 2021 was the iCicade model.

We adapted it to the ant foraging model by just looking at movement that left a trace, not just the iCicade movement, which is also path-based and can be based upon epistemic and pragmatic value, but just doesn't leave a trace on the surface.

And then you can look at those demo,

scripts and and see what they're written okay yeah oleana great comment thanks for adding that to the questions

section there's so many angles to converge upon the material with and this is like a um this is like this is like a computer science entry point like we didn't even look at any math notation equations at all we didn't engage with like um some philosophical questions it wasn't about precision psychiatry so this is like another entry point and then figuring out in your own time allocation to this

learning and application work itself, which has like so many learning moments and rewarding moments in it.

Okay.

Any last comment or question?


SPEAKER_01:
uh yeah just again uh yeah there's a final note for anyone if you especially those most interested in checking out code um yeah we're doing a lot of this kind of as we move along and what daniel

has produced here is a very nice, like, attempt to already at the get-go have a more universalized approach to, like, here's how we can nicely, like, you know, here are all the chapters.

Here's a repository layout.

You know, it's getting a strong step forward on, like, building out a repository that's dedicated to this rather than, you know, doing things too piecemeal and bit by bit to where things can become even more disorganized.

That said, it is a lot.

probably at once for a lot of people who are new to this approach.

So yeah, we're very open to, you know, there are different learners coming in at different levels who've never touched computer code before versus those who are just

making machine learning models all the time and just waiting for some hierarchical predictive coding model code so they can just you know shift over to that um so yeah we're very open to different kinds of questions and and and uh preferences so just let us know thank you really quickly and then aliana so um dorsa yes we can record a short video like that but go to cursor.com and install that software go to github.com


SPEAKER_02:
and get an account and get the desktop application or just download the code and then get Hermes agents and then use the free LLMs just like I showed with OpenRouter.

And this is the one command that you run to install that in the terminal.

Open the terminal on your computer, look for a YouTube video for how to open the terminal, but you're going to like open the terminal, install Hermes and cursor.

Log into GitHub if you have that set up or don't.

And then literally prompt and discuss from there.

Join the Discord or email us if you have some specific questions.

But that is really as consolidated as it is at right now.

Aliana?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Once again, I just want to extend a really big shout out and thank you to you, Daniel, to Andrew, to Frasier for the immense amount of hard work that you've had to put in and incredible consistency.

And I'm noticing that this is a new cohort for fundamentals.

There are nine previous.

And you're showing up multiple times each week, which is, it's just a true test of stamina and dedication.

And I just thank you guys so much.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

Andrew and Fraser, both ex-interns, have done amazing learning and teaching.

Appreciate it.

Yeah, so it's all on there on fundamentals.


SPEAKER_03:
I've added a few questions that were put in the chat to the questions block on Coda where we will add answers to them and they'll be a bit more visible for everyone to see.

They're in chapter five right now, which is not the best place, but I just sort of mentioned that.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

All right.

So enjoy.

Give a shot.

Come back with what questions you have.

All right.

Farewell, everybody.

I'll stop the recording.
