## Fx7xWUU1MlI

SPEAKER_00:
hello everyone welcome to actin flab live stream number 24.0 today is June 16th 2021 and we're going to be talking about this paper in empirical evaluation of active inference in multi-armed bandits I'm Daniel and I'm here with blue

Awesome.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Here at the short link, you'll find all of the live streams and different series that we do in the communications unit of ACT-INFLAB.

And today we're going to be contextualizing in the dot zero video for two upcoming discussions in the second half of June, 2021 on the 22nd and the 29th, when we have discussion 24.1 and 24.2 on this paper, and hopefully with the authors joining.

Today in Act-Inf Livestream number 24.0, we're going to be trying to set some context and give an introduction to the following paper, An Empirical Evaluation of Active Inference in Multi-armed Bandits, by the authors listed here.

And the video is just an introduction to some of the ideas.

It's not a review or a final word.

It's kind of like a three-way intersection.

We have people who are maybe within the active inference community and looking to be exposed to some different areas like Bayesian statistics or machine learning.

The second road is those who are coming from Bayesian statistics or machine learning approaches and curious about active inference.

And then, of course, we hope that this will be exciting and interesting, even if you're unfamiliar with active inference or machine learning.

We'll hopefully try to connect it to some broader questions in behavior and decision making more broadly.

We're going to walk through the aims and claims of the paper, the abstract and the roadmap.

covering a few big questions, and then we're going to go through all the figures and some of the key formalisms of the paper so that whether you read the paper or not, you'll hopefully be in a good spot to ask questions and learn more.

And of course, in the dot one and dot two, in the coming weeks, we'll be discussing this same paper.

So save and submit your questions and let us know if you'd like to participate or contribute in any way.

Here we are on the paper itself, which has a screenshot of the cover on this slide.

And I'll read the aims and claims, and then Blue, you can give a first thought on what you thought were kind of cool pieces about what they aimed for or claimed.

In this paper, we provided an empirical comparison between active inference, a Bayesian information theoretic framework, and two state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms, Bayesian Upper Confidence Bound, UCB, and optimistic Thompson sampling in stationary and non-stationary stochastic multi-armed bandits.

We introduced an approximate active inference algorithm for which our checks on the stationary bandit problem showed that its performance closely follows that of the exact version.

And hence, we derived an active inference algorithm that is efficient and easily scalable to high dimensional problems.

So what was cool about that or what made you excited to make this .0?


SPEAKER_02:
This paper was really awesome.

It shows how active inference can be used to solve problems that are sometimes computationally intractable and really pretty difficult.

So I think that the authors did a great job of deriving this active inference algorithm and proving that it's useful.


SPEAKER_00:
Agreed.

And they did an awesome job bringing it analytically, like with equations.

in line or at least being juxtaposed to other approaches in machine learning rather than appealing to a qualitative body of theory which is also great this is definitely one where the claims are specific and exact and that's what we'll be following up on so the abstract i'll read the first half and then you can go for the second half

A key feature of sequential decision-making under uncertainty is a need to balance between exploiting, choosing the best action according to the current knowledge, and exploring, obtaining information about values of other actions.

The multi-armed bandit problem, a classical task that captures this trade-off, served as a vehicle in machine learning for developing bandit algorithms that proved to be useful in numerous industrial applications.

The Active Inference Framework, an approach to sequential decision-making, recently developed in neuroscience for understanding human and animal behavior, is distinguished by its sophisticated strategy for resolving the exploration-exploitation trade-off.

This makes Active Inference an exciting alternative to already established bandit algorithms.

So it's kind of awesome.

First few words.

It's about sequential decision-making under uncertainty and the bandit task was made to explore that.

Machine learning has already gotten so much value out of pursuing algorithms for approaching this multi-armed bandit problem.

And then enter active inference, which was developed to initially cover human and animal cases of behavior.

But as we're seeing, it also goes beyond that.

And so that motivates studying active inference in the context of multi-armed bandit problems.

So go for the second part.


SPEAKER_02:
Here we derive an efficient and scalable approximate active inference algorithm and compare it to two state-of-the-art bandit algorithms, Bayesian upper confidence bound and optimistic Thompson sampling.

This comparison is done on two types of bandit problems, a stationary and a dynamic switching bandit.

Our empirical evaluation shows that the active inference algorithm does not produce efficient long-term behavior in stationary bandits.

However, in the more challenging, switching bandit active inference performs substantially better than the two state-of-the-art bandit algorithms.

The results open exciting venues for further research in theoretical and applied machine learning, as well as lend additional credibility to active inference as a general framework for studying human and animal behavior.

So this is really nice because it takes, like...

Active inference as an approximate way that humans deduce reason, balance this exploration, exploitation paradigm, and it programs that into the framework.

So it just shows that, you know, it's getting closer, approximating human thinking in a machine more and more, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, and there's sort of a pair of pairs that we're going to return to a bunch of times in this discussion.

The first is the two types of problems, the stationary and the dynamic bandit, which one of them is static, one of them is changing.

We're going to talk more about that.

And the other pair that comes up often is the Bayesian upper confidence bound and optimistic Thompson sampling.

We're also going to come back to that.

So they're kind of doing a pair of pairs approach.

And then the results are just really fascinating.

And we're going to unpack that, that actually in the simpler case, we see that the active inference algorithm doesn't do perfectly.

But in this more challenging dynamic case, it does better than state of the art.

So what do you call something that goes beyond state of the art?

Here's the roadmap for the paper.

And of course, as with these .Zero videos, if you're curious about how it was specifically stated in the paper, or you wanna dive in for more and you wanna see how they cited or how they built up a claim, you should go to the paper itself.

This is just the roadmap for it.

They start with an introduction of the multi-armed bandit and cover the two kinds of bandits that they explore, which is the stationary and switching versions, and talk about how you evaluate performance in different versions.

They then introduce the algorithms that they're going to utilize and talk about this variational smile approach, which we'll cover just a little bit of, but look forward to hearing from the authors about what it does.

Then there's results for the pair of problems that they explore, stationary and switching bandits, and then have five figures, which will go through showing some results.

And hopefully even if the algorithms or the formalisms were a little bit hard to follow, the figures are really clear and they show how the algorithms perform through time and close with a discussion that hits on some awesome general points for the active inference and machine learning communities.

Here are the keywords that were provided with the paper.

So as usual, we're going to use these keywords as jumping off, but also jumping in points for those who might be familiar with sequential decision-making, AKA life, but not be familiar with Bayesian statistics.

And we're going to start from sequential decision-making and then go on to talk more broadly about Bayesian inference, multi-armed bandits.

So it's totally fine if you've never even heard of the bandit problem.

Then we're going to talk about those two different algorithms that they're going to be exploring, upper confidence bound and Thompson sampling, and then see how they talked about active inference, which is going to be a really distinct way relative than a lot of approaches we've seen previously.

So let's go to sequential decision-making.

Blue, what would you say about this?


SPEAKER_02:
So sequential decision making is dependent on time, T, right?

So at one time step, you have a state of the system, you perform an action, and that alters the system, right?

So that at the second time step, the system is now in a new state, and then you have another decision to make about what you're going to do with the system.

So this is like driving a vehicle, managing a stock portfolio, playing a game of chess, sequential policy decisions.

And so like, to

kind of juxtapose what is a not sequential problem.

So that'd be something like image classification is not sequential.

Like you can just classify all of the images parallel or at once.

The state of the system doesn't depend on how you classified the previous image.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So definitely all kinds of organismal behavior in decision-making that happens in time.

So think decisions, you're thinking usually sequential decision-making.

especially when the decision influences the future.

Those are all the kinds of problems that we're going to be talking about.

But also to even make it broader than that, some non-sequential problems can be framed sequentially.

So let's just say that we had that classification problem where it's one blob, one big data set, and so there's no temporal sequence.

We might want an algorithm that treats it as if it were sequential so that we could just start reading in examples and then after 10, okay, got it.

So then by looking at it as if it were a sequential problem and we were solving things through time, sometimes we can approach non-sequential problems that way because in the computer, it is gonna be sequential on the processor.

So it's for things that actually are sequential in the world or they're for things that we wanna act as if they're sequential.

One big tension that comes up with all kinds of modeling is the explore-exploit dilemma slash trade-off.

And this is an awesome 2015 paper of Hills et al.

Exploration versus Exploitation in Space, Mind, and Society.

it's pretty cool because it talks about multiple different domains here in the table one there's animal foraging visual search information search memory search searching and problem solving and social and group learning those are like all of our favorite topics blue and it gives just a little bit of a visual example how in different domains what does

the archetype of exploration look like and what does the archetype of exploitation look like so some of these are very uh related to kind of a physical movement like patch foraging exploration moving to a different tree exploitation staying on the same tree but also visual focus exploration scanning around exploring exploitation having a fixed gaze and staring at something

And then also we can think about even in word association, like memory, exploration is doing big jumps from different semantic neighborhoods, whereas exploitation might be like all the livestock animals or animals with the same letter.

There's different ways that you might exploit because there's different dimensions to the semantic landscape, but

there's still this trade-off between jumping far or staying relatively close in the neighborhood.

So it's a big trade-off.

It's studied in animal behavior.

It's studied in all kinds of decision-making tasks.

Anything to add on that?


SPEAKER_02:
Only that I got to interact a lot with Peter Todd last summer, who's the second author on this paper, and it was so fun.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, and also Ian Cousine has done awesome collective behavior work.

So it's exciting to think about how these algorithms are able to apply to individual agents, but also maybe groups, and that's hinted at multiple times here, like role assignment and social connectivity.

as we heard about in the abstract of the paper that we're discussing today they went right from sequential decision making under uncertainty to multi-armed bandit is

way that we can study that and from the paper this is where we're introducing that that uh double problem the two problems are solving we consider two types of bandit problems in our empirical evaluation a stationary bandit as a classical machine learning problem and a switching bandit commonly used in neuroscience so we're going to go into more detail about how those are technically defined but let's just start with what are people getting at with multi-armed bandit why

Is it something that so many people have addressed?

This will make the presented results that they're doing here directly relevant, not only for the machine learning community, but also for learning and decision-making studies in neuroscience, which are often utilizing the active inference framework for a wide range of research questions.

So there's all these different areas.

Here's a multi-armed bandit deciding which area to study.

Computer science, machine learning, economics, neuroscience.

These are all areas that the multi-armed bandit is like a bridge amongst.

So now we're sitting active inference right at that nexus.

We've talked a lot about connecting computer science to behavior or connecting neuroscience to economics.

What if we could all meet at a common nexus?

What if that were active inference?

These are the kind of fun things to talk about.

But it's not just a nexus of conceptual connection, the multi-armed bandit and active inference.

There's a lot of really specific use cases and a lot of the algorithms that power our experience online are actually trained and fit with multi-armed bandit problems.

So here's a few fun examples that we came across while researching here.

On the top left is showing how you have a multi-armed bandit playing a role in music recommendations.

So it's like the arm, which arm is being chosen, that's the song.

So it's thinking about it from the point of view of the music platform.

It's sending a song.

then the target user which is the bandit machine here gives a payoff back to the algorithm thumbs up or thumbs down and then the algorithm sends you another song and then a payoff is given so it's sequential decision making and it's that same relationship that's shown graphically the goal is to maximize the sum of the ratings versus maximizing the sum of the payoffs in an abstract problem

Here's an example of website A-B testing, testing versions of a website.

So in the top, there's four versions of the website, and then they're each being allocated to a quarter of the users, and then each of the users are staying on the site for a certain amount of time or staying for different amount of times.

In the standard A-B testing for the whole duration of your test, you keep that 1 fourth for each site.

But in the multi-armed bandit, you start with a quarter.

But then very rapidly, we see that this blue one starts performing better.

and then we keep exploring and having some time allocated to these other colors but we see that the blue pretty steadily dominates and then that black line ends up staying higher so overall a higher number at the end of the epoch so you're sort of earning while learning because you're able to be making exploration while you're also exploiting and there's papers specifically on that

like Bayesian bandits in the context of online personalized recommendations any thoughts on that blue cool so these are yeah these are algorithms that are in use every single day and they power a lot of our experience and a lot of decision making support here's where we bring in some of the Bayesian algorithms

They're going to be using these two types of bandit problems, stationary and switching.

And here's the second pair of terms.

They're going to be empirically comparing active inference to two other state of the art bandit algorithms from machine learning.

So those who are familiar with machine learning will have seen these two algorithms a lot.

The first is an upper confidence bound algorithm, UCB.

And the second is a variant of Thompson sampling called optimistic Thompson sampling.

And then they note here, the two algorithms, the UCB and Thompson sampling, reach state-of-the-art performance on various stationary bandit problems.

Achieving regret, which is the difference between actual and optimal performance, we'll return to it soon, that's close to the best possible logarithmic regret.

In Switching Bandits, learning is more complex, but once this is accounted for, both of the algorithms exhibit state-of-the-art performance.

You can never play perfectly, but you're approximating about as good as you can play with these algorithms.

What does that look like before we go into the technical details of what these algorithms are?

So on the top left, we're gonna be thinking about, again, whether it's deciding which version of a website we wanna be presenting or which songs we wanna be presenting, or just keeping it kind of abstract.

On the top left, we start with zero trials.

So this is before we have any information at all.

And then as trials occur and payoffs are observed,

and the trials count, count, count, count, count, after 28 trials, we've reached a very markedly different set of distributions.

And so what this overall looks like is you show up at the casino and you don't know the payoff of any of the slot machines.

And then you're going to be choosing some policy, some way of approaching those slot machines and switching between them as needed.

some approach that's going to hopefully result with you getting the most money and so in this case it's sort of like as you get more and more information you're fine-tuning your estimate of what the distributions look like like we can see how the red distribution gets tuned as it gets tried more and more and similarly for the other distributions so that's kind of what this algorithm does is it starts with no specific bias towards a given slot machine

And then it tries to develop a strategy for staying with slot machines that are known about versus trying new ones or ones you haven't tried in a while in order to get the best possible outcome.

And as you can imagine, if there's a static one, then it's an easier problem.

If it's dynamic, you have to keep the rate of change in mind.

Any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_01:
Good, good explanation.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so Bernoulli bandits are the class of bandits that they're going to constrain themselves to.

So they say, we're constraining ourselves to a well-studied version of bandits, the so-called Bernoulli bandits.

For Bernoulli bandits, choice outcomes are drawn from an arm-specific Bernoulli distribution.

Bernoulli bandits together with Gaussian bandits are the most commonly studied variant of multi-armed bandit, both in theoretical and applied machine learning and experimental cognitive science.

So you can fit any kind of distribution for the rewards underlying each of these slot machines.

But it turns out that if you use the Bernoulli distribution, the math works out nicely, which makes it easy to study.

That's why there's been a lot of study in the Bernoulli and the Gaussian.

So a Gaussian distribution reward would be like, okay, you get five with a certain bell curve

of how much you might win.

Bernoulli is going to be a different shaped distribution, but just the idea is that you're going to be learning the parameters that describe the reward returned by that arm.

So it's just the subcategory or the function that underlies the reward payoff on these machines.

Let's talk about the two algorithms that they're gonna be discussing a lot, and then also where these algorithms come into play in terms of strategy.

So again, you're sitting there at the slot machine at the casino, and how are you going to decide how to stay or leave a given machine?

Stay in the casino though, that's where you wanna be.

This is from a nice blog post from 2019.

Data scientists have developed several solutions to tackle this problem.

And the three most common algorithms are Epsilon Greedy, then Upper Confidence Bound and Thompson Sampling.

So Epsilon Greedy is not given in this paper because it's not the best performing algorithm, but it's really a nice sort of starter algorithm.

It's the simplest algorithm to address the exploration exploitation trade-off.

Basically, during exploitation, the lever with the highest known payout is always pulled.

So whatever the running best estimate of the top performing slot machine is, defaults there.

However, from time to time, some random fraction epsilon with some fraction 5% of the time or 1% of the time, select another random arm to explore the other arms with an unknown payoff.

So you're sticking with the one that has the highest point estimate, and then just some fraction of the time, you flip to a different one just to check.

And then you update your estimate of how each of them are doing.

So that's one strategy.

Now here's two strategies that do better than that.

Those are the ones that we're going to be contrasting with active inference.

One of them is the upper confidence bound, which is sometimes referred to as optimism in the face of uncertainty.

That sounds like active inference.

It assumes that the unknown mean payoffs of each arm will be as high as possible based upon historical data.

so we don't know the payoff of each arm but we want to assume given what we've already gotten from the data which is as far as we can speculate we want to assume that it's as good as it could have been which is why we see the upper confidence bound on the top of this distribution and then thompson sampling

is fundamentally a Bayesian optimization technique with a core principle known as probability matching that can be summed up as play an arm according to its probability of being the best arm.

So in contrast with epsilon, which says just go with the one that you think is best, and then 10% of the time do something else.

Thompson sampling is like you kind of have a pie chart with a relative performance of different arms, and then you pick them based upon how big of a pie it is.

So you do rarely choose ones that don't have high payoffs just to sort of check in on them.

But then if you check back on one and it does really well, then that slice of the pie starts growing.

And then the whole point of training these algorithms is how fast should you be reweighting in the dynamic case, et cetera.

So just laying it out like that is not the solution, but this is getting at a few ways, whether optimism in the face of uncertainty or this sort of conservative probability matching

These are two ways that, as we've seen, are state of the art because they basically perform as well as possible.

And so we're locking it down with upper confidence and a lower confidence bound.

It's a pretty nice choice of algorithms.

They're brought up as an instructional pair all over the machine learning educational space.

So nice choice by the authors to juxtapose it so clearly to active inference.


SPEAKER_01:
So is Thompson sampling then

pessimism in the face of uncertainty.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Things couldn't be better than they have been in the past.

Let's go a little bit more into detail into the two different algorithms and then talk about regret.

So here's from another blog post, Lillian Wang's blog, talking about bandit strategies.

so again it's about explore and exploit even though active inference is going to help us reconceptualize of explore exploit which we can maybe get to at the end but we don't want to be exploring inefficiently because we're kind of spending our time playing on losing machines while we know that there's a better way to play so to avoid such inefficient exploration one approach is to do epsilon sampling

And then in the case of a static set of payoffs, you decrease that parameter epsilon in time.

So again, how fast should you decrease it?

Still have to fit parameters, but that's just one approach.

The other approach to sort of prevent this inefficient exploration, so avoid pain, is to be optimistic about values that are optimistic about options with high uncertainty and thus prefer actions implicitly for which we haven't yet had a confidence value estimate.

That's why this is optimism in the face of uncertainty.

in other words we favor exploration of actions with a strong potential to have optimal value so that's exactly what the ucb upper confidence bound algorithm does is it measures it with an upper confidence bound so that the true value is always below that bound and then we are trying to push up the upper bound knowing that somewhere below it hopefully not too far is the true value

then the ucb algorithm does optimization with this arg max selecting the greediest action to maximize that upper confidence bound so as it's laid out in the blog basically you can do no exploration

That's just sort of pick the first one you sit down at, stay there.

You can explore at random, that's epsilon greedy, or you can explore smartly with a preference for uncertainty.

So we're just kind of building on that epsilon idea of sticking with the one that usually we like,

then spending sometimes elsewhere how much time spending elsewhere and which ones should we choose well don't just go to any old machine if you're going to select somewhere elsewhere let's choose ones that still have a good probability of having a high expected payoff so that's ucb any comments on that

No.

So in contrast, we have Thompson sampling from a nice slide deck from Agrawal at Columbia.

And Thompson sampling goes back to 1933.

So like many other algorithms, the classical variants are pre-computational.

Sometimes they're even just thought experiments.

And in the slides, it's talked about how Thomson sampling, it's a natural and efficient heuristic that maintains belief about the effectiveness, which is the main reward of each arm.

We're going to be kind of tracking how well we think each arm is doing through time.

And basically, the way it works is we're going to observe feedback.

then update our beliefs about different arms in a Bayesian manner, and then pull arms with a posterior probability of being the best arm.

So not the same as choosing the arm that's most likely to be best.

This is like, again, a pie chart that is the proportions of how well they're performing, and then we choose based upon that proportion.

And the pseudocode looks like this.

We start, we initialize the model with a prior, as well as the family of distributions that our rewards are expected to be drawn from.

So this is a Gaussian case, but this is where you could see a Bernoulli bandit come into play.

And then the algorithm is as follows.

first there's a sampling um of a mean with a estimate from the posterior for a given arm i then the arms are played according to the probability of them being the best arm the reward is observed and then everything is updated so it's like sample

your posterior from your prediction then act then observe and update it's sort of like that closing time song you know every every every beginning comes from some other beginnings end and it's called a posterior in bayesian statistics you know prior gets updated the posterior but then that posterior is the prior for the next round so it's not like it's just a one round learning

the posterior feeds back into the model, which is why we just talk about continual Bayesian updating.

So it's kind of like OODA, like observe, orient, decide, act.

These kinds of action loops, which of course include active inference, is what makes these models really similar, or at least in the same neighborhood.

And then this paper that we're discussing brings them into alignment analytically with the equations and through simulation and juxtaposition.

That's what Thompson sampling is though.

Any comments on Thompson?


SPEAKER_02:
Just how well it plays into this sequential decision-making process that we were talking about earlier, right?

So it's, you have a next time step and you update and you update and you update.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So again, like even for those non-sequential tasks, like the image classification you brought up, you could sample from your big database

then update your model and then once you're sampling and you're like i'm not really updating my model that much you might not need to look through the entire data set and so by framing that non-sequential problem sequentially you get big computational speed up and then of course for sequential decision making then you need an approach like this how about regret learning regrets i've had a few


SPEAKER_02:
Haven't we all, right?

So I think you put this in here, the introduction to regret and reinforcement learning, which is a medium post, correct?

So if you wanted to learn more about regret, you can check it out there.

But regret is just the difference between the optimal performance, how good you could do, and the actual performance.

And so you see in this little image here, you can see that the best policy is the red dotted line and then the choices that the agent makes.

This is like the logarithmic equation.

performance, logarithmic regret.

And so they're converging.

The idea is to converge with the best possible policy based on your previous decisions, right?

Exploring, exploiting.

And then the authors here use regret when they're looking at the stationary bandits.

They use regret as a measure of performance.

But then they use regret rate when they're looking at the switching bandits.

And so regret rate is just...

the regret over time and they used the rate they said it was had been illustrated to be a better estimator of this logarithmic regret in the dynamic case.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

And the big idea of regret is looking back over your history.

So either for all of history, that's cumulative regret, which applies really well to the stationary problem or recent history, which applies well to the dynamical case.

Because if things are always changing, you're kind of more interested in how well you're doing recently rather than over all time.

You don't want some fluctuations early on to be playing a role in your cumulative value because you don't want to fit your strategy now to reducing regret from a different epoch, which can happen if you don't do it this way.

So looking back over history again, whether all of history, cumulative regret for the fixed case or recent history for the dynamic case,

Update your strategy so that you would have minimized regret to zero by playing that strategy all along So, you know looking back at the Bitcoin price What strategy would have been hashtag no regrets?

Those are the big questions or just in the last little window of time Given what I recently have found out How could I make my rate of regret gain as low as possible?

so

It's a way to look back and then optimistically think about how you could have performed by reducing regret to zero.

And we see this all the time in computer science, like maximizing something, you do it by minimizing.

Whether there's a negative thrown in there or whether there's a natural log thrown in there or whether it's one over something or it's just framed in an opposite way.

A lot of times, if you know that you're bounded at zero, something can't go below zero, then

you want to go as low as possible.

Or if you want to maximize something, it's sometimes easier to do a one over the maximum and then try to get that number to zero rather than this unbounded maximization, like, okay, I'm at 5 million.

Should I stop?

You don't know.

Maybe that's nowhere even close because there's no highest number.

So that's regret learning, and that's how they're going to be calculating their performance.

Let's get to active inference.

So one thing that you'll see on this slide right away is we're not seeing a sensory motor loop.

We're not seeing an agent in an environment with arrows and nodes.

We're coming at active inference from this point of view of sequential decision-making under uncertainty.

And so in this section, which has a great title, three, two, one, active inference.

They write that the exploration exploitation trade-off can be formulated as an uncertainty reduction problem.

where choices aim to resolve expected and unexpected uncertainty about hidden properties of the environment.

So already we're seeing that active inference formalization.

There's hidden states in the environment which we don't directly have access to, but we get admitted outcomes from decisions.

This leads to casting choice behavior and planning, aka planning as inference, as a probabilistic inference problem, as expressed by active inference.

So action and inference.

Our inference is about what actions we're planning and about the hidden states of the world given the outcomes that we're receiving, sensory data.

Using this approach, different types of exploitative and exploratory behavior naturally emerge.

In active inference, decision strategies, behavioral policies, are chosen based on a single optimization principle.

Or yesterday, I think it was a, what was it?

A functional, a common functional footing or something like that.

The single optimization principle is minimizing expected surprisal about observed and future outcomes.

That is the expected free energy.

So it's kind of cool, like the...

backwards looking approach is to minimize regret like how would i have performed best in given what i know about the past how does that change the way i act now and then free energy minimization expected free energy in the current and the future moments is like given the state of my model

for now and moving forward, how can I minimize expected free energy?

Because regret is not anticipatory.

Regret is only looking back at it, which is why it's really easy for training.

And then here's something that's looking forward.

So it's kind of cool how like the current moment is this handoff between the retrospective regret learning and then the prospective free energy minimization.

That's how they frame active inference here.

Any general comments or what do you think was kind of cool about that?


SPEAKER_02:
So I just am thinking back to Alex Shantz's paper that we did way back.

I think that was number eight.

But I still always go back to that when I'm looking at these computational frameworks, because he broke it up very nicely into the reward, the pragmatic value, which could be, in this case, the minimization of regret can be seen as the pragmatic value or the reward, and then the epistemic value.

So you have both of these things that play into

giving the system, helping the agent update relevant to the system.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And I'll look forward to hearing from the authors.

Were they studying active inference and then approached Bayesian decision-making algorithms?

Were they coming from a non-active inference computer science background and then found active inference as something that was exciting?

How did they converge upon this approach?

Shortly after introducing active inference, they turned to an approximate active inference.

And they described that as saying, active inference in its initial form was developed for small state spaces and toy problems without consideration for applications to typical machine learning problems.

So that's like when there's two decisions and sort of a two by two matrix and two outcomes in the world and two decisions you can make.

This has recently changed and various scalable solutions have been proposed.

I think one of these citations would be that Chance et al.

Scaling Active Inference, Actim Stream 8.

In addition to complex sequential policy optimization that involves sophisticated deep tree searches.

So that's sophisticated active inference with these tree rollouts followed by tree pruning approaches.

Therefore, to make the active inference approach practical and scalable to the high dimensional bandit problems typically used in machine learning, we introduce here an approximate active inference algorithm.

Definitely will be cool to hear from the authors like, what exactly are we approximating?

What else could be approximated and still have an active inference or what can't be approximated?

But let's look at how and why they approximated active inference.

So this is good.

Yeah, yeah, go for it.


SPEAKER_02:
So to kind of speak to the why, you and I have both done tree construction in terms of phylogenetics, right?

And the tree switching and the switching of nodes.

And that can get really computationally overwhelming, like can run for days and days and days.

So it's really nice to see such a sweet, clean implementation of approximation here.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Here we're...

not going to go into depth into formalism 16 and 17 but we'll look forward to the authors describing it but here is the key piece the exact marginal posterior beliefs over reward probabilities

theta can be expressed this way.

Okay, just looking at that, you go, okay, it's gnarly.

How are we going to win if that's what we have to solve?

So the exact correct beliefs over reward would look this way.

And then they write the exact marginal posterior in equation 17 will not belong to the beta distribution, making the exact inference analytically intractable.

So there might be a way to numerically approach it and simulate it or calculate it.

But if we want to be looking through big data sets and doing it fast without massive amounts of computational effort, we need a different way.

However, if we constrain the joint posterior to this approximate fully factorized form, and we've seen factorization of variables before.

Factorization of variables is kind of a big topic, so we're not going to totally go into detail here.

Again, it'd be awesome to hear from the authors how did they derive and factorize, but if

One way to think about it is that constraining a big open-ended long equation into a factorizable form reduces the solution space a lot.

And that enables certain kinds of optimization to become tractable.

So for example, for linear regression, we have least squares, which is a way where if you constrain the problem to saying, I'm trying to solve the sum of squares, not the sum of cubes or the sum of some other function, but I'm just trying to solve this one, then there's...

computations that scale really well.

And so that is what is happening, a factorization.

And another way to think about factorization is if you have a Bayesian graph where the nodes are the variables and then the edges are like the relationships between the variables,

you could just dump it all into a parameter fitting framework with all the edges possible.

That would be like an unfactorized model.

So the number of edges that you have to figure out the exact values for is going to be a lot, and it's going to increase exponentially with the amount of parameters you want to fit.

But if you factorize things, you go, okay, variable A only is associated with B, and B is only associated with C and A.

all of a sudden you're reducing the amount of edges that you have to fit which helps you get to hopefully a solution that is attractively reached but also approximatingly accurate so that's like probably approximately correct and approximate bayesian computation but we've seen that factorization a few times won't go into too much more detail here but what they do is they take this

factorized form and they use variational calculus to recover the following variational smile rule which we'll go to in a second and so they get to a different set of formalisms we'll hear from the authors about what's different about those formalisms and then um what's kind of cool is that for the stationary bandit where you can change the parameters to like zero for the rate of change

it corresponds to the exact Bayesian inference over stationary Bernoulli-Bandit problem.

So that was just kind of interesting how the exact form of an algorithm solution might, how active inference might be doing something exact in the asymptote.

What is SMILE?

Here's the SMILE paper.

Variational methods as a prize to surprise minimization learning.

So that sounds like a lot of things that we do with variational methods, variational Bayes, and surprise minimization.

And the pseudo code is presented here for the exponential family.

This is just a question for the authors.

What is the smile doing?

How does it help us approximate active inference?

What else can we use the smile for?

So that's this approximating active inference interlude.

They take a big messy form and then by constraining how variables can be related to each other and using variational methods on that factorized representation,

it's possible to get an approximation that is going to be effective.


SPEAKER_02:
So it's interesting that, you know, there's this direct correspondence for the stationary bandit case, because in the stationary case, like we didn't see improvement, right?

Using the active inference algorithm, that totally explains why, right?


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, and they have a few more pieces on that, I think in a bigger...

Figure four or something like that.

Let's go to the two problems that they tackle and then the results for those two sections.

We'll cover first the stationary bandit and then the dynamic bandit.

Here's the definition and where they work through the stationary bandit.

A stationary bandit has a finite number of arms.

It has K arms.

And then it's going to be playing through T time steps.

And then it's big K, big K arms.


SPEAKER_02:
And then each little, little K, K is the set of little arms, little K. Yeah.

K is the action.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
So here's how they define the stationary bandit.

And again, you can think about T in time, actions, and arms.

And then in stationary bandits, the reward probabilities theta sub K are fixed for all trials.

So theta is just like, it's funny, it's like the parameter that means just like variable sometimes.

I guess a lot of them do, but theta especially.

So just a fixed reward value.

the fixed reward probability.

So that's why it's not stationary.

In the casino, this would be like one of them pays out on average one to one, one of them pays out 50%, one pays out 200%, but they never change.

So here's a sort of visual representation of that with here's the multi-armed and then the mouse is getting the cheese and each arm has a different fixed probability, but those don't change.

So the probability of cheese does not move.

Here's figure one.

So in figure one, we're going to see regret rate analysis.

So the regret rate you can imagine is, we'll get to that in a second, but the regret rate analysis for the stationary bandit.

And then we're going to be comparing approximate active inference in red to the exact active inference in blue.

So that will be cool to talk to the authors about what was the relative change in how much time it took to compute.

We'll find out.

And what they do is they are showing that the blue and the red are always kind of tracking together.

So that suggests that the approximate form does a really good job because it follows the behavior of the exact form pretty well.

And then just to sort of how to read this graph.

So there's four columns.

corresponding to k equals 10, 20, 40, and 80 arms.

So that's changing just the number of arms.

Then there's the rows, which are for epsilon being the, so this is like the differential between the arms.

So kind of how easy the task is, I believe.

And then that's 0.1, 0.25, and 0.4.

And then within each cell, there's lambda, which is a function of precision over prior preferences.

And then R sub T, which is the regret as a function of trials.

And the dash black line denotes the upper bound on the regret rate corresponding to the random agent.

So this is...

i guess as bad as you could get and then we see that active inference is performing better like there's it converges upon a lower rate of regret than 0.1 or around 0.1 which is the amount of regret that's accumulating for the randomly behaving agent so


SPEAKER_02:
So just to footnote that, which I thought was interesting and made this more meaningful for me, that lambda parameter, the precision.

So it says when the active inference agent has very imprecise preferences, so lambda closer to zero, it engages in exploration for longer and reduces the uncertainty that way at the expense of accumulating reward.

So just to kind of footnote that in there.


SPEAKER_00:
interesting and that's definitely going to come back when we talk about active inference and how we rethink explore exploit so what is this showing it's showing that as you uh though they're that as a function of precision you're getting different behavior

the active inference agents but the approximation is basically always working pretty well and then also the dotted lines are fewer trials and the solid lines are more trials so we can see like in all these cases the dotted line and then the dash and then the solid you're always doing better with more trials

That's what we kind of see.

Like, if you only have 100 trials, so just a few trials on 80 arms, your regret is almost as if you were playing randomly.

Because you've barely tried every arm once, so you're kind of not able to do so well.

But...

If you're in the right area of precision, not too much precision, but still in this area down here, and you have 10,000 trials, even with 80 arms, the regret rate can drop to very, very low.

So playing almost optimally, even on 80 arms, given the trials, and given a significant enough difference between the outcomes.

So that's what figure one shows, which is that active inference can learn to reduce its regret, given the right parameters, the things that we'd expect to make the situation harder, like more arms or less differentiability amongst the arms or super high or low precision rates.

Those are the things that influence active inference algorithms.


SPEAKER_02:
And also they said that they found the minimal regret rate at around Lambda is 0.1.

So that's why they fixed the regret rate for the upcoming trials or for the upcoming tests.


SPEAKER_00:
Because there's a bunch of knobs to tweak.

And so they do their best to do a parameter sweeps and show like here's for...

know the whole distribution of lambda for three different sampling regimes for four different arm styles for three different difficulties like already the combinatorics get really high and if you were going to be using this in an industrial situation you would optimize it with all these parameters in play and then um

they write that they're only going to consider this approximate active inference variant for the between agent comparison because it was doing pretty well in figure one.

So they're just going to follow up with the approximate, but it's something we can ask them like, what is the difference in computation time for the general or exact?

All right, figure two.

So we're still thinking about the stationary Bernoulli bandit.

Here is going to be a slightly different plot.

It's a comparison of the cumulative regret trajectories for the approximate active inference, that's AAI, optimistic tops in sampling, that's OTS, purple, and Bayesian upper confidence bound in the teal.

So those are the three lines, and that's the legend on the top left.

and as blue just said the prior precision is fixed to 0.1 which is what they found from figure one like this sort of dip that they all have at near 0.1 that seems to be a good precision variable setting so they're just going to roll with that instead of also sweeping across precisions and here we see a similar

columns and rows where k different number of arms in the columns and then different problem difficulties in the rows and then the cumulative regret so you want lower regret that makes sense that's the whole thing that we're training on um

what do we see there's a lot that can be seen because there's so many combinatorics of viewing at it but what do we see right off the bat well as the number of samples increases beyond say a hundred in almost all cases the red line approximate active inference is below the other ones so you're getting less regret with active inference on the stationary bandit

for many parameter combinations, okay?

But there's a few interesting pieces.

So one of them is that sometimes active inference early on has a higher regret.

So maybe it's like a little bit more exploratory in the beginning.

That's one thing to see in that bottom left corner.

There's a few other ones where it's sort of like this elbow early on.

But then there's this very interesting behavior that actually shows a lot on the very top left.

So it's not always the case that you can just set your model to some parameter combination and draw a really generalized conclusion, but this is an awesome point by the authors.

So they're looking at an ensemble of agents.

So here it's a thousand agents, like they're sort of running a thousand of each of these and then taking the average, which is why the lines are smooth.

And so what we see in the very top left is that

The active inference agent is doing as well as the other algorithms, then it's doing better, lower regret under those lines.

But then the error bound increases, that red shading, and it starts to head really far up.

So that's pretty fascinating what's happening.

And they write, this divergence is driven by a small percentage of the agents in the ensemble that did not find the accurate solution and were overconfident in their estimate of the arm with the highest reward probability.

so that sort of pie chart of which arm you should choose it got off to a bad start and then their precision was such that they just sort of rolled with that and they kept on seeing the information they were getting within that way of setting up the problem and so they ended up for a small fraction of the agents kind of getting derailed with continuing to regret the decisions they were making because they were locked in

The divergence is not visible in the earlier settings, easier settings with larger, I'm not sure what variables you see there, as one requires larger ensembles and bigger number of trials to observe suboptimal instances.

it may appear surprising that the divergence is evident only for the smallest number of arms considered, because that's supposed to be like the easier problem.

However, the reason for this is the smaller the number of arms is, the more chance an agent has to explore each individual arm for a limited trial number.

So it's almost like it's easier to lock in your beliefs and maybe even false beliefs for a small social group rather than a party with K equals 80 people

It's like, there's so much to learn that you're less likely to get locked in early.

But then at the smaller party, some of these active inference agents are getting locked in really early to what they think the most rewarding arms are.

And then they end up not sampling efficaciously.

So they end up implementing regrettable policies.

So pretty fascinating.


SPEAKER_02:
So I just want to footnote here also.

So you're looking at this top left where K equals 10 and then this epsilon is 0.1.

The top left is the most easy.

And then the bottom right is the most difficult where K is the number of arms.

And then this epsilon factor is the difference between the arms.

So it's the outcome difference if I go to an arm that has a reward versus an arm that doesn't.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah i think well point one is harder because there's less of a distinction between a better and a worse um so it's the smaller number of arms is easier but then point four is a bigger contrast so point one is harder than than point four okay so then it's the bottom left that's the the that would be the easiest

Well, it depends on what you mean, easiest.

I mean, all things being equal, fewer arms is easier.

And then all things being equal, the more contrast between good and bad arms, the easier.

Got it.


SPEAKER_02:
So then the bottom left would be the easier... Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
The fewest arms and the biggest contrast.

And interestingly, that's where we see the biggest elbow of active inference, like the biggest initial regret.

So it's like when the game is easy and there's few arms, active inference stays exploring a little bit longer, but then it ends up locking in on what's right.

then especially when there's not that big of a difference between arms all of them have this slight uptick and then the variance increasing with this shading that's showing us that it's not like all of the ensemble is behaving differently but perhaps again that a subset are getting deranged


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, see, that's why I think the bigger epsilon would be the more difficult.

But we'll just have to save that one for the authors.

I would think that the less contrast would be easier.

So I guess it's like not super clear.

So we'll just have to ask.


SPEAKER_00:
This is a cool outcome, and it's almost like it's a qualified critique that makes a bigger point about where Active Inference can really succeed and where it might still need challenges, which we're going to return to.

That's Stationary Bandit.

Let's go to the Switching Bandit.

The key difference is that at each time step,

Any particular arm has a maximum expected reward.

And this reward probability is going to change with the probability.

So there's some probability row, which is, is it P or is it row?

Yeah, with row.

That is the probability of the reward changing.

So now you can't just learn it in any old order because things are changing through time.

The probability of the cheese is time dependent.

Section 2.2.

Oh yeah, go ahead, Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, I don't have anything.

No, that's it.


SPEAKER_00:
So you did it.

It's good.

So 2.2 is where they give the formalism for the switching bandit.

And so in contrast to the stationary bandit problem, outcomes are drawn from a time dependent Bernoulli probability distribution.

So that is provided.

And those who want to look into the...

details can do so.

But the key difference is that there's some probability that things change as you're playing the game.

So...


SPEAKER_02:
So I did have a question here for the authors and looking forward to getting to ask them.

So it's the probability is the same and then it just suddenly changes.

So like after 20 time steps or 50 time steps, like it's the same, the same, the same.

And then it suddenly changes or it's the it's changing at each time step.

I feel like it's because it says it changes with some probability, but it's otherwise constant.

So I'm curious as a constant, like across all of the arms, is that the probability that's constant or is it always changing?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
Good question.

Here we get to the between agent comparisons of different algorithms in the switching Bernoulli bandit with a fixed mean outcome difference.

So epsilon equals 25.

So they're setting epsilon fixed.

So now it's gonna be a different row and column situation.

So in this figure,

the three columns are row equals 0.01, 0.02 and 0.04.

So that's the probability of changing.

So here on the left column, it's a dynamic environment with 1% of time steps, there's a change.

Here it's on the right side, it's up to 4% changing.

So all things being equal, the more change, the harder it's gonna be because it's gonna be like changing,

faster and then the less change it's more like the static case and then the rows now are the arms so k 10 20 and 40. so all things being equal it's easier when there's fewer arms because there's fewer decisions to make

And then we're gonna be looking within each cell as the regret rate, this R sub T with a tilde, regret rate through time, where again, you want to have less regret, so lower is better, as a function of the samples.

So up to several thousand samples, and then here are the algorithms that are being compared.

Active inference in red, Bayesian upper confidence in blue,

Optimistic Thompson in purple, and then Random Control in the black dashed line.

So the random play is a good... It's not the adversarial play, so it's not like you're choosing to lose, but this is the random play.

And what we're seeing is that it accumulates a static amount of regret rate.

It starts at the same value.

The purple and the teal algorithms

they also converge upon a regret rate that's lower than the random play.

So they're playing better than random.

But we see in essentially all cases,

the active inference is lower than these other algorithms.

So when we say like, oh, active inference has better performance on this task than some other algorithm, this is kind of what it looks like.

This is saying that as time goes on, active inference is acquiring regret at a lower rate than the other algorithms.

It's just performing better.

It's implementing better policy.

then we can see that for the less less changing and fewer arms on the top left so that's like easier we see that the the difference between random play and the algorithm is significant and active inference does like super well whereas when you have a very dynamic environment and more arms

you don't get that much of a regret.

You're still doing relatively better and still active inference outperforms the other algorithms.

But it's like, imagine if it was changing every few time steps and there's a hundred arms, you would just, you would never be able to sample enough to make a meaningful update to your model.

So that's why the faster things change and the more arms there are, the more the overall performance of any machine learning algorithm is gonna converge to random play.

Whereas the more static the problem is and then the fewer options there are, then better and better strategies are going to perform better and better relative to random.

So this is just pretty cool that they do simulations.

They do, I guess, a thousand simulations.

And then the switching schedule is generated randomly for each agent instance within the ensemble.

So they do a full simulation 1,000 times for each of these cases and then average it out.

And yeah, well done, Active Inference.

Pretty cool to see that it is doing better on the switching Bernoulli Bandit for a wide range of situations, and it rapidly figures out a good way to work, and then it stays at that low rate of regret accumulation.

Any thoughts on three?

Super cool.

Yep.

Now, in four, we're going to fix the number of arms.

so now we're at k equals 20 arms in the switching bernoulli bandit and then we're going to be comparing these algorithms again so here the columns are just as they were before with less changing row equals 0.01 o2 and o4 on the right but now as we kind of saw on previous figures we have epsilon which is that differential between the rewarding and less rewarding arms as the rows

So we can think about the less changing and the most contrast between rows is where you see the most gain relative to random play.

Whereas when you're in the more dynamic setting,

And when there's less differences between which choice you make in terms of the outcome, then there's less of a regret rate differential with the algorithms.

But again, broadly across the board, active inference is performing better than these other algorithms.

So as sampling increases, active inference locks into a pretty good spot by around 200 or 500 samples.

And this is for the 20 arms.

So it's kind of like it's visited each arm probably a few times, maybe some more than others, but again, they're always changing.

And so Active Inference is able to cope with that.

And also it's interesting that especially this teal one, it almost has a lower regret rate and then it actually creeps up.

Whereas, at least just visually, we're seeing active inference kind of flatline, but not creep back up.

And so that's something that can happen with all kinds of algorithms that they'll get locked into an aberrant precision regime.

And...

So this is just another way to slice it.

In Figure 3, they fixed the epsilon, the difference between the more and less rewarding arms, and then they explored how the number of arms was associated with how dynamic of a problem was being solved.

In Figure 4, we fixed arms so that we could explore how rho, the dynamic, changing probability, and epsilon, the differential, how those change performance.

And then...

Okay, good.

Now, okay, figure five.

Here, it's yet another similar looking figure.

We're going to have similarly the row for the column.

So less changing on the left column, more changing on the right column.

And we're going to have the number of arms just like figure three with 10, 20, and 40.

But there's going to be a non-stationary difficulty.

And the difficulty of the problem is non-stationary as the advantage of the best arm over the second best arm changes with time.

Ah, so epsilon is varied.

Yes, exactly.

So switching, changing epsilon through time.

And they fixed the precision over preferences to lambda equals 0.5.

So that's a different lambda than they used elsewhere.

And this is just sort of showing, I mean, the variable values they choose clearly work because they're outperforming the state of the art, but here they chose a different variable.

Yeah, Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
The lambda of 0.5 they used in all of the switching graphs.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yes.


SPEAKER_02:
Figure 3, figure 4, and figure 5.

And they changed it to 0.5 in the switching because they just optimized for that but didn't show that variable optimization.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, thank you.

And so here we can see that, yep, active inference, the red line is on bottom, and it doesn't have this sort of secondary increase in regret rate.

So for even dynamic on the right and many arms on the bottom right, we're seeing active inference perform well.

So figure 3, 4, and 5 really make a super compelling case for active inference outperforming state-of-the-art algorithms.

Nice work, and that's something that we're really excited about.

Let's go to the discussion and just spend a couple minutes on the discussion and the closing notes, and then we'll look forward to the dot one and dot two.

They opened the discussion by rehearsing what they have previously mentioned, that they're comparing active inference to two state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms, the Bayesian upper confidence bound and the optimistic Thompson sampling.

That's the pair of algorithms in the pair of problems, the stationary and the non-stationary stochastic multi-armed bandits.

Their contribution, among other things, was the introduction of the approximate active inference algorithm.

And then they perform some checks to show that it's performing again as well as you could do exactly.

So they derived an active inference algorithm that's efficient and easily scalable to high dimensional problems.

leading us to ask, of course, where could it be cool or useful or important to apply active inference?

And we know that there's many thoughts on this and hopefully will be many more, but we'll just note for those who are listening at the right time,

that there's been recently announced a net hack challenge and we're going to be starting work on this in the end of july or the beginning of august 2021 so if you're interested in applying active inference to like a video game performance challenge we hope that having a collaborative team

Make an entry for this challenge will be an awesome opportunity to really demonstrate to the world what active inference can do.

But we'll also look forward to the authors and all guests sharing what kinds of questions they think might be interesting to explore using approximate active inference type algorithms like this.

Here's a really nice point that speaks to that, again, in figure two, where we saw that sort of runaway regret on a small fraction of the agents that were just getting locked into extremely regrettable decisions in that K equals 10 case.

So what do they say about that?

To our surprise, the empirical algorithm comparison in the stationary bandit problem, figure two, showed that the active inference algorithm is not asymptotically efficient.

The cumulative regret increased faster than logarithmic in the limit of large trials.

So in other words, even though it's not all agents that get deranged, the ones that do are dragging down the group in a way that's damaging.

This cause for the behavior seems to be the fixed prior precision over preferences lambda, which acts as a balancing parameter between exploration and exploitation.

So this is a pretty interesting piece.

Instead of like two modes, explore and exploit, and then we're going to have a parameter that flips us one way to the other, like a light switch.

Or we have one extreme explore mode and one extreme exploit mode in the model, and then we're going to have a dimmer that goes between the two.

In active inference,

the knob that kind of does that is actually the prior precision over preferences so if you have no if you have no preferences aka you have no precision over preferences you're going to act in the maximally exploratory way

you have an incredibly strong incredibly precise prior over your preferences then you're going to act in a very exploitative way like if there's two restaurants and one of them you like you know 60 the other one you like 40 if you have no preference you're going to go to them 50 50. that's like explore but then if you have a super high precision over your preferences you're always going to go to the one you that you prefer even if it's only slightly preferred

An analysis of how performance of the algorithm depends on that parameter showed that parameter values that give the best performance decrease over time, suggesting that this parameter should be adaptive and decay over time as the need for exploration decreases.

So start with low precision over your preferences, and then you learn

and you update so that eventually you increase your precision later.

Attempts to remedy this situation with a simple and widely used decay scheme were not successful.

So the logarithm of time.

So you just make the precision directly a function of time, like, you know, one over the number of trials, just that kind of thing.

It's like, that's a function that scales with the number of trials.

So here you scale it with the logarithm of time.

This indicates that it's not a simple relationship and a proper theoretical analysis will be needed to identify whether a scheme exists.

So that's pretty interesting.

Like, how are we gonna pull back a level?

Okay, we think that active inference architecture is gonna be a really productive way to model learning under uncertainty, but we're also just pushing the problem up a level, which is, okay, how uncertain should we be?

And then how should we change that uncertainty over preferences moving through time?

So nice point there.

And then,

one last thought is in the non-stationary so the dynamic switching bandit the active inference algorithm generally outperformed the bayesian upper confidence bound and the optimistic thompson sampling this provides evidence that the active inference framework may provide a good solution for optimization problems that require continuous adaptation

Active inference provides the most efficient way of gaining information, and this property of the algorithm pays off in the non-stationary setting.

Cool points that'll be awesome to hear the author's perspective on.

So how do we compare active inference framework algorithms to machine learning more broadly?

And then especially for problems where informed foraging is helpful, like not that epsilon greedy, just sometimes look away from the best and pick randomly and not even just the Thompson sampling.

Remember pick each arm according to how likely it is to be the best arm.

We could have an even more informed or empirically better performing scheme

for doing the trade-off for earning while learning.

Earning while learning doesn't mean that you're learning optimally or earning optimally, or how are we going to balance that out?

And it seems like active inference is gonna be a strong contender

in the coming years as more and more people in the machine learning community start to get keyed into these results tune the regime of attention to what these authors and others are doing and it starts to become more broadly understood that hey rather than just having more and more parameters and billions and billions of parameters in our model and training it on larger and larger networks of you know computers what if we just had a curious agent who learns how to learn and prefers to win

It's sort of like a ground floor reinterpretation of these problems.

And I think hearing the author's views on where the active inference and machine learning communities and fields are heading will be for sure informative for us.

What do you think about that, Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
I just am thinking about problems like the mountain car problem, where actually learning is winning.

If you have to explore, you want to go up the hill so that you can get back up to the other side of the hill and the flag.

So what other problems are out there like that that have a reward that's uncoupled from exploration?

So I'm thinking about that, and I don't know.

Just where is learning winning?


SPEAKER_00:
Great question.

It's almost like in a mountain car, the altitude is, in some senses, a reward heuristic.

You want to get to the top of a hill, so it seems like altitude would be the way to go.

But then the way that the problem is set up, you could also optimize the bounds and say, I seek to be expanding my bounds laterally more.

Oh, yeah, well, of course we're changing in height.

We're in the mountains.

But

especially for cases where we focus on exploration, like innovation or maybe other areas, it's cool to think about how active inference could perform well.

So what are the next steps for the authors and for us?

An important next step in examining active inference in the context of multi-armed bandits is establishing theoretical bounds on the cumulative regret for the stationary bandit problem.

Because as we saw, it kind of diverged in an unexpected way that made sense, but still wasn't quite the behavior that was initially expected.

And a key part of these theoretical studies will be to investigate whether it's possible to devise a sound decay scheme for that lambda parameter.

So how rapidly should we change our precision over preferences?

That provably works for all instances of the canonical stationary bandit.

What would that enable?

That's our favorite question.

This would lead to the development of new active inference inspired algorithms, which can achieve asymptotic efficiency.

These theoretical bounds would also allow us to more rigorously compare active inference algorithms to the already established bandit algorithms for which regret bounds are known.

moreover we would potentially be able to generalize Beyond settings we have empirically tested here future work may also consider an information theoretic analysis of active inference which might be more appropriate than regret analysis also kind of a cool idea like regret analysis was performance oriented it's saying

You're calculating your regret based upon the difference in performance between optimal versus what you did.

But another way to look at that is using information theory and looking as a function of information being gained perhaps through time.

which just like you brought up it really helps us focus on exploration because if the whole project is framed in terms of performance and reward and value it's almost like favoring exploitation off the bat because exploration is always going to have to get couched in terms of successful exploitation like this basic research is important because later on we'll be able to apply it

which is fair but when we have an information theoretic analysis not just a regret performance analysis there might be a way to have exploration for exploration's sake and what that might enable


SPEAKER_02:
Or even exploitation can be thrown in in terms of surprise minimization.

If we're going to frame active inference in terms of minimization of surprise, think about something like the stock market problem.

This is very much like a switching bandit problem.

Everything's changing all the time.

It's the same for a little while.

You're stock that's going to win.

Like, you know, you're surprised when you deviate from, say, the S&P 500.

So you want to track with the S&P 500 and surprise happens when you deviate from that.


SPEAKER_00:
One more thought there on the information theoretic analysis and how it might say something different than regret.

Let's go back to picking a restaurant.

So we often hear about like controlled novelty.

You want surprise, but not too much surprise.

So this gives an explanation for why people might like their favorite restaurant.

It doesn't even need to be thought of in the context of maximizing reward.

the 60% likely to be the most rewarding restaurant.

It could be like, I'm trying to reduce my uncertainty.

So I'm likely to choose a place that I'm familiar with so that maybe I'll choose a different meal or maybe I'll choose the meal I always order.

But it's like the choice was driven by reducing uncertainty

not even per se by maximizing reward, which is something that we come back all the time to, the difference between value-driven reinforcement learning, reward learning, and implicitly regret, which is regret about reward.

and reduction of uncertainty which puts us in a whole different space yes we're able to enter that whole physics of information flows area and where we get the pragmatic um straight component and then the solenoidal the flow the iso contour yes we access that whole area in the information theory reduction of uncertainty world but also we just get

qualitatively a different story and a different explanation for behavior.

Again, you don't need to grasp for why somebody is maximizing reward with why they went to that restaurant or why they ordered that one thing when a lot of times just it stands alone as an uncertainty reduction and prior preferences understanding rather than needing to make it about some sort of maximization.

I'll flip to the last slide and then we have an awesome question.

So Alex V wrote, is there connections between exploration on epistemic value and exploitation for pragmatic value?

I think that's related to what you were just speaking about, which is that we're putting it on a common,

footing with active inference in terms of the reduction of the expected free energy which has this epistemic or knowledge gain component and this pragmatic or functional component so the epistemic is like learning and the pragmatic is earning so we're we're learning while we're earning or the other way around we're

acquiring epistemically valuable information while we're also acquiring pragmatically valuable information.

because the decision making of um expected free energy minimization conditioned on policy we're choosing policies based upon a function that looks at both of those jointly and so that is one of the ways that we're rethinking exploration and exploitation

by thinking, okay, that's not really the duality of policies that you want to talk about because explore exploit makes it sound like it's two behaviors that the bird can be doing.

And so here, what we're doing is we're kind of taking that idea of sometimes you want to be doing a more exploitative act, other times, a more exploratory act.

then we're asking given the policy of which a whole spectrum might exist of different policies how is each policy contributing to epistemic and pragmatic gain and then which policy is going to have the best combination of the two

Maybe there's strategies where you're maximizing both and maybe there's strategies where you're maximizing neither, but if you're only looking at one or the other, then you might choose one that's like a poor combination.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, so a perfect example is like, you know, so your policy is based on your previous chance of reward, of minimizing surprise.

So I have a policy that I'm not going to eat a meal I've never had before in a restaurant I've never been to before because I like I don't know what I'm getting into.

That's like way over there.

Right.

So my policy would be to order a new meal in a restaurant that I like or order a meal that I'm used to in a new restaurant.

So that would be like the policy.

And that just to continue that example.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Well, what a fun discussion.

I hope this was useful to those who are familiar with active inference as well as Bayesian statistics, machine learning or not.

It's all chill because your questions will really help move the whole project forward.

The parts that do and don't make sense and the parts that you want to explore more.

I think that's how our ensemble is going to proceed in these transdisciplinary areas is by welcoming those who have different backgrounds.

So whether you're really familiar or not, you're totally welcome to participate in our live discussions or just to ask questions or

participate in some other way.

Thanks Blue for the awesome help with preparing the slides and for this conversation.

And we'll see everybody another time.


SPEAKER_01:
Bye.


SPEAKER_00:
Bye.

## a089q9RaI14

SPEAKER_02:
hello everyone thanks for joining and welcome to act in flab live stream number 24.1 today it's june 22nd 2021 and we're going to be discussing the paper and empirical evaluation of active inference in multi-armed bandits with several of the authors so thanks everyone for joining

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this screen.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for livestreams.

This short link has a schedule of all the live streams that we've been doing and will do for 2021.

And we're here today on June 22nd in number 24.1, which is the middle of the three-part series on this paper about multi-armed bandits.

the dot zero video 24.0 had some context and some background on this paper that we're going to be discussing an empirical evaluation of active inference in multi-armed bandits and today we're here with three of the authors so thanks so much for all of you who are joining today because we'll have a lot to discuss and learn about and

in today's discussion for 24.1 we're gonna first just go for some introductions and then we're going to have a presentation by the author and then we're going to just open it up for discussion so if you're here on the video call or if you're watching live in the live chat just feel free to ask any question and we can go wherever people are interested in going

that being said here we are in the introductions we'll just go around and introduce ourselves and say hello and then especially for the authors who are joining for the first time it'd be awesome to hear anything you want to say or we'll ask you questions as well so i'm daniel i'm a postdoctoral researcher in california and i'll pass to dave


SPEAKER_01:
I'm in the tropical mountainous rainforest, 120 miles north of Manila.

My background is in cybernetic learning theory, general psychology and machine translation, but not much math.

So I'm floundering with much of the active inference world.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool, we'll go to Sarah and then continue on.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm Sarah.

I'm a postdoc in Dresden together with Dimitri.

My original background is physics and biophysics, but I wrote my dissertation essentially about active inference, especially applied to habit learning.

And yeah, that's it for me.

I'm going on to Dimitri.


SPEAKER_04:
Should we let Pervoy introduce himself?

I don't know.

I'm not sure if he wants to do that.

Okay.

I mean, I can also introduce him shortly.

So here was our colleague from UCL previously.

So he worked in Max Planck, UCL Center for Computational Psychiatry and Aging Research.

And currently he's switched to industry.

So he's working in second mind on applied reinforcement learning there.

So basically he's an expert on this other part of stuff, which doesn't cover active inference, right?

I'm also a postdoc at the Technical University of Dresden.

Both me and Sara are at the chair for neuroimaging.

The head of the chair is Stefan Kibel.

We have been involved with Active Inference for a while now.

Since probably 2015, 2016.

have been applying it to various questions regarding human behavior, cognitive control, decision making in dynamic environments, and similar.

And yes, so should I kind of switch to the slides now?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure, we can go to the slides, or if I can just ask one general question to any of the authors who wanted to respond.

Was it that you were interested in active inference and then looking for domains to apply it in, or were you interested in a domain and then sort of found active inference as a way to integrate what you were working on?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I mean, so my background is also in physics, complex systems.

and computational neuroscience.

And as physicists, we like to think about this unifying theories.

So in this sense, active inference has this appeal that it can connect a very kind of distinct way of basically thinking about decision-making, thermodynamics, stochastic dynamics, and very kind of different areas of understanding dynamical systems, so to say.

and control.

So that would be the appeal.

I mean, definitely, as a tool to apply to decision making, understanding human behavior, this is kind of where this all started.

So what new can we learn, basically, using this approach?


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

And Sarah, any thoughts about, especially I'm curious about the biology side, because we hear a lot about the math and the physics verging towards active inference, but it's also cool to hear about biology.

And that was my background as well.


SPEAKER_00:
My background is rather in biophysics.

So I'm only tangentially in biology.

But what I like is also that it connects with some general information processing scheme in the brain.

And actually, my master's thesis, I was working way, way down in the abstraction hierarchy on spiking neural networks and receptor dynamics.

And actually, in this area, I find it easy to not see the forest for the trees.

And I think actually connecting upwards and ask the question, what is the general information processing that's going on?

And then connecting back downwards again is what also attracted me to Active Inference.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

So as usual, people will be, I guess, joining or leaving.

I'll unshare this screen.

And Dimitri, if you want to jump into the presentation, that'd be awesome.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes.


SPEAKER_04:
OK, so you see, I hope, the slides.


SPEAKER_02:
JOHN MUELLER- Yep, looks great.

And I'll crop everything, so go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
MIHAI APERGHISONIUGUEVREHREHREHREHREHRE.

Excellent.

OK, so let me start with a bit of motivation for this work.

So, well, you realize kind of our involvement with active inference came from this kind of cognitive neuroscience direction and originally not so interested in the technical or machine learning side of it.

However, if one thinks about multi-armed bandits as a very general problem, which kind of generalizes resource allocation problems,

then one realizes that this is most of kind of behavioral experiments can be cast into this kind of framework.

And one sees this in a range of kind of experimental cognitive neuroscience domains like decision-making in dynamic environments, value-based decision-making, structure learning, and similar.

One can also think about attention as a resource allocation problem.

So there are many other domains where maybe they're not explicitly talking about multi-armed bandits.

as such, but they can also be cast into this general framework.

For example, from decision-making dynamic environments, one of the most well-known tasks is probably a reversal learning task.

That's kind of used in hundreds of papers.

And this is also kind of what initially motivated me to make this paper.

It's a kind of just understanding.

So if I apply active inference to reversal learning tasks, how does this compare to other alternative decision-making approaches we can apply to that?

However, right beside this kind of cognitive neuroscience direction, multi-armed bandits have a range of industrial applications.

They are really used starting from marketing to finance, like recommendation systems in finance for trading applications.

Even in many optimization problems, like deep learning, there are lots of papers showing how you can speed up learning by finding better sets of examples for deep learning systems.

And right, so basically the way this also kind of allows them active inference to bridge this into machine learning gap and find new applications there.

If it's kind of shows to be useful for this kind of multi-armed bandit setup as kind of adding something new to the existing work.

Right.

And when we talk kind of multi-armed bandits have a range of different formulations.

Today we will talk about stationary bandits and dynamic bandits, where it just means that reward probabilities either are fixed over time or change in different ways.

However, people also discuss adversarial bandits, risk-aware bandits, contextual bandits.

One can also talk about non-Markovian bandits.

kind of rewards depend on a sequence of actions or have kind of some memory dependence in the system and so on, right?

There's really like a range of different kind of structural definitions of multi-armed bandits which kind of then require a different way of thinking about the problem.

And this is potentially something also interesting for the future, expanding what we did here into these other domains and seeing if, again, the results are generalizable to other definitions of multi-arm bending problems.

OK, so just how I structured the slide so far.

We have two parts.

One is about stationary bandits.

And then we will go to switching bandits.

And given that we have two hours, I hope that will be enough time.

But if not, we can also continue for the next session, for example, with switching bandits or so.

Let's see how this goes.

Okay, so what is stationary bandits?

So the definition of the problem is as follows.

On any trial, an agent makes a choice between K arms.

Choice outcomes are binary variables.

So we've kind of focused here on Bernoulli bandits.

Outcomes can also be drawn from any other distribution.

So then, for example, you talk about Gaussian bandits or

depending on how the rewards are generated.

We will just work with Bernoulli here, and we have fixed reward probabilities in a very specific way.

So there is only one arm which has a reward probability associated with P max, which is one half plus some term epsilon, which is larger than zero, and all other

all reward probabilities associated with other arms are just fixed to one half.

This kind of allows us to control the difficulty of the task.

So because the smaller the epsilon is, the closer to zero is, the more difficult it is to distinguish the best arm from others.

And the more samples one needs to draw to kind of realize the difference.

And beside this, like the best arm advantage term, one also realizes that the right number of arms, K, is also increasing the difficulty.

The more arms you have, the more time you need to figure out what is the correct arm to play.

So just to give you an illustration of the example, we have four arm banded here.

So whenever an agent pulls one of the arms, it gets either zero or one.

So we can think of this as a reward or absence of a reward.

Beliefs about the reward probabilities.

We will assume that these are beta distributed.

So we will use beta distribution to model a representation of reward probabilities associated with each arm.

And we will use Bayesian belief updating for all action selection algorithms.

So this also kind of limits the range of algorithms which we want to compare here in the study.

I will explain a bit later why we focus on that.

So just to give you a kind of visual example of what this does.

is whenever an agent starts with flat beliefs over reward probabilities associated with each arm.

So this is like a uniform distribution.

This is a special case of beta distribution.

And whenever it pulls, selects one arm, it gets either 1 or 0 as an outcome.

And it updates the beliefs about the reward probabilities in one of the directions.

So in here, it's sampling one more often.

So it has increased belief that there is a higher reward probability associated with this.

So formally, how this is implemented, what you see here, is to a very simple generative model.

So with each k-arm, we assume there is some associated unknown reward probability, theta k, which is just a number between 0 and 1.

And outcomes of choices are either 0 or 1.

So they are just binary choices.

So these kind of constraints are like observation likelihood to a Bernoulli distribution.

So this is just kind of product of different Bernoulli distribution, depending on which arm one is selecting.

term below is our prior belief about reward probabilities.

And this, we'll assume, is just kind of product of many beta distributions, where here alpha 0 and beta 0 are just fixed to 1.

So this corresponds to the uniform rate prime.

One can also start with other values, but I think this makes some sense, reflects no knowledge a priori about reward probability.

So now, given some choice at trial 80, we just apply bias update rule, and we get from some prior beliefs, posterior beliefs.

And the nice thing about the stationary case is if our priors are beta distributed, our posteriors will be also beta distributed.

And the update, one only needs to take care about how we update the parameters of beta distribution, alpha and beta.

And this just works in a form of accounting, basically.

Alpha counts how many times you observe 1 as an outcome.

And beta counts how many times you observe 0 as an outcome.

And so because of all this, in this stationary case, inference is exact.

Because both prior and posterior belong to the same distribution family, you have conjugate prior here set up.

So you can just track effectively the updating.

There is another kind of representation of the update rules one can use here.

So for example, if we express the updating in terms of expected kind of outcome, mu, and the scale parameter nu here, we see that actually the expectations are updated in the form of a delta-like learning rule.

So where this kind of learning rate is something which decreases over time.

So basically, new is just increasing over time.

Whenever you select a specific arm, new will just increase by one.

And this means that the learning rate decreases over time.

So the more you sample from one arm, the less you will update your beliefs about it.

So this is practically what's happening here, but very, very simple.

Okay, so basically this is everything we need to know about this, let's call it, perceptual part of the generative model.

So how we update beliefs given some outcomes.

Now we have to introduce how we select actions based on these beliefs.

And for this, we can talk about action selection algorithms.

And so...

In the literature, there are lots of examples.

One of the oldest ones is probably EpsilonGreedy.

You also mentioned it during the first presentation, point zero.

People also talk about UCB, upper confidence bound.

This is also one of the oldest ones.

KLUCB.

kind of extension which uses KL divergence as an estimate of exploration bound.

There is Thomson sampling, etc.

Here we will focus mostly on this tree.

We will use optimistic Thomson sampling as one kind of comparative example, and another is Bayesian upper confidence bound.

So first, both of these algorithms have been extensively analyzed in the literature.

And people just found that they work, in many examples, much better than, let's say, non-Bayesian approaches.

And secondly, we can use basically for all three algorithms the same update rules because they're just Bayesian.

They're just algorithms corresponding to Bayesian and bandit.

So we can kind of... Our motivation here is to compare kind of action selection principles based on the action selection algorithm and not based on potentially different ways how you update beliefs about the history of observations.

And so this would be kind of motivation and also a bit to simplify the comparison.

I mean, you can add to the list at least 10 other ways of doing the action selection and even decision making in multi-armed bandits.

Okay, so just a bit to kind of historic example, important.

This is just like upper confidence bound.

Although I will not directly compare it, it has some relevance to understand also what is happening kind of in active inference later.

And this form here just corresponds to a version which is adapted to specifically Bernoulli bandit.

So some people might be more familiar with other version which

was derived from Gaussian bandit.

So in this paper here, one can see these different derivations and examples how this works.

What is important to notice here is basically that this first term is just the expected probability of reward on arm k. And the second two terms correspond to this exploration bonus or the bound.

So this is typical for UCB is that the bound kind of increases over time logarithmically with the number of kind of trials you're doing.

So basically the more you're not selecting one arm, the more you're kind of pushed again to select it at some point in time in the future.

All right, so basically this necessarily increases over time if you are not interacting with the specific arm.

But still, although the algorithm is very simple, it has nice theoretical results because it's an efficient algorithm.

It converges in infinite number of samples.

However, we'll talk on this Bayesian variant of the upper confidence bound, which actually selects arms.

based on the upper percentiles of cumulative distribution function.

So as time progresses, one is trying to estimate the extreme value of a belief distribution, which in this case is just like a beta distribution.

And one gets this extreme by solving this equation, which just corresponds to inverse regularized incomplete beta functions.

So basically, the more extreme point your beliefs contain, the more likely that you will select that arm.

The more relevant is to select this arm because you're expecting that this high value is still possible

as a reward probability in this setup.

And so this kind of algorithm has a couple of parameters, but what authors kind of show in this paper is if you have very good results by fixing C to zero, so basically this term just becomes one,

And so we just use their advice here in the paper.

So we will not, and we didn't kind of try to analyze other possibilities or other kind of values of these parameters in this case.

So for Thompson sampling, and this is again, one of the classical algorithms first probably

with Bayesian bandits or with Bayesian decision making.

And it's also extremely simple, right?

Given some beliefs about probabilities at each arm, you sample one point.

So if there are like 10 arms, you would sample from each arm one point and you will just select an arm which gives you the largest values.

A variant of that which was shown in the last five to ten years that it works slightly better is this optimistic Stomson sampling, where one is constraining the samples only to values which are larger than the expectation.

So one is first making a sample from each arm, and then if the sample is larger than the expected probability,

of reward, then one keeps the sample.

Otherwise, you just use the expected value as a value, a kind of reward probability associated with that arm.

And you're just, again, all our different arms maximizing, selecting the arm which gives you the maximum reward probability.

This is a kind of a very stochastic approach where this exploration actually kind of bonus to this algorithm comes from basically this random sampling from a probability distribution.

And the broader your beliefs are about something, the more likely is that you will get the kind of large value.

Hence, the more likely is that you will explore more, select that arm.

in different routes.

And basically exploration is kind of here completely driven by the noisiness of the sampling process itself.

Okay, so now we come to basically active inference version of this.

So, we are kind of simplifying here things from what people maybe know how Active InfoRates is used normally.

So, first we will use like rolling behavioral policies, which means that agent is not like tracking history of actions it performed.

It's just kind of repeating step of policies on every trial.

And in this case, the behavioral policy just corresponds to a single choice.

So in this type of bandit problems we are kind of analyzing here, like agent cannot change anything in the environment, hence planning is completely irrelevant.

In a way, you cannot kind of position yourself in space better over time so that you kind of need to plan something, which means that just kind of single choice policy evaluation, a single time step in the future is sufficient to make

good decisions.

And generally, we will base our action selection on expected free energy here, where this would be a form which decouples into a risk and ambiguity term.

But we can also think about this problem as estimating expected value.

of different arms plus the expected information gain.

So how much information we can extract from different arms if we select.

So now let's assume that we know how to compute expected free energy.

I will go through details on next slides.

Normally, like right posterior of our policy,

is estimated as a kind of mixture between expected free energy so kind of a future expectation about what behavior will do plus the kind of the second part which is the free energy about the past kind of outcomes however because we have like rolling policies this term is just constant for each policy it's the same it has the same value basically so the posterior policy or where action just corresponds then to the

to the soft max over the expected free energy.

And normally, when one thinks about choice selection, this is samples from the posterior.

However, we are here only interested in kind of optimal choices.

So for us, basically, gamma is just infinite value, and we are just making choices about actions which minimize expected free energy.

So this is a useful parameter to have if you need to kind of fit a model to the behavior.

But for this kind of practical application, there is not much gain in adding another source of noise here.

OK, so how do we compute expected free energy?

Well, that's, in a way, quite simple.

So we just have a couple of terms here.

posterior beliefs over reward probabilities, but given is this like Q term, this is just the product of beta distributions.

We have marginal likelihood, so probability of observing OT outcome given some action AT.

So this is just marginalizing likelihood over our current posterior beliefs.

And another term is here just the prior preference over different outcomes.

And this is really easy to parameterize because we work with binary outcomes and we can just define here a single parameter lambda.

So the higher the lambda is, the higher the preference is of the agent to observe ones relative to zeros.

And this lambda parameter also has a role of regularizing the amount of exploration an agent does because the larger the lambda, the more focus is set on the exploitation of making selections based on the expected value instead of expected information gain.

And so this final term, computing ambiguity, is basically just computing expectation over the entropy of different outcomes, which also has relatively simple form here because of Bernoulli likelihood.

So without going into all the details, this is basically how the expected free energy looks like.

So this first term here,

is correspond just to the negative of the expected reward.

So because we are minimizing expected free energy, this effectively means that we are maximizing expected reward.

And the second term is just a very complex set of equations, which gives you an estimate of the expected information gain rate.

And in a way, kind of motivation is just because one cannot really understand what is going on here, right?

We have kind of logarithms of expected reward probabilities, but then we have a D-gamma function of parameters.

And so instead, we can kind of try to simplify the term by approximating effectively the information gain part.

just to get a better understanding of how basically expected free energy scales with repeated choices.

And so one ends up with a very simple form, where basically the exploration term just corresponds to one over two divided by the number of times one selected different arms.

So this is in a way quite similar to...

what we had in UCB algorithm, right?

The first exploration term was also divided by something which is proportional to how many times you selected.

But without this kind of expansion of exploration bonus with time.

So there is no logarithm of t. And I mean, this will have a consequence on efficiency of active inference.

So I will show you this in a moment.

So how you want to achieve basically this simple form is just by assuming that for large, the big gamma function has this type of approximation when x is sufficiently large, right?

So this just means when you sample sufficient number of time each arm, this will be more or less very accurate approximation.

And we see that this approximate algorithm and the exact behavior is similar.

So it is, in a way, a reasonably good approximation.

Daniel, I think you asked a question about the scaling properties of this.

Motivation for introducing approximation is that, in a way, the algorithm is much simpler, so it scales better.

So you can kind of run it on much more arms easier.

However, the advantage is not huge.

So maybe it scales slightly better, but you are maybe gaining like 10% or 20% performance in computation time.

So it's not something which destroys completely the exact form, at least not in this example.

because the problem itself is simple.

However, it helps us a bit understand, but just get intuition what is happening.

And at least write how the exploration bonus changes with time.

OK, so before I kind of just show some result, like comparison of different algorithms, I want to introduce just concepts which come from

machine learning analysis of multi-armed bandits, which people use just to kind of rate and compare different algorithms, how good they are in solving this task.

And this is done by using something, defining a regret.

So basically, regret is simply a difference between what you did at trial T minus what was the best choice at that trial.

So kind of assumption here is that there is some oracle which is solving the task, which knows exactly what was the best choice in every trial, right?

And so normally people kind of consider two quantities, either a cumulative regret, which is just sum of regret from first trial till the current one,

or a regret rate, which is just the average over time of cumulative regret.

And we will here use both just for visualizing different aspects of the algorithm.

And in a stationary case, at least, this is a very important result.

Because for all good algorithms, one would expect that this regret goes to zero over time.

So as you go to infinite number of trials, you should be able to always do like a good choice.

And if this is the case, then one can show that algorithms which have this property, they are called also asymptotically efficient, and they scale for large Ts as something, some terms times a logarithm over T, right?

And so this is kind of,

one important aspect of, at least for stationary case of different decision-making algorithms, so multi-armed bandit algorithms.

So they should at least scale as logarithm of T when you expand, right?

When you go to large T limit.

Otherwise, right, this first thing will not probably hold.

Well, or they can also scale slower than logarithms.

But for example, if they increase linearly with p, this will not hold anymore.

Okay, so now let's go to the comparison, right?

We will look into how optimistic Thompson sampling Bayesian upper confidence bound exact inference algorithm and the approximate one compared to each other.

I will start first with just trying to see what would be kind of a good value for this lambda parameter in different settings.

And also to give some kind of initial comparison of exact algorithm and the approximate one.

So what I'm showing here is a regret rate for different kind of snapshots.

So these dotted lines are after 100 trials.

The dotted dashed line is after 1000 trials and the solid line will be after 10,000 trials, right?

And so what one kind of notices here is that there is some obviously kind of minima for different lambda.

So this kind of preference parameter.

And that the longer kind of, well,

The more trials you do, the smaller the lambda should be.

So this is not quite nice.

And this kind of has a consequence.

However, we can just pick some value.

So for example, this purple dotted line shows around 0.1, lambda 0.1, which seems to be close to minimum for most of these cases.

So we don't want to kind of...

have different value for different examples because this is just not practically feasible.

You want to have a kind of general algorithm which can be applied to many different situations at the same time.

So when we compare Bayesian UCB, optimistic Thompson sampling, and just the approximate active inference, so I'm just excluding this here, the exact one, because they will behave the same pretty much for this specific parameter value.

If we compare them in terms of cumulative regret, we see that the approximate active inference is not asymptotically efficient.

So this curve just goes, diverges over time.

Versus if you look at the green and the yellow curve, they kind of flatten out after some time.

And they get the slope proportional to this dotted lines, which actually shows the slope of this kind of asymptotic limit, what you should see for large t's.

So why is this happening?

So the thing is that...

because this exploration bound is kind of just decreasing over time, active inference algorithm kind of gets stuck into the wrong solution with some probability, which depends on the difficulty of the task.

So the smaller the epsilon is, the more likely and the more arms you have.

Sorry.

For smaller epsilon and for small number of arms, there is a higher probability that you get kind of stuck, right?

And one can see this if kind of we take a snapshot of different runs.

So this is kind of a distribution of cumulative regret.

I'm just plotting logarithm here.

So like making a histogram of over different runs of this is like 10,000 runs of different algorithms and just showing at what value for the logarithm of the cumulative regret they end up.

As you can see here, there is four kind of

active inference-based algorithm, you see this kind of, well, spike here.

And in the tail of the distribution, which is proportional to just doing random choices.

So that means that basically algorithm was just selecting wrong arm constantly.

It never converged to a correct solution.

In a way, it gets stuck to a wrong solution because the exploration was reduced too soon.

Right.

So this is kind of, say, a limitation for application of active inference to stationary problems, because this is not a feature of an algorithm you would like to have.

In a way, normally, if you are kind of, so example of this would be, for example, optimization problems that you want to find the best solution for a set of parameters.

For example, Bayesian optimization finding the minimum of some unknown function uses Thomson sampling.

This seems to be a very efficient way of finding the minimum.

However, if you would apply to such situation an active inference basis,

kind of arm selection or sample selection, there is a chance that the algorithm fails, right?

You'll just kind of get stuck in the wrong minima, wrong optima.

It doesn't do sufficient exploration.

So this kind of requires potentially some adjustments to how actions are selected, at least in the stationary case.

So just to... Okay.

Strange.

I got some strange slide just to kind of show a bit what the short-term behavior looks like.

So from the perspective of kind of cognitive neuroscience or like human decision-making, you don't really care about this asymptotic limit because you don't usually expect people to be in either stationary environment.

Things always change.

or rather they kind of have to repeat actions so many times.

So what I'm showing here now just in a very reduced example, so if we have only three arms and we just use kind of different epsilon values, so task difficulties, what is the probability that for different algorithms that you select actually the optimal arm?

And as one can see that right initially,

So Bayesian UCB for first maybe 25 trials has the highest probability to select an arm.

However, there is a range of trials like from 50 to maybe 1,000 where active inference based algorithm takes over.

So in a way, because of this information game term, active inference is more efficient in

targeting the arms which will give you the most information, it can recover the best arm in some intermediate interval with the highest probability.

However, as you expand this after 1,000 trials or so, you see that this probability gets stuck, so it never converges to one, unlike the other algorithm.

This is especially evident for this difficult problem, small epsilon.

And so this is, in a way, explanation of what happens.

So basically, algorithm, although it reaches good solutions with higher probability than other algorithms, there are still lots of examples in this kind of simulations, simulations, which get stuck to a wrong solution.

And they cannot get out of this.

So in a way, this kind of asks the question, OK, what can one do to make active inference also syntactically efficient?

So how can the maybe either generative model be changed to support increasing the exploration bound over time?

Or maybe introduce, instead of computing expected expectations of expected free energy, one can also just draw samples

from a posterior and kind of also compute these two terms, like information gain and similar to like Thompson sampling.

So right there are kind of different ways one can think of how to add exploration bonus.

A third option would be to actually introduce learning of the lambda parameter.

So that lambda itself kind of goes down over time.

So it kind of goes towards 0 with specific rules.

However, currently, we don't have a very good solution for this.

So we just leave it at this.

That is an obvious limitation of just applying active inference to this type of problems.

Are there kind of maybe any questions?

I think this would be like the half where we switch now to the other.


SPEAKER_02:
If anybody has any thoughts, definitely I could ask some things.

Or also we'll ask if in the live chat people want to post any questions.

But how much longer of a presentation did you estimate that you had so that we could kind of

also address some general points here during this point one?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I don't think there is more than maybe 20, 30 minutes max.

I didn't really gauge it.

But there is less less slides in the second.


SPEAKER_02:
Would it make more sense to go through it quickly here?

Yeah.

Or would it make sense to do it in the next weeks?


SPEAKER_04:
I think both are fine for me.

I mean, maybe an additional 15 minutes.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

So we'll complete the presentation and in live chat and on the video chat here, we'll compile our questions and then in the remainder after your presentation today, and then the next week we can have more open discussion.

So please continue.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

Okay.

So now we go to this like dynamic non-stationary problem.

And on any trial, in this case, it's a very similar setup.

On any trial, an agent makes a choice between K arms.

Again, we are focusing on Bernoulli bandits, so outcomes are just binary variables.

However, what happens here is that the reward probabilities associated with each arm change over time.

And we differentiate between switching bandits.

where we will assume that the changes happen at the same time on all arms.

And furthermore, in switching bandits, they are kind of also called piecewise stationary.

So there is like a period where nothing changes, and then there is just one moment in time when reward probabilities on all arms change.

Or we can think of another variant of dynamic bandits would be restless bandits, where changes happen independently on each arm, and they are continuously changing over time.

So for example, following a random walk.

I will only talk about switching bandits, but from some testing I did, all the results generalize also to the restless case.

And beside this number of arms and the difference between the best arm and the other arms of reward probabilities, epsilon and k, we have another task difficulty.

This is the rate of change or just change probability.

So the more often things change, the more difficult the task is, especially if you have many arms.

And we will consider switching bandits with fixed difficulty, which is just the extrapolation of the stationary case by introducing changes to which arm is associated with the maximal reward.

We will always have the same rewards on all arms.

It is just that from time to time, optimal arm changes with probability row.

And in this case, we have just three parameters which define our task task difficulty.

We can also think about switching bandits with bearing difficulty, which then just means that with probability row, the reward probabilities associated with each arm either remain fixed on the next trial, so they are just kind of translated.

Or they are sampled, sorry, with some probability one minus rho should be here, right?

They are staying fixed or with probability rho, they are just sampled from a uniform distribution, in this case, beta distribution with parameters one.

And in this,

In this variant of the task, we just have k and rho as a fixed difficulty parameters.

So epsilon kind of disappears.

So you're kind of averaging over epsilon in the task.

And just to give you an example, so we will not discuss this, but how restless bandwidth setup looks like is basically you can

You assume, for example, that the logit transform of reward probability just follows a random walk.

So it's just Brownian exploration in the logit space of the reward probability.

And this would also require potentially changing the generative model, which I will introduce.

But it's not necessary.

So one gets pretty similar solutions and behavior.

So now,

To come back to the example from before, if we have multi-armed bandit with four arms, the setup is exactly the same.

And in addition, we assume that the agent has access to the underlying probability of change.

So this is not something which is unknown.

This simplifies the learning rules and belief update equations.

However, one can extend this, what I will introduce today, to the setups where the probability of change has to be learned also, or that the probability of change is also something which changes over time so that you can have to track how often reward probabilities change at different times.

So this would be kind of example of decision making in volatile environments.

So to visualize the algorithm, basically the only difference is practically that now you have an effective forgetting of what agent learned before.

And one can see this, for example, if you look

on this square to the left.

As kind of time evolves and agent is selecting other arms, this value, which reward probability associated with the leftmost arm just decays back to uniform probability, right?

So in a way, agent is forgetting information or expectations it had about this arm.

And it assumes that with time, the reward probability will, beliefs about reward probability will revert back to a uniform distribution.

And the algorithm is really a straightforward extension of what I already described before.

So the generative model now is slightly more complex.

So besides the likelihood term, so observation likelihood, which remains the same, is just the Bernoulli distribution.

Now we have a kind of state transition term.

which tells us how reward probabilities change over time.

What this means is that if one believes that there is a change, reward probability will be independent from the previous values, and they just belong to a uniform distribution, so this kind of prior belief.

And if there is no change, the transition corresponds to a delta function, which just means that the reward probabilities stay unchanged from trial t minus 1 to t. And finally, on each trial, we have the same prior about probability of changes.

And this is just, again, a Bernoulli distribution with probability rho, which here we will just assume this is a known parameter.

to the agents.

So the problem here in dynamic cases, you can still apply the

the bias rule and you can compute the posterior both for the change probability terms on JT and for the marginal posterior about reward probabilities.

However, as you see here, the exact kind of form of the posterior is not anymore, doesn't belong to like conjugate.

So the prior is not any more conjugate probability distribution to the likelihood.

And this is not anymore a simple beta distribution, but it becomes a mixture of beta distributions.

And as you are kind of evolving into the future, this becomes larger and larger mixture of beta distributions, which is, well, practically intractable, right?

If you kind of expand this to open any number of trials.

So because of that, we want to have something which is a bit more efficient algorithm.

We can basically introduce a mean field approximation.

when we now say that, okay, our probability distribution can be described as a product of a bunch of beta distribution and a categorical distribution, which just tells us the probability of change, right, on trial T. And how one, what this corresponds to here, so basically, what is actually, we are using here a bit of a,

It's not a standard variational inference, so you would have to kind of compute the gradient over the ratio of free energy to find the optima.

This simplifies the things because you just need one step to update parameters, both about the change probability and about reward probabilities.

This makes it not super optimal, so there are better solutions how I can do this, but it's very efficient.

In the end, for the Bernoulli bandits, there will not be much difference.

You can use better algorithms, but this gives you just marginal advantage on the long run.

just because the problem is very noisy, and it's very difficult to actually figure out the correct choice.

So what this variational smile does, it was introduced by Vasiliki quite recently, in 2021.

So they provide you a bit more detailed justification for what I'm saying here.

I'm just paraphrasing a bit how the algorithm is defined.

So basically, we can associate the marginal about change probability with the exact posterior marginal, because you can compute this analytically.

And then we use this as basically

known belief about change probability to estimate reward probabilities by averaging in the log space over different prior beliefs about reward probabilities.

So basically, instead of averaging in the probability space, you're kind of averaging in the log space here.

What this kind of results is in a very simple set of update rules.

So on the left side, I'm just showing how omega t is updated.

And this is just correspond basically to forming beliefs about change probability based on bias factor shown here, which is just the likelihood between

observing OT given that the change didn't happen and observing OT given that the change happened at the current trial.

And then using that estimate to update your beliefs about different arm probabilities and basically depending whether you selected the arm or not.

So basically the omega term here plays as a forgetting rate.

So the larger the omega, the closer to 1, so the larger the probability of the change occur, the more you will revert back to the beta 0 and alpha 0 parameter, so the initial prior beliefs, and less you will depend on your current beliefs from the previous trial.

And this also has an important limit.

If the agent believes that there is no change in the environment, you will revert back to the exact inference and the update rules which we had for stationary case.

And that's kind of also a nice thing about this algorithm.

It can be just generalized to any knowledge about change probability.

OK, so the action selection algorithms did not change.

So the learning rules will change, but we are practically doing still the same way of making action selection.

So for Thomson sampling, we are just sampling from the posterior beliefs.

For Bayesian upper confidence bound, it's slightly different.

So we are using kind of the mixture.

between again the mixture of possible parameter values to estimate the inverse because from the this predictive posterior it's difficult to inverse it it's a mixture of two beta distributions so this is just kind of approximation one can use for Bayesian UCB and for action selection in approximate expected free energy one gets with

very same set of equations because basically row can just, so probability of change drops out.

It can be ignored easily there.

Okay, so now if we do kind of the same comparison, first of exact and approximate after inference algorithms, we see a slightly different picture to what we had before.

First, it seems that as you increase the number of trials and you kind of compute this regret rate for this specific number of trials, the regret rate does not change.

So in a way, algorithm converges very fast to a specific regret rate and for different

And there is a clear kind of stable minima independent of number of trials you're exposing algorithm to.

Similarly, again, we see very similar behavior between exact active inference algorithm and the approximate.

And for this example, I just fixed lambda to 0.5.

It just seems to be a reasonably well-valued parameter for many situations, which we see here.

However, so here I'm showing for...

10 arms if we go to 80 arms the picture slightly changes so it seems that optimal lambda parameter although it doesn't change with t it changes with the number of arms and obviously with all the other rho and epsilon all the other parameters so this makes things a bit difficult and basically

suggest that it's important to kind of find potentially a learning rule, like self-optimizing way of estimating lambda.

And there is some work actually in active inference literature which potentially has a solution for that.

So we just have to test it out at some point.

So however, we can still use the same value.

This does not influence that much the performance.

Later on, so what we see when we compare it to approximate active inference with Bayesian UCB and Thompson sampling is that for a range of settings, either with fixed advantage of the best reward probability advantage of the best time, we see that active inference just performs better

already after 1,000 trials or so compared to the other two algorithms.

This is just for different change probabilities.

So for example, row 0.05 corresponds to a change every 200 trials.

This would be every 100 trials on average.

And the last step here is every 25 trials.

So this would be the most difficult scenario.

So one sees that the more difficult scenario, the differences disappear.

So you're kind of losing the advantage.

However, similarly, if we fix number of arms, for example, to 40, and we just change the epsilon parameter, a similar trend is visible.

The more easier the task is, the bigger the difference in non-stationary scenario you get relative to other algorithms.

Of course, one would potentially...

kind of destroy this advantage if changes become very slow, like every 10,000 trials or something, where you are kind of approximately in the stationary world.

and okay so this would be like this switching bandits with varying difficulty we can do the same kind of analysis for a switching bandit uh sorry previously we looked at the switching bandits with uh fixed difficulty similar analysis can be done for varying difficulty and uh interestingly one sees here uh knows because epsilon drops out one sees here uh actually for the exact active inference there is like a clear minima

which seems independent on any of these parameter terms, so rho or k. So basically, we can fix lambda to 0.25 for the exact active inference algorithm, and we can still keep for the approximate active inference algorithm lambda to 0.5.

And just to show what happens here,

is that there seems to be, like in varying difficulty, there seems to be also advantage of using exact active inference decision-making algorithm.

It outperforms the approximated quite clearly in these settings, and it doesn't require a fine tuning in this sense, right?

For the range of problems, you can have much better performance with a single choice of lambda value.

And again, so in this case, interestingly, the easier the problem becomes, so in this kind of quadrant, the less the difference between algorithms is, and actually Bayesian UCB algorithm becomes quite efficient in these settings.

Also here, right, you see that

Bayesian UCB also achieves quite good performance.

Interestingly, much better than optimistic Thompson sampling, which for me at least, I didn't found any paper who previously showed something like this.

So yeah, this is also probably new result for machine learning people.

Okay, so just to conclude, active inference does not result in asymptotically efficient decision making.

Additional work is required to establish theoretical bounds on regret and derive improved algorithms.

In non-stationary bandits, however, we see better performance in comparison to other algorithms, and especially noticeable in more difficult settings.

You are kind of getting

the more difficult task is you're kind of forgetting the better results.

A tentative to-do list for like next steps here is like introduce learning for the lambda parameter, establish a really like kind of theoretical bounds on cumulative regret.

So what can one expect to see given different choices of the algorithm for action selection based on expected free energy.

So this would hopefully improve behavior in stationary case and potentially also apply to some real-world examples.

So this kind of, right, in machine learning field, I would say.

This kind of recommendation systems optimization problems and similar.

Just to see how it performs in this kind of scenarios.

Yeah, okay.

I would just like to thank all the collaborators on the project and the people who helped me with different advices.

And you can also find the slides here and the code is available on my GitHub page.

I would just not recommend to use it in the next two weeks because the paper is under revision and I'm breaking stuff constantly.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

awesome thank you you can unshare and we'll return to just um discussion for the last 45 minutes or so here but thanks for that awesome presentation with always good to get okay multiple um

multiple times just to sort of see some of those figures in the paper.

Then also there are some different figures and some different views.

So again, anyone in the live chat is welcome to ask a question or anyone who's here in this Jitsi.

I'll ask a question from the live chat first.

And then if you're here in the Jitsi, please feel free to raise your hand.

So it's written in a live chat.

since the bandit problem here is not Markovian does this mean that we only need to consider the current time to calculate the expected free energy uh why why is it not to Markovian well let's let's actually clarify what makes a problem or a situation Markovian or non-markovian


SPEAKER_04:
OK, so for example, the problem is Markovian because the changes are only dependent on the last trial or the current trial.

Right, so the reward probability in this non-stationary case

will be a function only on the reward probability on the previous time step.

And this is what makes the problem actually Markovian.

So I didn't talk about, there are non-Markovian bandits, but this is not what we are discussing here, right?

It is really just Markovian bandits.

But this is not the case why you don't need, well, maybe yes, actually.

I mean, if you would go to non-Markovian bandit,

then you would potentially need to plan ahead for longer because that would require that there are kind of dependencies between your actions and outcomes, which you observe in a sequence and different sequences might result in very different outcomes.

So right, because here we are in Markovian case and

An agent cannot change the dynamics of the environment in any way.

So it's in a way just kind of passive sampler from the environment.

Then you just, there is no gain in planning ahead.

So you can just reevaluate your beliefs on each trial.


SPEAKER_02:
So it's kind of like a...


SPEAKER_04:
memoryless process which you brought up and then what would have to change to maybe account for situations where sequence of actions does matter uh so for example one could introduce structural dependencies between different arms so that for example rewards uh reward probabilities depends on the location and allowing agent only to

to make their choices from the nearby arm, right?

Kind of introduce some spatial dependency.

That would be one example where then depending on in which part of the space I am in kind of where I selected one arm, this limits me to what's the next arm which I can select.

And this would require you to then plan depending on where you should be in different trials, depending on how you expect things to change, right?

This would kind of introduce then the requirement for planning.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Very interesting.

Blue or Dave or Sarah want to ask anything?

Otherwise, I have some questions.

mentioned a few industrial applications and a few ways in which people do use the multi-armed bandit this is just kind of like um a logistical question like what is the rate limiting step in those use cases deploying active inference agents is there a way to kind of wrap the inputs and outputs of multi-armed bandits uh in a way that's sort of

interoperable like you talked about how the learning rules were similar but then you juxtapose different action selection approaches so in the context of pipelines that people are already using is there a way to kind of hot swap active inference and maybe have it be deployed in industrial settings very rapidly well yeah i mean that would be one idea and for example uh if you have this non-stationary problems


SPEAKER_04:
And you have already been using Thompson sampling, for example, or even like optimistic Thompson sampling as a choice of the algorithm.

In a way, you already have a way to form beliefs about relevant aspects of the problem.

Then you can really easily swap the two.

And you just can then apply the difficulty just to figure out how to compute basically expected free energy and test it out.

Or the different generative model that people might probably have there.

Again, for stationary problems, that may be trickier.

It might work in some situations, but you don't have this kind of nice asymptotic guarantees that you will always find good solutions.


SPEAKER_02:
in a way it's an advantage of active inference in a changing world.

Like people's preferences for a given advertisement or the situation for trading is always changing.

And so it's a false allure to have something that has extremely well-behaved

behavior in the asymptotic or infinite case because we're not in the infinite case we're in the finite and dynamic case and so it's almost like the sort of strong pillar that purportedly is underpinning these other approaches isn't so much of a gain pragmatically so it's pretty cool to hear about that blue thanks for the raised hand what would you like to ask


SPEAKER_03:
So I have a question that was left over from the .zero video and something you kind of alluded today in your talk.

Can you kind of detail the difference between the switching bandits and the restless bandits?

I was like unclear on like the timing of the switching in the switching bandits.

And then also just like a part B of that question.

In the case of the restless bandits,

What are the similar algorithms that are optimal for switching bandits, also optimal for restless bandits?

You had mentioned the active inference was good, but what about the others that are commonly used?


SPEAKER_04:
No, it's the same, right?

I mean, so let's say in restless bandits, the only kind of... So in switching bandits, we have a piecewise linear problem or piecewise stationary problem.

Which means that between trial 1 and trial 10, everything behaves stationary.

And then when the change comes, you're just getting new reward probabilities associated with each other.

For example, that would be a kind of idea of a switching bandit, so that between changes, everything is fixed.

And the restless bandit assumes that

things continuously change.

And here, the example I gave was one can assume, for example, that reward probabilities can be described as a random walk in this

in this logit space of the probability.

So basically, because probability is like between 0 and 1, you transform it to unconstrained space between minus infinity and infinity.

You just have a Gaussian random variable, so to say.

And then you map it back into the sigmoid function, for example, into the probability space.

For example, the algorithm I showed for belief ablating, one could also just apply it there.

One doesn't know what would be the role.

What is the change probability in the restless case?

In that sense, you would need an algorithm which can also infer the change probability.

And restless case doesn't necessarily translate to potentially fixed change probability.

So it's a bit more different problem.

Because the maximum arm, the changes between arms which are optimal do not follow specifically the same structure as in the switching case.

So one can either take a different generative model, which actually assumes explicitly the random walk and, for example, hierarchical Gaussian filter.

is something which one could apply there.

There are also other belief updating algorithms for that.


SPEAKER_03:
So the local or the global maxima and minima are changing in the rest list as well?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, yes.

So this would be kind of this case of varying difficulties.

So the relative probability between the best arm and the second best arm varies all the time.

um yeah i don't have i could have just drawn the lines to show but i don't know i didn't do that i could hear that i just don't have it right now something to illustrate this


SPEAKER_02:
The one other thought on the advantage possibly of active inference is that with a deep generative model using the same skeleton of maybe even the same code, it could be possible to do model testing between two different

types of bandits, like what kind of scenario am I in, or even have deep temporal models.

So it could be extended in a way where a sort of instantaneous sampler might be led astray.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

Yes.

Yes.

I mean, in principle you can, any hierarchical Bayesian generative model, which consists of multiple models, potentially, you could also write generalized to Thomson sampling.

or Bayesian UCB, I just wouldn't assume that this would be a very efficient way to figure out which is the correct model, which you should be currently applying to the specific task.

And this is potentially also where active inference would provide an advantage in such scenarios.

where you can also kind of learn about the generative model itself better over time.


SPEAKER_02:
And that made me wonder, what would it look like at the sort of human level as we're making decisions that are sequential in our day, our decision-making, what would it look like or what would we keep in mind if we were going to be making decisions more like an active inference agent than like a Thomson sampling agent?

Like what would be, when you're in the grocery store looking at the cereals that you've had before or not, how would an active inference agent behave differently?

Just kind of wondering.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I mean, that's a good question.

I mean, we could actually, we have some data sets which we could use exactly to ask these kind of questions.

I mean, I don't have on top of my head any clear answer.

What would be your expectation, Sarah?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I guess it would tell you when is a good time to try a different cereal because you may like it even more, especially if cereal recipes change over time.

And then you have some likelihood to be stuck maybe with the super bad cereal, but also high likelihood

It's the one you like most.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I mean, I guess this exploration would be more structured in a way, more directed, right?


SPEAKER_02:
Right, like when the ingredients change.

You check the ingredients, and then now you've updated your likelihood of trying something new.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, right.

I mean, Thompson sampling doesn't have directed part of the exploration.

It's just a random exploration.

Whereas here, the focus would be more on directed exploration and potentially thinking how to add randomness to the algorithm.


SPEAKER_02:
one other piece is like we're often comparing and contrasting active inference to reward learning and reinforcement learning so it's almost like instead of making that decision based upon the highest expected value like choosing something proportional to its relative value or always going with the one with the best likelihood of having the best tasting cereal

There can be some other heuristic.

And so it opens the door to just purely curiosity-driven sampling.

Like, I've just never had this.

And it's not even as much a reward-maximizing maneuver as it is just a purely epistemic gaining maneuver.

And then as we've seen...

when there's a pragmatic and an epistemic component to the function that's being optimized then those decisions can kind of coexist and be put on a common grounding unlike in a purely value-driven framework where even the exploration has to be kind of coerced back into reward


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, I mean, I think Saeed Noor, and she had like, as a first author, she had an interesting paper, Demystifying Active Inference, and they discuss a bit about learning the preferences themselves, right?

And what kind of consequence this has.

And this kind of puts a different perspective on understanding what the reward is, because in real world, you don't necessarily know

Why should something be more rewarding than something else?

But you learn this over time, and you just learn to prefer different outcomes.

They don't even necessarily have to be somehow rewarding more in the absolute sense.

You just build experience with some outcomes over others, and you start to prefer them.

And this then appears as if you were doing reward-based decision-making, but, I mean, it's actually, in a way, preference-based decision-making.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

I had another question about the approximation of active inference.

Is that the only way to approximate active inference?

Are there other moves that you could have made to approximate the sections that you did approximate?

Are there other pieces that can be approximated?

What can be swapped or approximated, but still retain this essential structure of an active inference model?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I don't have many ideas what else one could do.

I mean, the problem is, in this scenario, it's relatively simple, right?

But for example, one can kind of think of, OK, given that we have to compute the expected information gain, and we are kind of having a way to estimate it efficiently, like just with this approximation, there is other way how you can compute this, just by sample.

you can draw a couple of samples from your beliefs and you get some estimates on the expected information gain.

So this will still be in the kind of active inference framework, but just slightly different way of how you actually compute expectations and what they will kind of represent there.

This would be a way to add a bit of randomness to the decision-making process.


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, active inference is also general enough to work with many kinds of approximations, right?

And you can do approximations and many different points, but as long as you, they get some sort of variation of free energy, I guess it's still within this framework.

And he separated the inference part from the action selection part, but I think,

Actually, you can use it as a model of both, right?

And then you can do approximations and different points in this joint model.

And as long as you can still write down a variation of free energy, I guess it counts as active inference.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I don't know even if that's necessary.

I mean, I would say any kind of Bayesian belief updating, even if it's not specifically motivated by variational inference.

Would the consequence have minimizing variation of free energy once you compute it from some posterior which you obtain?

And I mean, right, it will still be in a way active inference.

So in a way, one can replace like SMILE variational updating with any belief updating rule.

and still keep the same concept there.

Because you are just getting a better bound on the marginal likelihood if you have a better posterior.


SPEAKER_02:
So what would you say anyone is necessary or sufficient for a model to be considered active inference versus not active inference?

you know, just including sense and action or perception inference action or agents in a niche or blanket states.

These things are sort of, we're in an overlap of Venn diagram with certainly many classes of models, different approaches.


SPEAKER_04:
and is it like that blurry intersection that we're looking at and that's where action and inference are being just applied together or is there something unique or something that we can use as a diagnostic well i guess the difference would be more than this kind of uh this action selection i mean planning is inference part not then not necessarily as perception is inference because as i said one can think of many ways how one can solve that part

But once you go into this planning as inference part and also concept that your actions themselves will change beliefs and you will choose actions which are the best in changing your beliefs or what you want to achieve, then this is an idea of active inference.

Let's say it's a circular inference program.

It's not, in a way, I mean, more so easy to disconnect effects of choices and effects of perception.

They all depend on each other.


SPEAKER_00:
And also being aware of your own uncertainties.

And I think if you do standard reinforcement learning where you just calculate expected rewards, I don't

think you're always aware of how certain or uncertain you actually are about your own generative model, for example.

And then potentially with active inference, easier to know which action to take in order to better learn your model.


SPEAKER_02:
very interesting it's almost like by carrying and propagating our uncertainty and having a self model of action and learning then we get that almost like second order cybernetics where we're acting in a way where in the future we can expect to learn better or expect to act better

as opposed to just this hungry search for the best action and then learning is only a one-step projection into like what action is going to be informative right now what's the next wikipedia article that's most informative rather than what's like the trajectory that i expect is going to be resulting in more effective learning or action again on a common grounding

So that's pretty interesting.

Looks like you have a thought, though, Dmitry.


SPEAKER_04:
DIMA VOYTENKOVSKYI- No, I mean, that's definitely an important part.

I mean, I would then call Thomson sampling would also satisfy that.

Bayesian UCB, right?

I mean, they all kind of are any Bayesian decision-making algorithm would necessarily have to take into account uncertainty.

if it's derived from Bayesian decision-making theory.

But yeah, it is not that clear that right this aspect that, okay, the actions also have a consequence of reducing your uncertainty in the future.

And this is what you can use also for as a gauge on which one, which action is better.

So yeah.

There are subtle differences and not that obvious always.


SPEAKER_02:
It's one reason why we're so interested in ontology and slowly scaffolding the research so that we can actually juxtapose different models and understand where they differ.

Like, OK, it's like two road trips, and then this person just took a little extra loop, or this bridge they crossed this way versus this person took a different route right here.

we can understand like you talked about the smile variational updating, but then just recently you mentioned that there's that's sort of like a module you can switch out.

So what is smile or because I also noticed a very recent citation.

So what does it do?

Or what is it different in regards to other ways you could have fit that module in?


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, I have implicitly used SMILE for years now.

It's just a very simple way of updating your beliefs.

So the problem a bit with kind of variational inference, if you want to find the minimum of approximate posterior, you kind of necessarily need to iterate through several loops, like minimizing the gradient.

So following the gradient of the variation of free energy, right?

I mean, this also doesn't make it very efficient for this kind of applications.

So for me, at least, this variation smile approach tight-taps this iteration so that we can kind of transform a relational inference into just a single update step.

Just because there is a way part which you can compute explicitly, and you just assume, OK, this is now my fixed belief about that.

And the other part, which you need still to update through variational approximation.

And so this is, I guess, the small advantage here.

But as I said, there are other approaches how you can update beliefs in these scenarios.

And in the Bayesian sense, they can also be more optimal.

But they just bring you closer to the exact posterior.

But I mean we tested these things with some examples and the story remains the same so there is no gain on making things more complex on that level.

But one can also imagine that in different environments better generative models and approximation rules

would take you further.

So for Bernoulli band, this is just not the case.


SPEAKER_02:
what kind of empirical data sets are almost whether they're open source or just obtainable are amenable to this kind of analysis like if somebody hears about the algorithm and they kind of want to see it in action or play with it themselves once you're you know two weeks from the recording of this when your code is available like is it pos is your code set up for more of a simulation

Or is it something where we can plug in a type of data set that might already be structured appropriately?


SPEAKER_04:
It's currently just for simulations.

But I mean, one could potentially play out with different algorithms, add other algorithms, both on the learning part and the action selection.

That would be super useful for everybody.

yeah if there are people interested in that repository is open and welcoming any contribution it was part of the structuring of your paper that like made us excited to juxtapose


SPEAKER_02:
with these other approaches is you kind of showed that you can directly compare active inference alongside other models obviously it's something we're coming back to because that's the crux of the results of the paper is really the different dynamics as time increased or as the relative challenge increased as the number of arms was changing between these different styles uh

and the two styles of Bandit.

So it's kind of a cool thing that people could both build on directly what you're working on, but also maybe more broadly, instead of just a single model being presented in a paper, people could just include multiple types of models in their sort of baseline paper so that we wouldn't just have to read the paper that says this algorithm works well,

we could see them directly compared.

And that's something that more and more papers are doing with active inference.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

I mean, the kind of also, the libraries we use is also, this is something which was developed relatively recently by Google Jaxx.

It's kind of...

acceleration for linear algebra libraries, which allows you to run very fast this code.

And it also integrates well with the probabilistic programming language.

So it's NumPyro, which was also

developed recently.

So one could, in practice, link this to any behavioral data or to create some test data very easily with few lines of code.

So yeah, there is also this perspective.


SPEAKER_02:
What language is the code in, one or multiple?

And then what areas of conceptual math do you think somebody would want to know before diving in?


SPEAKER_04:
So the language isn't, I mean, program language is Python and just depends on, as I said, a couple of libraries like JAX, NumPy, very standard stuff, except the JAX, that's new.

So yeah, somebody interested in using it would have to learn a bit about JAX, but it's a long-term also useful, so go for it.

But from the math side, yeah.

Well, I mean,

Maybe getting a couple of introductions to multi-armed bandits, that would be a good place to start.

There is a recent, quite recent introductory paper on multi-armed bandits, which exposes many different algorithms in the stationary concept.

provides a bit insights about this historic way how they analyze these problems.

So I would suggest that that's a kind of potential place to start.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Blue?

So I'm curious about this Google Jacks.

I haven't heard about it.

But I thought Google had their own language.

Don't they have like Golang, right?

Isn't that Google?


SPEAKER_02:
Or TensorFlow.


SPEAKER_03:
Right?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, yeah, TensorFlow.

Yes, they have TensorFlow.

And I think the basis is similar XLA.

It's called Accelerated Linear Algebra for both TensorFlow and JAX.

So what JAX is is basically accelerated NumPy.

So you can just run standard NumPy code and in pure Python, more or less.

and get very... so you get for free like computational gradients, so it's kind of autograd library, so you can kind of compute gradients on very complex graphs.

This is also something which TensorFlow allows you, but this seems to

provide more benefits for these dynamical scenarios.

So I had problems when I tried learning or using TensorFlow.

It's very difficult to think, to write code which is dynamic there.

And that's why I never actually started using it.

I started with PyTorch at some point.

And now that JAX showed up, that has some speed up advantages, it's also kind of quite lucrative.


SPEAKER_02:
So one code question, just to stay on this theme and then ask a question from the chat.

What about the Python implementation, like, I think, Infer actively or what Alec Shantz et al have worked on?

What are the similarities or differences with their Python approach there?


SPEAKER_04:
I think currently none, because I'm also involved in that.

So they will also start using text.


SPEAKER_02:
OK, cool, so that those threads will join together.

MARIUSZ GASIEWSKI- Yeah, the threads are merging.


SPEAKER_04:
But I mean, this also code just reduces some of the, I mean, one could also write to use just the SPM code, but this is super complex.

It would be super slow.

So for example, just to examine numerically this stationary scenario, this would take months, probably.

OK.

That somebody is ringing.

So yeah, right.

That's kind of the problem there.

And I wrote the code to be kind of very efficient in a way.

So it just kind of removes lots of complexity that you don't need for this.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.


SPEAKER_04:
In some scenarios, you want to have general description of the problems.


SPEAKER_02:
So here's a question from Steven in the chat.

you think that parallel modeling processes might be used more in the future with different model approaches highlighting different patterns of behavior happening in different niche contexts i would say in some ways it's what your paper did but what do you think about yeah look


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, from practical side, yes.

I mean, that's what you should be doing.

Because just figure out what works best and just don't think too much about, well, the philosophical side of things.

But yeah, I mean, I guess long term, one could imagine a scenario where more and more things become generalizable.

to this description.

So it's just, in a way, a difficult process.


SPEAKER_02:
Even for those who are just learning about the technical details, the visual tell for me was that the figures were a grid of graphs.

So it was kind of like three different settings of difficulty or three or five different settings of arms.

It wasn't just showing, we ran it with one parameter combination.

Each of those graphs was a grid of combinatorics.

And then you presented

what I guess could be considered two different niches with the static and the dynamic.

And then today in the presentation, we heard about all these other variations.

And so those are like kind of toggles in the code.

You can say, I'll take A1 alpha or I'll take A2 beta as far as the combinations of how to run it.

And so as the code becomes more interoperable and pruned down to really the necessary pieces, then it becomes easier and easier to expand it back out so that we can choose amongst different options for a given piece.

And so that's like this skeleton that so many variations flow off of.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
um cool well in our last few minutes here where would you like to uh take it next week or Beyond I mean what are your current interests or curiosities well I mean for me it's just important to have this paper out so next time when a reviewer asked me what about that and that algorithm I can say okay look


SPEAKER_04:
We analyze this.

It's like that.

It's similar, different.

You can get whatever you want, basically.

Right.

I mean, because you have these adaptive parameters, in a way, you can generate very different behavior.

One can also think, okay, if you have an agent which behaves as a Thompson sampling, what would be the corresponding parameter in active inference framework which would emulate that?

Can you actually even differentiate between them?

So, I mean, this is a potentially interesting questions which one can try to answer and which are just from my work kind of relevant because of this constant questions I'm getting in during the review process.

Yeah, but then there is also this like quite interesting side in like machine learning.

where this can find potentially quite interesting applications.

I got started a bit recently working with kind of Monte Carlo research.

And interestingly, this is something which was applied in active inference as a way to compute expected free energy in complex problem.

But turns out that if you have kind of very complex problems, you can also

use Thompson sampling in Monte Carlo research.

So that's a way to just figure out what is the best path to follow in a sample.

And this potentially provides if this stationary scenario can be improved somehow.

And this is also kind of, you can apply active inference to planning inside active inference itself.

you know, in a kind of a hierarchical circular way.

Right, so.


SPEAKER_02:
What does that look like or how does it get implemented or how is it different than just straightforward active inference?


SPEAKER_04:
So the problem is like that when you have quite a complex decision making in a planning problem where you have multiple branches in the future which you have to go, it's like not practical to compute everything.

So what people do is a very popular way to do is Monte Carlo tree search, where you just sample different paths.

You estimate on a sub-sample of possible paths what is the best path to go.

And this would correspond in active inference, like you're estimating expected free energy of a path in the future just through a sample.

then you have a problem okay how do i select the same the pets in the sample and then you can apply it active inference to the pet selection itself so right you can kind of choose which pets i should sample randomly when i'm trying to approximate uh expected free energy for this problem itself so that's kind of what makes it kind of interesting as a possibility to explore


SPEAKER_02:
And the way that you just framed it, as well as what we've seen, which is the relative strength of active inference in dynamic settings, it's consistent with a lot of the qualitative and philosophical ways that people are talking about active inference as like a sensemaking or a wayfinding or a navigation approach, rather than a sort of cut and dry approach.

calculus of decision making just resulting in the total you know crystal path just being laid out before you it's really about the instantaneous actions that we take now in light of uncertainty about the present and really the past and the future as well so it's always cool to see how the technical developments while they're like kind of weaving and recombining

they proliferate and then we see actually these three are kind of interchangeable or these three are complementary and then we get more technical detail and speed ups while we also get more and more clarity on what the structure of this sense making problem is.

Yeah, I agree.

any final thoughts here from anyone otherwise this was a super interesting presentation and questions so we really appreciate it thank you cool yeah yeah we're looking forward to for the next week

Great.

So thanks everyone for joining and everyone's welcome to join live for next week when we'll continue the discussion and the dot two is kind of like our jumping off into the unknown unknown instead of just the known unknown.

So thanks again for joining and we'll see you next week.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Bye-bye.

Bye.

## lqxl8w_JGek

SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Hello, everyone, and welcome to ACT-INF Lab live stream number 24.2.

Today is June 29th, 2021, and we're looking forward to this follow-up or jump-off discussion with some of the authors as well as other lab participants on this awesome paper, An Empirical Evaluation of Active Inference in Multi-Armed Bandits.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find out more about us at the links on this slide.

This is recorded in an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can be improving on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

It's great that there's so many on the call and I'm sure we'll have many questions and opportunities to raise our hand as well as for those in the live chat to ask questions whenever they feel like it.

We're closing out June with this DOT 2 discussion on paper number 24.

So last week we also spoke with Sarah and Dimitri and others.

That was very informative.

And now we're in the DOT 2.

We're able to take it to a few different places and raise up a few questions that were asked over the last week.

And the goal is really just to learn and discuss this paper and related topics.

We have a few cool related areas that we're going to be going into.

So we can just begin with a introduction round.

Each person can say hello or check in, say anything that they're thinking about today, and then pass it to somebody who hasn't spoken yet.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a postdoc in California, and I'll pass it first to Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, I'm Blue.

I am an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico, and I will pass it to Ryan.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, I'm Ryan Smith.

I'm an investigator at the Laureate Institute for Brain Research.

And I'll pass it to Sarah.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Sarah.

I'm a postdoc at the Technical University in Dresden, and I'm looking forward to the discussions today.

And I pass on to Dimitri.


SPEAKER_07:
Hi, everyone.

I'm Dimitri Markovich, postdoc at Technical University of Dresden also, chair of neuroimaging.

And I pass it to Dave.

I can't keep talking, actually.

No.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm Dave Douglas.

My background's basic psych and cybernetic learning theory.

And I'll pass this to Stephen, please.


SPEAKER_08:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

I'm doing a practice-based PhD around social topographies and immersive experiences.

And I think I'll pass it back to Daniel, if I'm not mistaken.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Great.

Thanks for the cool intro round.

So Sarah prepared this slide, which we just want to start off with.

So go for it, Sarah.

How does this set the intention and the mood for what we're going to be going into today?


SPEAKER_02:
Wait, how can I make it so that I see it big again?

So after the discussion last week and also the questions we've got, we thought it would be a good idea to just make a short overview slide about what we understand as active inference.

And as cognitive neuroscientists, you said in the discussion before also, we are often or mainly interested in this action perception loop.

that an agent or we as living agents are in with our environment.

And that's what you see on the right in this loop.

And on the left side, on the right, you see the environment that may have hidden states that are the states that you may know from Markov decision processes and reinforcement learning, but that may also be more abstract things that aren't observable to an agent like contexts,

volatility parameters, anything that describes the environment.

And these hidden states may also evolve with time.

And then such an environment generates an observation that the agent then integrates together with its prior beliefs in order to infer the hidden states of the environment, which is what we call perception.

Then you can use this information to plan ahead and select an action accordingly.

And in turn, the action may change the environment the agent is in.

And concretely, how the agent side of this works in active inference is so that you specify a probabilistic generative model that contains the hidden states,

your a priori knowledge or your assumptions about how these hidden states relate to each other, which states may follow upon which states and so on.

It contains observation generation rules.

It contains actions or policies, which in active inference are also treated as hidden variables that need to be inferred.

And additionally, the generative model may contain

its own parameters as a random variable so that they can be inferred and therewith learned.

Then you specify probability distribution of approximate beliefs.

In theory, you could also solve the beliefs of the generative model analytically, but that becomes very computationally expensive really quickly or even analytically intractable.

So what you do instead is formulate these approximate beliefs, which are supposed to be of a simpler form.

And for example, in your approximate beliefs, you could assume that all hidden variables are independent random variables, which makes the beliefs very easy to calculate, but may not properly capture the temporal dynamics, for example, of your environment.

And this

Independence assumption is also called the mean field approximation.

But you could also say, no, with some hidden variables, it's very important that they are allowed to co-vary and be dependent on each other.

And then you would have pairwise dependencies in these approximate beliefs, which is then called the beta approximation.

You may have different approximations for different variables.

Some may vary together.

Others are independent.

Then you plug in the generative model and your approximate beliefs into the free energy.

And then you find your approximate beliefs at the minimum of this free energy.

And this way you can form beliefs about hidden states of the environment, which really can be anything, your location, volatility of the environment, the context you're in.

You infer beliefs about policies, which is a probability distribution over actions from which you can then choose.

And you can even form beliefs about parameters of the model and therewith update your knowledge of the model in each time step.

And then in the end, you can use all this inferred knowledge to make actions.

And yeah, we as cognitive neuroscientists are often interested in this whole loop

But what Dimitri showed last week is also that in principle, this can be really modular, right?

So in our paper, for example, perception was the same for all different agents, whereas Dimitri then plugged in different action selection algorithms, one corresponding

to the expected free energy and active inference, but other well-known action selections algorithm too.

So yeah, you can really also play around with this framework and use its modular nature.

You could, on the other hand, use the same action selection algorithm and compare different learning algorithms, which is something we're also often interested about in our work.

And yeah, with that, that's it from me for now.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Very interesting.

And anyone can raise their hand.

But I think the part that spoke to me there was just that it's a framework.

And so it's kind of like the framework of a desktop computer.

You can take out the memory or change out the hard drive.

And so we can talk about changing the environmental dynamics.

with respect to the hidden states and how they evolve through time we can talk about changing perception but we can also like lock in multiple of the components and then explore how different learning rules influence system behavior that's what we explored in this multi-armed bandit paper but it could be the same learning and policy selection rule but then a different perception rule

And then those might map onto very subtle differences in decision-making of agents that we care about.

Like what's the difference between somebody who has blurry vision, but they know the language versus clear vision, but then they're semantically unsure about what the symbols are representing.

Yeah, Steven.

And then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, this is really interesting and helpful to see your thinking here.

I would just be curious how action states or, you know, the idea of different types of states alongside these hidden states, just how that you treat those in your thinking, because they could be kind of the action states that are imagined and the action states which are part of the kind of


SPEAKER_02:
external environment that you're somehow immersed in so in the end yes actions are also treated as hidden variables i think they are very separate from other from the hidden states for example because the space of actions determines what an agent can choose and you cannot choose a state in terms of other hidden variables i think so for example if i think

location versus context, then in my head the generative model becomes a hierarchical model instantly.

And in the end, yeah, that's also what I meant when I said you plug in your a priori knowledge or your assumptions about the environment because different types of hidden states will have different relationships to each other and you really end up with a completely different generative model.


SPEAKER_00:
Just to follow up there, Sarah, you said that when location and context are differentiated, that it's a hierarchical model.

So what does that look like on this layout?


SPEAKER_02:
You mean in this figure here?


SPEAKER_00:
Like what's the setting where location and context are identical and so it's a non-hierarchical model versus a case where they are differentiated and then it is a hierarchical model?


SPEAKER_02:
So for example, if I want to model myself walking through my flat, that wouldn't be a hierarchical model, where just each location, maybe the different rooms count as states that I infer based upon the curtains I see, for example.

But then if I want to introduce another person's flat, then

the transition dynamics may be different for their flat.

So for example, in my flat, I can go from the living room into the kitchen, but in my friend's flat, I cannot make the state transition.

And that's actually something I'm working with currently where an agent, like the underlying decision process is very similar, but an agent needs to infer which context he's in in order to then load the correct transition dynamics.


SPEAKER_00:
That reminds me of the SPM textbook, how it talks about hidden states being just the state that a process is in that generates outcomes.

So we have a clear distinction between the hidden states which aren't directly observed, but there is this hidden state like which

flat min and then that is going to change the transition dynamics between the rooms but the observations are what are um coming to the agent and then also there's like learning which we don't have here but that would reflect the prior beliefs being updated through time what about this planning stage like what is happening in this planning module


SPEAKER_02:
That's a good question, actually.

Nowadays, so this figure is from my previous paper.

Nowadays, I lump in perception and planning together because it's really not that easy separable.

So in this case, what I meant is perception is really inferring past up into the current hidden states.

to which I had the observations that belong to each state, whereas planning is inferring future hidden states and future observations and potentially future rewards.

But in the end, it's all one model and it's a chain to go through the states, so the differentiation only makes medium sense, I think.

It's rather one inference problem.


SPEAKER_00:
interesting things, Blue, than anyone else.


SPEAKER_03:
So just thinking about metacognition and where that might fit into this model.


SPEAKER_02:
Dimitri actually has some

has published a paper on metacognition recently also.


SPEAKER_07:
So metacontrol actually, right.

But yeah, I mean, one can just see, one can stack multiple agents on top of each other and imagine as a kind of higher level agent controlling what the bottom level agent is doing.

And so this would be like, well, deep active inference models.

And in one of the recent papers, we're also exploring this in a kind of meta-control approach for describing cognitive control.


SPEAKER_03:
So if there's some kind of downward causation, does that then inhibit what's going on at the lower agent level?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah.

So basically, you can see kind of actions on the higher level are

defining priors on the lower level and hence selecting the policy space.

So what kind of your lower level agent can actually do.

This is now just kind of illustration of kind of separating maybe higher level cognition from the executive part, which is kind of moving arms or muscles on your body.


SPEAKER_00:
uh it's it's interesting about that like kind of like a virtual machine or a hypervisor that there's this like emulated agent you know what would my better self do that's a classic metacognition question and then also it was just interesting that you know blue you asked about metacognition and then dimitri you went right to meta control and so that really speaks to the way in which we're thinking about cognition as control

and that's part of a control theoretic perspective which is that like the cognition planning as inference the cognition is about action selection but then one piece that differs potentially is inactive inference relative to just sort of the um way that control theory is often discussed is the insight of perceptual control theory

which is that the planning as inference is being done in service of the expected observations.

And so we're planning and acting in order to control our perceptions.

And that's happening as part of this integrated loop.

So it's kind of cool that there's like this like good regulator theorem in terms of cybernetics.

And then it is like there actually is an emulated regulator agent

And then yeah, pretty cool.

Where does that play in with like our thought?

Does that I don't know, what does that relate to our actual experience of thought?

Or does this happen all at the sub personal scale?


SPEAKER_07:
Well, I mean, that's how I knew it is it's really like a problem of separating different timescales.

And uncertainty associates it with different timescales.

What you can do now, for example, in the next couple of seconds is very different from what you can do in the next couple of months.

And potentially, your long-term goals and plans have an impact on what you're doing currently.

And there needs to be a way how to resolve this uncertainty on different levels of representation.

And from active inference, one solution for that is just like you stack agents on top of each other, which just representing increasingly longer timescales.


SPEAKER_00:
Interesting.


SPEAKER_07:
And I mean, as each agent, I mean, we can see it as a little, as something which is separated from

an environment through the marker blanket, so basically through the actions and the observations it's making.

I mean, you can also separate your brain in multiple nested blankets, right?

Where one part of the brain just informs and sends information to other part and accepts signals as actions, right?

And I mean, we know this from experimental research.

Lots of this is hierarchically structured, so both temporal and spatial priorities.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Dimitri, Stephen, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, would I be correct?

Between perception and planning, you've kind of got this more conscious belief awareness being sort of available.

And the prior beliefs, once you get from around the observations to perceptions, might be below consciousness in the sense that it might be part of the visual system or whatever.

And I was just wondering how you see that transition from below awareness to phenomenological consciousness.

playing out with the types of models.

I know sometimes like Ryan Smith uses some semi-Markovian processes which start with some, you know, self-reports about beliefs.

So it's working at a level which is kind of building on top of the dynamics that might be going on in the kind of biology.

So I was just wondering how you see those different dynamics playing out and where you fit your models with some other models if they were sort of to play with each other.


SPEAKER_02:
If I may say so, I think this relates back to Dimitri's statement about the hierarchy of timescales.

Because if it's like my conscious thought is on a slower timescale, for example, than my visual perception is.

And I think my conscious thought is maybe rather responsible for the slower timescales

where it helps me to narrate through the slow Markov decision process, whereas it would be not useful if I have to critically think about any inference I make on my retinal image, for example.


SPEAKER_00:
it's interesting you said there that the conscious thought it narrates because first off we've talked about narrative and active inference but also just like you described how there was this hidden state of which flat i'm in and then that sets the transition probability of the rooms

maybe you have a narrative that sets up like which policies you're transitioning between like in baseball you know there's a story to the alternation of the innings and then it's like okay we're going to be enacting this policy because we're in this phase and so there's like a higher level narrative that helps connect when policy transitions

might be um plausible to be adaptive and then that is almost by definition at a slower time scale than the play-by-play because the play-by-play is going to be a lot more like motor control the eye cicading and then as you slow down you get slower transition dynamics that are more and more narrative in nature because they narrate like different phases of action but then the sub actions are very rapid


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, in a sense, it also has to do with a level of abstraction, right?

If I see a leaf, it's just a leaf.

It has a very concrete meaning in terms of my physical environment, whereas my study program, for example, is something a lot more abstract that is a lot harder to grasp without abstract states that you maybe need a narrative for more.


SPEAKER_00:
Ryan, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, I mean, I was just gonna say, I mean, you know, like, when we went through mine and Chris's paper on consciousness a couple months ago, or whatever, I mean, the question about how conscious, conscious processes relate to active inference, really any related kind of computational model is

is a complicated one in part because what consciousness, what the word consciousness is used to mean can be different in different contexts.

You know, I don't personally think that, yeah, I mean, the question of what processes are conscious or unconscious in and of themselves doesn't really fall out directly from active inference, right?

All we're doing is modeling things at different timescales and their relationships to one another.

You know, I mean, in the model of, you know,

visual consciousness of you know in that paper that we published a few months ago um you know the idea is very similar to what other people were saying you know which is this idea about different time scales um but but here i mean the idea the idea was something more like you have a particular level in a hierarchy that operates over a sufficiently long time scale that you can do the kind of goal directed things that consciousness allows including generating verbal reports which themselves are very kind of extended

um, you know, integrative policies.

Um, but that, um, you know, but that also requires that it integrates information from enough different low level sources, right.

To do that.

Um, but beyond that, you know, talking about consciousness as itself, the slower timescale process can also, I think a little bit, um, sort of subtle, um, because what a lot of people being like consciousness, um,

you know, has to do with the kind of subjective character of the kind of like moment to moment, you know, phenomenological aspects of experience.

And that's clearly not happening on a slow time scale, right?

Like those, the moment to moment changes in conscious perceptual experience are fast.

You know, so what we're doing in this kind of higher narrative level that I think you're talking about is something about, you know, integrating evidence for those over time and, you know, using them to come up with

certain sorts of longer timescale policies to infer certain sorts of longer timescale policies.

And so the way that we've talked about it previously is just that you can have these sort of, depending on the precision of the interactions between the first and the second level in a model, if that precision is low, then the lower level can, to a certain extent, just kind of operate semi-autonomously.

In which case the higher level doesn't really need to have all that much influence or know that much about what's going on at the lower level.

So you probably have as a kind of selection process where the precision gets turned up or down at different times and for different hidden states.

So the second level can kind of selectively become aware of and start integrating evidence with respect to certain lower level processes, which simultaneously allows this kind of top-down control

over those first-level processes.

You know, so with the perceptual phenomenology stuff, it's probably more about the moment-to-moment updates between lower-level perceptual processes and these higher-level solar timescale processes when the precision is sufficient for those updates to the second level to matter.

But anyway, I mean, that's more long-winded than I meant it to be, but mainly just trying to point out that it's subtle and it means a lot and it depends a lot on what you mean by consciousness.

and it's not specific to active inference necessarily.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.


SPEAKER_07:
Great.

I think the difficulty of talking about consciousness is I don't, I mean, we don't know what it is doing, right?

What kind of problem is consciousness solving?

What would be like a hyper-intelligent organism without the consciousness?


SPEAKER_04:
There are definitely a number of ideas in the literature.

It's not like it's completely pinned down.

There are things, for instance, requiring working memory maintenance.

Extended working memory maintenance beyond a specific timescale looks like it can't happen unconsciously, at least in current experiments.

Any kind of multi-step

um mental processes like for instance like um you can get unconscious priming effects where people can do something like two plus two um but you can't then you but they can't unconsciously do two plus two minus four um right so anything that requires holding this kind of intermediate result in mind um to do a further operation on it is something that at least thus far nobody's able to do an experiment to um you know that people can do that unconsciously um


SPEAKER_07:
But would you then, Ryan, would you think that consciousness is like a zero-one state, I mean, from that perspective?

I mean, for example, Giulio Tononi kind of sees this as a continuum, like consciousness is really a continuum of states where you can just have higher levels and lower levels of consciousness.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, so again, I mean, this gets back to what you're using consciousness to mean, right?

So in consciousness research, there's a distinction between levels of consciousness and content of consciousness.

Now, content of consciousness, I think most people agree, is fairly binary.

I'm actually not totally sure what the IIT crowd would say.

I'd have to look back at some of the more recent stuff there, but in terms of neuroscience,

There's these very well characterized ignition events that are nonlinear, all or none sorts of processes where if something becomes conscious, you get this global nonlinear, just kind of broad activation widely across large scale networks.

Whereas if you don't get it, you don't pass this ignition threshold, then you still get the local

like perceptual, like local activation in like say visual cortex provision or whatever sensory cortex.

But you don't get, but it's just kind of linear and it doesn't kind of percolate up or pass a threshold to cause this large scale kind of more all or none kind of thing where the information becomes kind of broadly accessible throughout the rest of the system.

So that aspect I think has a fairly binary character to it.

Um, that's different than this kind of levels of consciousness.

Um, if you look at something kind of like the being in a predisposition to represent conscious contents, um, which would kind of be like a continuum from say like coma to like alert awareness.

Um, and that, that probably just has to do with kind of like the state of protocol processing that, um, allows for, uh, uh, the, the kind of dynamics that support this kind of all or none, um,

the stuff that allows for selective contents.

But anyway, I mean, all of this is going pretty far afield from active inference in your guys' paper now.

So I don't wanna detract it away.


SPEAKER_00:
It's fun stuff and it's important.

So we'll go to a more applied question and then following this kind of round on an applied question, we're going to go into a few

code walk slash talk throughs, as well as learn a little bit about a few approximations and some of other work by Sarah.

So Lars asked us a question on Twitter, which anyone is always welcome to do, and wrote,

I would love to hear any thoughts on how this work on the multi-armed bandit might be related to real world problem spaces or applications.

How might active improvements in multi-armed bandit tasks translate to improving how some problems or decisions are currently solved?

we talked a little bit about this in dot zero and dot one but I'll go to any of the authors for a first take and then everyone else is welcome to give any thoughts or like ask a follow-up question so when you present the work and somebody just goes to this kind of obvious applied active inference question what is your thought


SPEAKER_07:
Well, I mean, as I said, multi-armed bandits are applied to a super wide range of real-world applications.

So I opened a survey on practical applications of multi-armed bandits and contextual bandits on Bonifof and Arish.

Yurina Arish and Jalel Bonifof.

So this is one of the recent surveys I found, 2019, on Archive.

And here they list, for example, a couple of domains where they are applied.

Healthcare, finance, dynamic pricing, recommender system, maximization, dialogue system, telecommunications, anomaly detection.

And just by looking from that, I would first try things out with active inference-based bandits in kind of non-stationary problems.

And this is, from what I see, dynamic pricing and recommender system.

They are kind of in this domain, quite obviously.

But one can also imagine that telecommunication systems would also be a non-stationary problem as kind of searching for the fastest routing path and similar, where different routes can change over time.

And then you have constantly where to explore different channels

for passing along the information more optimally.

And these are kind of practical domains where one could first try active inference-based bandits.

As I said, in non-stationary kind of problems, which is most of the other things I listed, this is a bit more difficult.

One would have to see if

there is a way to deal with this kind of bad asymptotic behavior, basically, all our optimistic information search.


SPEAKER_00:
JOHN MUELLER": Awesome.

Sarah, any thoughts on that, or anyone else?

Steven?


SPEAKER_08:
Could you just repeat that last bit?

You said something about isotropic behavior or some sort of type of behavior.

I didn't quite catch that.


SPEAKER_07:
Asymptotic, right?

So this is like in stationary bandits.

People are interested in the asymptotic behavior after like infinite many actions, so to say.

and how different algorithms scale there, whether they converge to a good solution or not.

And I mean, this is what we find in the stationary problems.

Active inference is too optimistic in a way.

It converges to a solution too fast.

That's the way we define it, at least.

And that's why it doesn't have good asymptotic behavior.

So if you would apply it to a stationary problem,

When you would like with high probability to find a good solution, I mean, active inference algorithm is not one to go for there.

At least, again, we have some ideas how to change this.

But I mean, just based on expected free energy, this is not something which behaves nicely.


SPEAKER_08:
So you almost have to do like a hack on it to keep bringing it back away from premature.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, exactly.

It kind of just gets stuck prematurely into a solution which the agent believes it's a good one.

And the reason for this one can see immediately just from this, from...

the term which drives the exploration, which is this expected information gain.

In reinforcement learning, this is called exploration bonus or something like this.

And this doesn't increase with time.

So in a way, all these previous algorithms, like upper confidence bound UCB,

The reinforcement learning-based algorithms, they have a bound which increases with time.

So if you are not sampling from one arm, this bound becomes bigger.

So your algorithm is kind of forced to switch at some point.

And this is not happening here.

So either one will need a different generative model or a different way to introduce more randomness into the behavior.


SPEAKER_00:
One aspect of, it was figure one or no, it was figure two in the paper was that on the top left there, that the variance across active inference agents was increasing.

So it wasn't that like every instance was slightly degrading in performance.

It was actually that a small subset where you wrote there

a small percentage of the ensemble did not find the accurate solution and were overconfident in their estimate.

So it does suggest a few ways in which maybe, you know, when the variance of a few parallel instances of active inference starts diverging, that could be like a warning sign that some of them are getting too confident too early.

And then also it was interesting how you explored that variation

the learning rate or Lambda through time and just kind of said that, okay, there's no simple answer here, but it's an area of future work for sure.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I mean, the problem with like parallel runs in practical applications, you don't have that, how do you say, that advantage in simulations, I can just run

I mean, any number of simulations, just see how it behaves.

But in practice, when you're solving the problem, you just have one trajectory.

And then you have to provide an insurance that this sample or this sequence of actions will behave better than random or better.

There is some probability to converge over a long run.

And this is something which you don't get with

with active, infinite, and stationary problems, at least.

In non-stationary, we don't see this issue anymore because of basically the generative model itself.

Because the less you're exploring, the more your uncertainty rises on the arms which you haven't observed because the agent believes that things will change over time.

Simply, this is also what helps it shift between arms.

And it's also very efficient to kind of extract information from them because agent picks up really fast what kind of arms were not sampled and it is aligned with its beliefs.


SPEAKER_08:
I wonder if this also might reflect the difference between optimizing the model for practical application in, I don't know, a computer simulation program and the way that organisms behave.

It may be that we prematurely shut off and let things become a habit, but that may have downsides.

It may be that organisms, just to minimize use of energy,

prematurely converge on something inaccurate.

And so maybe that's like gambling and that could, it could show a fragility at times.

So there's maybe two ways that it's being applied, you know?


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah.

I mean, I would say that organisms are never exposed to a stationary environment.

So, right.

I mean, in a way, if you are not doing that, you are suboptimal because you are living in an environment that changes constantly.

Right.

So in a way, you can exploit this by now creating situations where, well, people behave weird and have gambling issues and stuff.

But I don't think that's kind of a disadvantage for what we evolved to do, actually.

For that, we are very good in doing.

Finding good solutions reasonably fast.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, sorry.

I was just curious, I mean, because

You know, I mean, this is something that, you know, like with some of our like empirical work we've run into, you know, so like when trying to model a like change point detection tasks, for example, um, using active inference where, um, yeah, like same thing, like the thing becomes too confident too quickly.

Um, but I wondered, I mean, cause I mean, in, in a lot of other empirical work, like in neuroscience, especially like it's, it's pretty clear that people don't just kind of.

learn and then unlearn the like reward probabilities or just whatever the kind of environmental statistics are.

Like when there's like abrupt changes, right?

I mean, what people do is instead they infer that there's some new hidden cause, right?

There's some new latent context.

And then under that new context, you basically just have really flat, low, you know, really, really small

you know, like magnitude concentration parameters, and then you just build up, right.

Like your beliefs a new under that new context.

Um, and so there's, there's like something, so there's like that kind of approach, which either would require having some, something hierarchical or having some kind of like additional hidden state factor that would correspond to context.

Right.

Um, you know, it seems like you could do it either of those ways.

Um, the, um,

And then the, the other thing to do would be to have some kind of like in the HPF, like in the hierarchical Gaussian filter where you have some kind of, uh, like dynamically adjusted learning rate.

Um, you know, or, or really something more like, um, you know, so then like recently when we were updating, um, some of the, with our tutorial paper, um, you know, like after talking with Carl, um, you know, it seemed like it would be a good idea to also include this kind of like forgetting rate parameter, as opposed to just like the standard learning rate parameter.

which is just kind of like a scalar parameter on the actual concentration parameters prior to adding on the new counts.

And so you could, that's not dynamic, but at least it does prevent, it can act as kind of like something like an implicit prior on volatility that can prevent the thing from becoming too confident too quickly.

But yeah, I guess I just,

I wondered if, you know, you guys had like thought about, or, you know, like played around at all with, with something like that, something like inferring, inferring new kind of like latent contexts, as opposed to just having to kind of like, you know, like the thing becoming too confident and having to spend a bunch of time overwriting.

Right.

It's a, you know, it's old, it's old beliefs, which happens way too slow.


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, in the end, um, I, my current model,

It's actually based on such a hierarchical model as you described where my agent, instead of unlearning all the action-outcome contingencies, it opens up a new context.

Have you inferred that the context changed?

I think when we were looking for proper learning algorithms for the paper, we most definitely looked in contextual learning and

I think in the stationary case, there are no contexts.

That's why we didn't introduce it there.

And I think the SMILE algorithm we used for the non-stationary bandit also has a forgetting rate.

Just like you say, a forgetting rate on the concentration parameters, which I think is another reason why this algorithm worked well in the non-stationary case or better than in the stationary case.

And in theory, I think we also tried some version of this where we have both contexts.

I'm not getting parameters, but yeah.

In the end, then, for the randomly moving bandits, we had also thought about then having another layer to this hierarchical model that in person volatility to adjust the learning rate.

And if you start that, your learning model becomes very abstract really quickly.

Maybe it's overkill.


SPEAKER_04:
So I guess what I don't completely understand still is,

Even in the stationary case, if, uh, if you're getting ready to switch really high, I mean that all this is going to happen is your, the actual like magnitude of your concentration parameters are never going to build up to too high of a value.

Right.

So like, does that not still help with the overconfidence issue?

I just sort of thought it would.


SPEAKER_07:
Well, we don't have a kind of forgetting parameter in non-stationary case.

At least this shuts off because assume agent believes it's in a stationary environment.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I guess you could still put an agent in a stationary environment, but it seems like it could be plausible that it has a kind of... Yeah, forgetting.

Yeah, I agree.


SPEAKER_07:
I mean, that's one way one could try out, right, to resolve the...

Uh, exploration from in stationary case, right?

Just simply, uh, giving agent to the wrong beliefs.


SPEAKER_02:
So the things we use the same learning, the same Bayesian belief updating algorithm for all the different action selection methods that we compared.

And then, um, it's a weird interplay between.

The learning model that we chose for the stationary case and the action selection rule and I mean Thompson sampling which uses the same learning does not have this issue.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
And that I think is also interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
So to the second part of the question, where how would that translate to improving how some problems our decisions are currently solved?

I'm hearing a few things.

We talked about speeding up computation relative to other approaches, but that's not a solved problem.

For example, if there's a 10 times speed up, but then you have to run 10 agents in parallel to get a good ensemble estimate.

then it's a wash.

So potentially for speeding up just the computational requirements for certain challenges, a second would be that it might be possible to more rapidly lock in to dynamically changing regimes and to avoid some of the pathologies of model fitting

in multi-armed bandit contexts and then a third way that it could translate to improvements would be it might reveal some hidden similarities between these different problems and settings like we already know that they're somewhat similar because we can apply multi-armed bandit to

you know, health, finance, recommendation systems, et cetera.

So we know that there's a lot of problems involving data that have similar enough structures such that a similar kind of general algorithm can be applied.

But then it could be interesting once we have them on the common grounding of active inference to say, actually, you know, the structure of the decision making is similar across these two settings.

or the telecommunications routing and the logistics routing are similar in this unexpected way.

So maybe insights relating to what kinds of tweaks an agent could improve on their performance with, like what we're talking about here with the categorical hidden states or learning and forgetting tweaks, maybe some of those insights could be implemented in active inference and then more easily transferred across different domains.

So hope that conveyed some of our thoughts on this question to Lars.

Anyone else?


SPEAKER_07:
Yes.

I mean, one issue there is that in different domains, you will, in principle, have different generative models.

I mean, although the problem is the same, multi-ambient, I mean, you will need different representation of the environment.

And this is then where the challenge comes, potentially.

if you can represent it as a multi-embedded problem, you can choose different, whatever action selection algorithm you find towards best.

And in non-stationary situation, at least for what we investigated, this seems to work well.

This doesn't mean necessarily that this generalizes.

One will still have to try out different things just to make sure.

But in the end, the bigger challenge is like, okay, what is a good generative model for this dynamic problem which I have?

And one can go there with many different things.

I mean, for example, what Ryan also mentioned, this kind of open-ended contextual learning.

I mean, one can represent simple in the environments where you don't know anything about what's going on.

You can just do a non-parametric generative model, like Dirichlet process or Gaussian process.

And you just try to learn even what


SPEAKER_00:
model itself should be awesome so let's go to this little sub discussion on sarah one of your previous papers and then we're gonna turn to some notebooks and walkthroughs of the bandit

project but hopefully this will be informative because first off belief propagation and message passing and these types of approximations are of interest to the lab in the community and also we're seeing a few faces that we can ascend active inference mountain on we have ryan with a matrix based matlab approach

We will walk through in just a few minutes with a Python-based approach of the bandit.

And then this is a slightly different approach based upon the Beth approximation.

So Sarah, anything you'd like to describe?

I'm sure this will be new to many people, so it will be helpful to convey what you were working on here.


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So in figure two, the upper one, what you see is

the generative model of a normal observable Markov decision process.

Where in the upper row, the unfilled circuits are the hidden states.

Sorry, they were called S in the previous slide.

And below are the observations.

And then the whole dynamics of which states follow upon each other is determined by the policy pi on the left side.

And then what people often do is assume in this Q that we saw two slides before, the mean-field approximation, which means, basically, which means that,

For example, here we have a bunch of hidden states, HT, HT plus one and so on.

And then if you assume the mean field approximation, the approximate belief distribution would be just Q of HT times Q of HT plus one times and so on and so forth.

And there with you create an implicitly, yeah, you essentially treat all the hidden states

as independent in your approximate beliefs.

And then the dependencies will be averaged out.

In figure three, you actually see the inverted model.

And with M, you see the messages that are being passed in between nodes.

So it doesn't matter what approximation you use.

In the end, you can calculate your beliefs with some sort of message passing algorithm.

Except that now, if you chose a mean fit approximation and you estimate all hidden sets separately, what we found is that actually they may not fit very well to each other.

So for example, when my agent predicted how it will go through the grid and a certain policy, it actually often predicted it will jump.

and go places that don't adhere to set transitions.

And therewith, of course, leading to decreased goal reaching success.

And then instead of doing this mean sheet approximation, we assume the beta approximation, which instead of having QHT times QHT plus one and so on, you have

small pairs of joint distributions.

So Q of HT and HT plus one times Q of HT plus one and HT plus two.

And then doing the math, you can show that if you assume this type of approximation and you plug it into the free energy, you want to minimize the free energy, the belief propagation methods passing algorithm comes out.

And so you can use the belief propagation message passing algorithm under the beta approximation to calculate beliefs.

And this is actually exact on graphs without loops.

And then you'll get a more appropriate joint representation in this case of temporarily dependent hidden variables.

But I mean, in the end, yeah, what I do nowadays that I also

I have a hierarchical model where now, for example, the parameters of the Markov decision process are context dependent.

I look into my model and think which variables belong together, and then I apply the beta approximation in these parts.

But then some slower varying variables like the context, I just use the mean fit approximation because it varies differently anyways.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for that breakdown.

What is message passing?

Like, who are the messages being passed between?

And does that reflect a variant on active inference?

Or is it the same exact active inference model can be approximated or can be calculated through message passing or through other mechanisms?


SPEAKER_02:
Correct me if I'm wrong, Dimitri, but I think in the end, all active inference agents do message passing.

Depends on the approximation, which type of message passing algorithm.

So, yeah, and the beta approximation, it's belief propagation, message passing.

I think there are equivalences to some product algorithm also.

You just get different messages that maybe

better or worse, but okay.

What other messages essentially each note in the graph.

So each hidden variable since other hidden variables that it's connected to a message about which state it should be in.

So HT would say, Hey, we're currently here.

Then I think in the next day we should be there and then vice versa.

HGPAS1 can send a message back that says, hey, we want to be there next time, Seb.

Where should we be now?

And so, yeah, these variables essentially send each other messages on what they should be so that they are in agreement with each other.

And that's how you get essentially a probability distribution over what you think, which state you're in and will be in.


SPEAKER_00:
Yet, Dimitri, any thoughts on message passing?

Or where do you see message passing fitting into Bayesian statistics and a few other topics?


SPEAKER_07:
DIMITRI LASCARISONI- I mean, as Sarah said, I mean, they would say all the algorithms are message passing.

So when you talk about mean field approximation, this would be traditionally variational message passing.

It's called the algorithm, right?

Here, this is like belief propagation.

message passing algorithm based on marginal probabilities instead of in the variational message passing you have like expectations of the log of conditional probabilities right i mean this is kind of the differences what you're what you're getting and losing and i mean we have another paper with thomas parr and carl neuronal message passing using mean field beta and marginal approximations

where we kind of contrast these different ways.

So who is interested in this topic can look into a bit unpacked discussion of similarities and differences.

In practice, the difficulty with mean field approximation is, I mean, for dynamical problems, for dynamical decision-making, it's not really a good approximation.

This is not something which one would use.

And implementation-wise in active inference, mean field approximation is not used on the dynamical level.

What they are using in MATLAB, for example, is all this marginal approximation.

It's still kind of gradient-based method, but it's computed slightly differently.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_00:
Continue, continue.


SPEAKER_07:
Well, I just wanted to wrap up.

Basically, the more complex problem it is, the more uncertainties you have on the state transitions.

the more difficulties you will have with mean field and marginal approximation.

Basically, the beta approximation is the only thing which kind of corresponds to actually exact inference in non-cyclic graphs.

So basically, this is theoretical solution.

You know that you can be exact under specific conditions on the marginal.


SPEAKER_02:
There's a paper I can only warmly recommend by Yadidia and Weiss, I think in 2001, called Understanding Belief Propagation and Its Generalizations.

And I find it very didactic.

It helped me a lot.

And they explain in detail how variational inference is also connected to message passing algorithms.


SPEAKER_00:
So just to capture that one interesting thing you said there about the gradients, the gradient, it's sort of like your models in a given spot on the landscape, and then it checks the temperature and it goes in the direction of the gradient.

So we've talked a lot about gradient based methods with the straight line versus the ISO contour.

Message passing kind of breaks that down into a process.

So at each click of the model,

Messages are being passed back and forth to one another which is both computationally tractable it's also shown through some work of

the BIAS lab, Bert DeVries and others, that for specific categories of Bayesian graphs, that message passing algorithms are basically equivalent in the Forney factor graphs, the FFG, which we're gonna be learning about in the future.

And also this topologically puts you more into touch with the predictive processing.

For example, the messages that neurons are passing to each other.

So it's one thing to say, well, it's as if the neurons are messaging to each other and that's doing a gradient descent.

But it's another thing to actually saying we have a message passing scheme for modeling how these message passing agents do inference.

So there's a few points of contact there that I think are pretty important.

And it's also interesting that you brought up that early paper.

So we'll check that one out.

Steven, did you have a question?


SPEAKER_08:
I think it's been sort of covered really.


SPEAKER_00:
cool area though so thanks sarah for um sharing that just one last question on this before we go to the um bandit codes and walkthrough like where do these approaches um are they converging and they're going to weave together more closely or is one of them like an umbrella over the other such that work will continue mainly under the generalized form

where do these different approaches that we're talking about to implementing active inference where are they heading like is it is more development happening on the message passing approximation or on other modes of breaking down active inference


SPEAKER_07:
I'm not sure I have the overview of hundreds of papers to publish every month to say something like that.

As far as our motivation is here, we just want to have in different situations good enough inference approximations.

In a way, for me, more important question is, what is a good representation of different tasks and environments to have rather than what is the best kind of inference algorithm to use?

Because especially if, I mean, depending, again, on the environment you're working on, but in dynamic context, it's difficult to get lots of advantage with just

improving slightly on the inference performance.

Just because there's lots of uncertainty and things in any way change all the time.

I mean, with this, we also kind of write for this multi-armbanded paper.

We tested lots of different algorithms.

There is one of the notebooks in repository just kind of lists different things we've tried out.

But in the end, one doesn't see any reason why one algorithm would be specifically a way better than another.

It's just they're very similar.

Subtle differences.


SPEAKER_00:
Great point that there's a lot of work on the comparability of different approximations and different algorithms.

But actually,

it might be more beneficial for a given application to focus more on how they're specifying the generative model and making sure that that really captures essential features of the environment, because it's like, okay, let's just roll with active inference and spend our attention on the generative process and the generative model.

rather than try to finesse potentially a a grossly inferior generative model with some better approximation there might be limited returns there so steven and then we'll go to looking at some of the bandit code yeah this is a kind of general question related to that is i often think about sort of didactic deontic q type um


SPEAKER_08:
sort of um ways of making inference um instead of um deductive thinking and such like and i'm wondering whether the message passing is is more present in those types of models because it's it's something that's been detected in the environment and decisions based on that are being made and you've got then you've got you kind of inductive where you're trying to narrow the gap

between a goal and then you've got your abductive where you're trying to build something up and infer from like a landscape that you're trying to work out what is out there, so to speak.

And I'm wondering if...

This is correct in my thinking that the message passing is more used when you have like a particular deductive reasoning approach and inductive or abductive ones would be different.


SPEAKER_00:
interesting question about how those different modes and types of logic are connected to message passing one thought which might be on or off base is that we're thinking a lot about how variables in a model are like nodes and then there's edges connecting the nodes that reflect the relationship between those variables

And message passing is just one way to describe as a model updates through time, which information is being passed between the variables.

So it doesn't say anything about the mode of operation of an agent, which might be engaging in different kinds of logics.

And I think that's a really excellent question.

Like how do we break out of the known

with respect to how our algorithms update and it does actually touch upon this mean field approximation for example if you think that all through all time past present and future that there's some stationarity of the hidden state then the mean field approximation will work but then if there's going to be a change in the state

then the mean field approximation is potentially going to give a misleading outcome but in any case message passing is just describing sort of the mechanics of how the model updates and which information between variables is connected but importantly which variables are not connected like the observation at a time point doesn't influence the observation at a different time point directly

but it could via a specified path of message passing.

Let's look a little bit at the bandit code.

So the links to the GitHub, Die Markov, you have the right name to work in the area.


SPEAKER_06:
I do, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
So we have a few of these notebooks up.

And is there, we can look at the overall notebooks folder or do you have a sense of which of the notebooks might be interesting to walk through?

I could go to a few or if you want to jump to a first one.

I think just this first one.


SPEAKER_07:
I think about this maybe.

Oh, go ahead.

Yeah, there are a couple of things.

I mean, there are a couple of notebooks which are not immediately relevant for the paper.

So we can focus just on the things which are part of the paper.

Or I can just generally kind of talk also about these other things which were just process of thinking about the problem.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, how about before we even, how do you as a researcher working on this area, keep that separate, like the paper specific developments, but then your overall developments?

Do you find that you're on an overall development mood?

And then you dip into specifying a paper?

Or do you pursue the paper and find that you have more general insights while you're working through the problems?


SPEAKER_07:
Well, I mean, I pursued the paper, but I mean, then, I mean, there are lots of branching paths on that way, in a way.

You have to figure out what's potentially interesting, what's relevant.

And so part of this code is just exploration, a bit of things, topics which were interesting for me, but which turned out not to be so important in the end, just maybe for some other paper.

And things which are just focusing exactly on the comparison of multi-armbanded algorithms.

Discussing this part.

In a way, it's difficult to combine lots of potentially unrelated things into one paper.

One always has to make some favourites in the end.


SPEAKER_00:
I knew it would be a both type of question because it's something that researchers are often, you know, interested in general questions, but we need to deliver on specific research projects with a defined scope and conclusions as well.

So it's just cool to see that this repository holds a little bit of both.


SPEAKER_07:
So for example, this notebook which you opened first, like expected free energy comparison, this was just my contemplation of just different ways you can define expected free energy.

So typically, people will think about expected free energy in these terms of expectations of outcomes.

But for example, other questions, OK, but why not computing in terms of expectations over states?

And there is a relation between these two, right?

One is an upper bound on another.

So basically, you see this last relation.

There is s of pi, there is g of pi, and there is i of pi.

And basically, g of pi would be expected free energy in terms of expectations over latent states.

So this first, and this is upper bound on what this would be like expected for me.

in equivalence to the free energy being the bound or marginal surprise, like log likelihood or surprising.

And then there is the I of pi, which is just KL divergence between posterior prior, which gives you then something else.

And one can also think, well, we can select policies or make decision-making algorithm based on this quantities and what happens when you use one over another.

So this is something which I was just testing out for myself.

I'm still not clear what to think about this.

So that's why I don't have a paper.


SPEAKER_00:
This is very interesting.

It's all conditioned on policy with pi.

And then we're approaching it from the top and from the bottom.

And so the free energy is being sandwiched in between these other approximations.

And then you wrote here that the minima of i and g of pi match.

but S is giving a different minima.

So what was curious about that to you?


SPEAKER_07:
No, at least in this example, right?

So I just kind of build up simple example and one can see that optimal policy or like minima of these different quantities is different.

And one can also think probably of different examples.

Well, this will, I mean, this relation will not hold it.

What I just wrote is a common there.

But I mean, this is more like than practical question.

So if you would then build an agent

Which one of these quantities should you use?

They are all kind of effectively can be seen as expectation over future surprisal and having different bounds on that.

expectation as an approximate quantity.

So just the question is... And I also found in different problems, depending how I formulate problem, one of these algorithms works... Well, not algorithms, but objective functions, let's call them, works better.

So in this particular multi-ambedded task, which we explored, the g of pi is not

So what should correspond to expected free energy?

This is not behaving that well.

In a way, you don't get such a good performance.

But I can slightly change the task, and I can get better performance with G of pi or S of pi.

So as I said, I'm not sure what to think about this still.

So it's really like exploration of different things.


SPEAKER_00:
We'll have you back on this topic when you're in a different phase.

Do you want to look at inference algorithms comparison?

Well, yeah.


SPEAKER_07:
So inference algorithms, as I said, this notebook just lists some of the things which we consider in the literature when you think about this approximate inference problems in changing environments.

One can think of different ways how to solve this.

What we used here is this representation, which comes from change point models as an approximation for the task, which is a good approximation for this kind of pitching bandits, which is what you're showing here, right?

For example, this is the question Blue had last week also.

So this would be how probability changes in switching bandits on one arm over time, right?

probability of generating one.

Let's call this a reward.

This is what this plot is showing.

And this is the switching concept that whenever a switch occurs, we are just sampling a new probability for each arm.

So this is this kind of setting with non-stationary difficulty.

So basically this difference between the best arm and second best, it varies over time.

And then you have like a drifting dynamics for which just like the different generative approaches model would also be better.

But then one can also say, well, we can use any generative model for any of these problems and let's just see which does inference better.

Are there any differences there?

So can you just use different representations or different underlying environmental dynamics?

in a way, misspecified in the model, but still doing reasonably well in the inference part.

And when you look at the results, posterior expectations you get over time, different approaches lead to very similar results in the end.

So there is no strong

advantage or disadvantage of one or another.

And that's the reason why we just picked the simplest thing, which kind of the most efficient, basically, algorithm.

Because then it's much easier to scale to more arms, more time steps, and things.


SPEAKER_00:
OK, very interesting.

This is a pretty thorough walk through the hierarchical variational smile.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, exactly.

It just describes the generative model, some of the steps one needs to take to get to the posteriors.

Then just implementation of the algorithm is unpacked there.

But besides this, what we used in the paper, we also implemented some of other approaches, which are non-variational Asian inference.

uh which is seems to be quite good and i mean right on average it performs better it's like more optimal uh representation now this comes from i think also recent paper on multi-armed bandits um do you remember sarah the first daughter louis et al maybe or uh unfortunately not i would have to look well we are citing the paper anyway so but right uh um


SPEAKER_02:
But yeah, pretty recent paper.


SPEAKER_07:
MARIUSZ GASIEWSKI- Pretty recent paper.

And one can see that it does a slightly better job.

So that would be, I guess, this algorithm you're showing now.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
What are the lines representing the red, blue, green, and then the sort of flat?


SPEAKER_07:
MARIUSZ GASIEWSKI- The green is just the posterior expectation over reward probability.

So the perfect algorithm should just match green with blue.

And the red is basically a change point inference.

So there's a posterior probability that the change occurred at this specific moment of time.

And as you can see, this process is quite noisy in a way.

You have lots of small errors in a way or slight jumps in places where change didn't necessarily occur.


SPEAKER_00:
know what what this reminds me of is um the blue is some hidden true price of an asset and then the green is like the markets tracking that price or value and then the red are like orders like buy and sell orders on the market that represent the underlying situation changing and it's like just uh


SPEAKER_07:
Well, I mean, markets, yes.

One can see markets as doing some kind of inference on the true value of the price.

This would be kind of a distributed inference problem.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

I mean, it's the whole no one knows the price of a pencil, but maybe the person making the eraser knows when the price of rubber changes a little bit.


SPEAKER_07:
But the colors are just a coincidence.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

OK.

And then here we see something.


SPEAKER_07:
Yes.

Here is this.

If I remember correctly, this would be the hierarchical Gaussian filter applied to the same problem.

So this is work from Matisse et al, Chris Matisse.

He actually, in his first paper, he did apply to inferring the price of an asset over time.

So when he introduced that.

But it's found lots of applications in cognitive neuroscience and just understanding how people adjust to volatile environments.

So what we have here is that this kind of change probability is constant over time.

But you can also think of the environment, the change probability itself changes over time.

so that you need to kind of adjust to these changes also.

So that would be also kind of one straightforward extension of this multi-armed bending problem, different types of dynamics, and testing out then more complex generative models and approximations to deal with that problem.

We are just comparing now how this algorithm tracks the underlying price value in different environments.


SPEAKER_00:
I have a question about what action does.

So here, the underlying generative process

is stochastic, but the actions don't change the process.

Like choosing a different slot machine isn't changing the probability of slot machines.

So it's almost like a little bit more of a niche modification setting, or can it just be directly put into the model that certain actions actually change aspects of the underlying generative process?

Or is that kind of a feedback between action and then future hidden states?

Is that like another module that has to be constructed in?


SPEAKER_07:
Well, for what we have implemented here, that would definitely need an extension, right?

So we kind of this is more than this general representation, which of also implementation of active inference, which, for example, is

implemented in SPM, which then helps you deal with these more extended problems.

So here we really are working with the simplest algorithm just for having it very efficient and compact so that it can scale easily.

The more general you are in trying to capture many different problems, the more difficult you have with scaling.


SPEAKER_00:
It's like inference all the way up or all the way down.

And it's a theme that we'll return to many times, which is that it's all good to track the absolute value of what you're interested in, but then the uncertainty on that, and then the uncertainty on your uncertainty about that can get you into this infinite recursion.

So you just go quick and dirty and just have a simple idea of how variance and higher order uncertainties propagate.

Or does one fully specify all the possible ways that uncertainty can exist across multiple levels, which can get to an explosion of the computational requirements really fast?


SPEAKER_07:
Well, I don't think that necessarily hierarchy is the issue.

But it's more right if you then start assuming that your actions change the state's

state changes or transition matrices in this stuff, right?

So basically you're effectively with actions, you're modifying the state transition matrices.

Then this requires that, I mean, you also think about the planning problem and it's not any more simple action selection problem, but it's then becomes a planning problem.

And this makes things more complicated if you introduce such an environment.

Because then it depends where you are at different moments of time in different states.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, because we've seen in the Markov decision processes that policy, pi, plugs into B, which is the transition matrix between hidden states.

so that's like actions changing the way in which hidden states are inferred to change through time whereas the one step decision making is um doesn't have to be done in that same uh way but


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, I mean, I think also, I mean, at least original implementation in SPM, what is used, this doesn't scale so very well for this type of problems and different groups or people have started exploring like Monte Carlo research and other methods, which actually allow you to then figure out potentially best policy in a very complex, high dimensional problems.

But as long as you are in the domain of cognitive behavioral neuroscience, you can get away with this by just making your task reasonably simple.

You have this control.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, but even as Ryan pointed out earlier that real humans, even when you control the experiment or you think that you're introducing a gradual change in a parameter, they might actually be cognitively doing a different type of inference.


SPEAKER_07:
No, humans are problematic.

I don't like them.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, humans.


SPEAKER_07:
We should do experiments with robots.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, maybe that will be the... I mean, we brought up the conversation, of course, logistics, planning, motor behavior, exploration, exploitation spatially.

Those are things where maybe having a defined digital twin for some robotics.

And then we go from in silico to robotics to starting to introduce the element of the human and the unknown.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_07:
Sorry, I think in behavioral experiments, you always have this problem of just convincing yourself that the model you're using is something which reasonably well represents what humans are doing.

And you can be quite certain that this is not what they're doing exactly right.

This is just an approximation of all the complexity which we

uh have in well our non-parametric representation of the role uh right and i mean kind of there is this issue right you can kind of get people to perform very well on the task through lots of training but then it's like okay is this really what i want to kind of experimentally whether like how can cubans learn to do this task well or i'm actually interested what people are doing when they are solving any task how they represent the environment

state time representation, how is this incorporated in their decision model.

And I think it's, I don't know how other people feel, maybe Ryan can comment on this, but for me, it's always a difficulty to deal with.

It's always uncertain whether you're doing the right thing, simply enforcing something, some task on people.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Thank you.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, so talking about this, the problem with humans, but I'm interested in how the precision parameter, you talk about the precision parameter and it helps to determine whether someone's going to explore or exploit the context.

And I'm interested in how exploration can become a pragmatic tool

this precision about the usefulness of something that's exploratory, i.e.

art or an experience of some sort, and how that meaningfulness in the future

could offset a pragmatic gain in the near term.

So I'm interested in this, the way that precision fits in with that and sort of the evolution of that.

And they even talk about that a bit with the affective charge with Caspar Hesp, i.e.

affective charge is how your precision about an expectation

been violated or not you know it's not necessarily whether it's good or bad it's whether your your prediction of how well you could expect something to happen suddenly got violated and that amplifies everything um so i'm interested in that because i'm trying to create immersive experiences for

theater and places like that.

But I was just wondering what your thoughts about how that precision parameter fits in with that dynamic and how that could be extended or if there's other parameters that kind of can fit in there as well.


SPEAKER_06:
I'm not quite sure that I understand the question.


SPEAKER_07:
Are you asking, is precision always relevant?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, can you stack the precision with the pragmatic, if that makes sense?

So say you've got low precision, but you have a high precision over the fact that exploring the low precision would be useful.

So the two things kind of stack on top of each other as being a sort of pragmatic epistemic game.

I can see that being the usual.


SPEAKER_07:
Yes.

So, I mean, in this other paper on meta control, we are playing with it a bit differently.

So we are saying that you can kind of control your exploration tendencies if you learn over time the exploration is bad.

And this is kind of where this stacking of different levels of the hierarchy, like a higher level agent controlling the lower level comes in play.

Because simply if this higher level observes that over time the agent is not performing well, in a way it's not reaching the goals efficiently, then it kind of punishes exploration and learns just to be more exploitative in the specific settings.

And the other way around, right?

We can make kind of a setting where the exploration is beneficial always.

And then the agent learns to kind of behave in this way better.

So one can then assume in real situations, this is something which people learn, right?

So just if they observe that depending on what they do, they gain more or less, they will also adjust their tendencies and associate this with different contexts, right?


SPEAKER_08:
So you could have almost like, it's not just precision, you could have like another generative model managing those.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, exactly.

I mean, you can just have another kind of higher level representation which controls


SPEAKER_00:
uh priors or precisions on the lower level so right and basically inducing different behaviors through that to connect that to the um ostentative cues it's almost like if you had a a sound or a cue that said okay now we're in a brainstorming period okay now we're gonna drill down

And by alternating between a brainstorming period and by drilling down, we're going to have the right kind of outcomes, but giving a cue for when one should be in a more exploratory mode versus potentially like more working with what is already known.

But this looks like an interesting paper, this meta control of exploration, exploitation dilemma.

And also framing it in terms of the hierarchy of time scales, whereas often it's framed in terms of, I guess, just instantaneously what maneuver would be best, whether one is instantly preferring exploration or exploitation rather than through deep time.


SPEAKER_07:
Usually the interaction with reviewers during that paper is what motivated this paper.

So that's like, OK, I really need something to just explain, unpack some of the similarities and differences between Active Inference and everything else around.

TINA WISDOMLENKO- Nice.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, if there's any other sort of closing thoughts, this has been an awesome set of discussions.

I think we'll have a lot to think about, and hopefully people will work through these notebooks.

keep an eye out for when the final paper is published.

So you got this one fully published while the multi-armed bandit is still not ready.


SPEAKER_07:
ROMAIN PIQUOTIERI- It's still under review, so we are finished.

Yeah, hopefully soon.

It's the first revision around, currently.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, to anyone who's on here, any other thoughts or questions?

Or what do we take moving forward?

I'm just thinking about different tabs I could be having a regime of attention on as the multi-armed bandit, you know?

Do I check something I haven't checked in a while because I'm uncertain?

Or should I pull back to my higher level and be like, you know what?

It doesn't even matter if I'm uncertain about that tab.

I should just stick on this one.

I'm sure there'll be some fun.

Yeah, Dimitri?


SPEAKER_07:
Well, I mean, it's a very general problem, as I said.

So most of the problems are multi-armed bandits.

It's not surprising, right?


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Sarah and Dimitri, thanks so much.

It was great to have your engagement from the dot zero on through.

It really made it awesome for the lab.

So thanks everyone for watching and until next time.


SPEAKER_06:
Thank you for having us here.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Yep.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, thanks very much.


SPEAKER_00:
Until next time.

Bye.

Bye-bye.


SPEAKER_06:
Bye.
