SPEAKER_01:
hello and welcome it's march 23 2023 and we're here in actin live stream 53.1

Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

head over to active inference.org to learn more about the institute and learning groups and projects we're here in active stream 53.1 and we are discussing a dyad of papers we are discussing snakes and ladders in paleoanthropology by

Hector, Carl, and Michael.

Welcome, Carl.

And we're discussing to copy or not to copy with Hector and Michael.

Previously in 53.0, Dean and I provided some background and context on these papers.

And today in 53.1, first, we will all say hello.

Then we will feature a presentation by Michael Walker.

and following the presentation we'll have a discussion and see where it goes so with no further ado we will all say hello the non-authors first then the authors concluding with michael and leading into the presentation so

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and it was a great fun and learning experience to work on the .0, so I'm really excited to continue in the .1 today.

To Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Daniel.

I'm Dean.

I'm here in Calgary.

I guess the only thing I want to just highlight today is the fact that it's 3-2-3-2-3, and I love that bouncing back and forth between those


SPEAKER_00:
those two quantities so i'm really excited and i will pass this to hector okay hello i'm hector manrique and i will just summarize what brought me here basically i graduated in psychology that was in spain and then i did my phd in psychobiology so i came to learn the biological basis of behavior

Then I recycled into comparative psychology when I joined the Max Planck Institute for Evolution and Anthropology in Leipzig.

I was lucky that I could work with Josep Cay under his supervision.

And then I had the opportunity to work with the four species of great apes.

And after that, I came to know Michael in a conference on human evolution, and we have been working together ever since.

So we are now good friends and also colleagues.

And that's it, basically.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Hector.

And Carl, if you'd like to say hello.

Yes, I will.

Please.


SPEAKER_05:
So my name is Carl Friston.

I'm a professor of neuroscience at University College London and a colleague of our main speakers today, who I've never seen in person.

But now at least I have seen you virtually.

So very nice to meet you.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

Thank you, Carl.

Michael, the floor is yours.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm very pleased to say hello to Carl, whom I've not yet met personally, but we're now meeting virtually.

I'm a retired professor at the University of Murcia in Spain.

I'm getting rather ancient.

I shall be 82 years old tomorrow.

But anyway, that doesn't stop me from digging up Neanderthal skeletons and even earlier things here in Spain.

I'm very pleased to be presenting this.

It's a case of the dog that didn't bark in the night.

So whenever you want me to begin, I can begin, Daniel.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, the slide is up and it is all you.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, this is really...

a paper which we have out on SciArchive in an earlier version.

It's now been modified from a different journal to the one that was originally intended.

But the presentation is in order to make a complicated subject fairly simple to comprehend.

I call it Snakes and Ladders because stuff appears, disappears and reappears throughout human life.

evolution over the past at least two million years, if not before.

And the question is, why is there not a continuous trajectory?

Let's move on to the next one, Daniel.

Right.

The traditional view is the received wisdom is looking at

what paleoanthropology can tell us from the outside.

And there are two basic methodologies, one based on geology and Darwinism, which gives us one view of what it is all about, and another view, down on the bottom right, is all based on what modern people do and what modern apes do, and it's all by so-called analogy.

Let's move on to the next one.

Both of these have drawbacks.

I won't go into this in detail.

You're welcome to take these slides away, provided you don't publish them, because they do include some material drawn from other sources, which I haven't acknowledged formally.

But the drawbacks to Darwinism is really the difficulty of being able to prove anything in the past in its own terms.

Okay, we can accept it as being

a valid way of explaining natural phenomena and evolution.

The drawback to using modern analogies is the spatiotemporal incommensurability with regard to the regular irregularities

and irregular regularities of which things appear, disappear and reappear throughout the Pleistocene record and indeed prehistory in general.

Let's move on to the next one.

So instead of looking at it from the outside, let's look at it from the inside.

And this has an advantage of commensurability

and compatibility at the same time with the gradual evolution of and within species by natural selection, and at the same time with the documented behaviour of Argenus Homo.

Well, this is from Carl's and his colleagues' latest book.

I'm sure you all know it.

So let's move on to the next one.

Right.

In the 1960s,

Some archaeologists were certainly reflecting, including some Cambridge friends of mine, on the ostensive presence of irregular regularities and regular irregularities in the archaeological record, and a well-known one is the case of the wheel.

Wheels were used for traction in Central Asia and the Middle East for about 5,000 years ago.

They were invented separately in Mesoamerica just over 2,000 years ago.

They weren't used for any kind of practical purpose, but just for moving effigies, statues, and toys around.

And this seems to have been completely independent inventions.

Okay, so...

Let's say that surprising enactment with stuff was the exception in early humans.

Cognitive surprises were probably disregarded in general because surprising spontaneous enactment with stuff

distracted attention away from daily routines.

If we go back two million years ago, when Homer first appears from the earlier bipedal humans, or human ancestors, we begin to see the establishment of the genus Homer, especially in Africa, and I'm sure that spontaneous enactment of this stuff certainly occurred innumerable times without gaining any foothold

technological or cultural, if you like, communal behavioural traditions passed down for generations and generations, because this is unlikely.

If we take a period, let's say from two million years ago, even to half a million years ago, that's one and a half million years.

That's 60,000 generations, if you consider one generation as lasting 25 years.

It's most unlikely that things could be handed down from father to son over 60,000 generations.

So,

Let's take a different take on this.

Let's go back to look at it from the inside.

From considerations of the free energy principle and active influence,

It follows that active inference underpins biological behaviour that has exploratory or epistemic and exploitative or pragmatic aspects, sensitive, respectively, to ambiguity and risk, enabling epistemic and ambiguity-resolving responses to support pragmatic reward-seeking ones.

And, therefore, it is not implausible that the snakes and ladders' disappearance and reappearance of stuff

over, let's say, the past two million years of the existence of our galaxy owe to no more than the extreme rarity with which unorthodox epistemic exploration of possibly advantageous opportunities in the human economy resulted from incipient, albeit imperceptibly evolving, neurobiological propensities

in brains or hierarchically mechanistic minds to generate exploitative, pragmatic attention via active inference to cognitive surprises from and towards behavioral incidents.

Let's move on to the next one.

So, let's forget about it.

Let's move on to the next one, Daniel.

Let's forget about this.

How do I get from here to there?

How do I get from a lump of rock to, let's say, a hand axe by spontaneous inaction?

What could provoke this?

Okay, let's move on.

Next slide.

I excavated a site, I am excavating a site, almost a million years old, which has one hand axe, remains of burning, lots of small stone tools.

You can see some burnt ones on the bottom left.

But then this is the dog that didn't bark.

Why are there no more hand axes?

Why do we only have one big large bifacially shaped cutting tool, the hand axe, and hundreds of tiny little tools?

People don't ask that question.

Let's move on to the next one.

They explain it away.

Oh, people really didn't bother with cutting up big animals.

They didn't need big cutting tools.

Well, that's one way of looking at it.

Prove it.

People lost stuff.

And so there should be more of these around, but there's only one.

Well, prove that.

There's only one because people took them away and used them elsewhere.

Move that.

The problem is these so-called interpretations only explain stuff away.

Could well have been a Valentine gift or not.

Next slide.

So let's get back to snakes and ladders.

We have fire at the site.

There aren't too many sites with fire either.

And again, uh, the general assumption is that there was continuity.

Uh, once, I'm having trouble with moving my other, um, my other screen.

Just a moment.

How can I move this on?

Excuse me a moment.

Uh, my eyesight isn't all that good these days.

Nope, that's not doing it.

Oh dear.

Excuse me one minute.

Um,

So we have the fire, as I just mentioned, and I don't believe that suddenly fire was brought to humans, or invented, and then passed on from father to son.

Nor do I believe, as we'll see in the next slide, that this was done along with an expansion

of these early Homo erectus moving from Africa outwards, carrying a hand axe, carrying little embers, and spreading the good news.

No.

Next slide.

Don't think it works like that.

Stuff couldn't have been passed on over all that period of time, over all that space.

This is not commensurable with modern human or modern ape behavior.

Let's move on to the next one, Daniel.

So how do we begin?

We begin by bashing stone, enactment with stuff.

And that started over three million years ago, we know that.

Next one, please.

And then we have another problem, which is that there is almost exponential increase in stuffed artifacts made by people.

And yet the brain, as we know from fossil evidence, does not follow that trajectory, which is the red one.

The brain increases and gradually flattens out at the same time as the number of stuff that people make increases almost exponentially.

Let's have the next one.

So here we have another problem to try and solve.

And one possibility, which was pointed out by the late Professor Philip Tobias, is that as the brain increases, we see in the paleoanthropological record an increase in the variation in the volume of the brain, suggesting perhaps that there is some relaxation of selection pressure as Homo evolved.

And we have the next one.

That's a point which is worth bearing in mind.

So let's think about another way of how all this may or may not have happened.

A methodological perspective grounded in fundamental biological and physical relationships gives us a parsimonious, prosaic, deflationary account of all these appearances, disappearances and reappearances of behavioural outcomes and so-called skills.

Professor Nicholas Timbergen, who was a professor of zoology at Oxford and got a Nobel Prize, was fascinated with four questions.

Let's have the next slide and see what those are.

He wanted to know how we can relate evolution at four different levels.

That of ontogeny and that of the mechanisms, the causation.

That of phylogeny and that of adaptation or survival value.

These are related diachronically and synchronically, as one can see from this little diagram, into also what we might call proximate and ultimate explanatory approaches.

If we look at the problem in hand, let's have the next slide, Daniel.

we can see that here we have in the diachronic aspects, paleolithic behavior in general, in the synchronic one, stuff appearing at different times in the top right.

As far as ontogeny is concerned, we have something which I'll mention later on, but we need to make a big deal of it, that we know that there was a lack of adolescent growth spurt and a relatively small

brain in homo erectus one and a half million years ago compared with ours.

It's about two-thirds the size of ours.

When we think of mechanisms, here we come to look at it from the inside.

We have the matter of awareness involving active influence, the free energy principle and variation of free energy, and we have what happens at the neurophysiological level, allowing a complexity of behavior between hand and stuff.

stone in this case or stones.

We have to involve matters such as working memory, long-term memory, perspective memory and indeed constructive memory.

So how does all this tie into phylogeny?

Here we have a snakes and ladder model based on the empirical evidence from the past and we have survival value that clearly existed because homo erectus eventually gave rise to us.

Next slide please.

So let's get back to snakes and ladders.

Here we have a man looking at the lock and saying, how the hell do I get this handaxe out of it?

And now the next one, and in the same way with the next slide, we have the snakes and ladders, a game of pure chance and random outcomes.

But, but, but, next slide, please.

We are not dealing with completely random outcomes.

There's a big difference between, on the one hand, a spatio-temporal snakes and ladders game of chance,

as if throws of a dice alone thought about appearances, disappearances and reappearances of behavioural phenomena, unrelated to responses of the hierarchically mechanistic minds of early homo, and on the other hand, a snakes and that is analogy of regular irregularities and irregular regularities in the behavioural record, owing to individual idiosyncratic or an orthodox activity, and the receptivity to it, or not, of an observing hierarchically mechanistic mind.

whether that of an onlooker, a bystander, or that of even the selfsame man making, or woman making the hand axe in this case.

Okay, let's move on to the next one.

And here we begin to see that the heterogeneous

composition of a picture of appearances by chance alone, disappearances by chance alone, reappearances by chance alone, renders it useless as a model for making predictions that can be compared or contrasted with archaeological findings of early paralytic science.

Whereas our preferred model, by focusing on the information theoretic and energetic constraints

on biological, neurobiological, and psychosocial evolution affords us a picture that lets us consider whether the model's focus could offer a rational interpretation of the material record and, in particular, of the uneven distribution across the old world of things like stone hand axes and evidence of the tending of fire or even visiting caves, things that chimpanzees and gorillas don't do.

Between 2 million and, let's say, 200,000, Matthew,

In this case, 80,000 generations.

Okay, let's move on very quickly.

And the rest of it, in fact, you're welcome to read for yourselves rather than have me read it out to you, because basically you can take this away or copy it or download it.

What we are arguing is that by about a million years ago, adaptive evolution was underway of cerebral human neurobiological propensities that support perspective and constructive memory in making artifacts or working with stuff, doing unusual, unorthodox things, together with short-term working memory, including that of the hands, haptic working memory, long-term working memory, and long-term procedural and episodic memory.

Those propensities were phylogenetic outcomes of existential ontogenetic programs adapted from natural selection for satisfying the bioenergetic requirements of organisms, our genus in particular.

So, here we have the basis of our argument, that in a small band of communicatively challenged homo erectus, one member's spontaneous enactment often went disregarded,

it was regarded as useless, pointless, and unhelpful to gathering the food requirements needed for surviving from day to day.

And we can refer the matter to the free energy principle applied to ecological niche construction, variation on uro-orthology, to use Frisson's phrase, whereby selection of adaptive actions of organisms involves their assessment of the alternatives in terms of the expected variation of free energy expressed as a combination of epistemic and pragmatic affordances.

So, these early individuals, a million and a half years ago, who experienced cognitive surprises

That is to say, prediction errors about effective variation of the energy were unlikely to introduce novel behaviours, whether affected or seen by them, that could gain a foothold in their community before those communicative skills had developed in some groups that widened their social scope for active influence and had been involved by natural selection within a shared framework of adaptive prior beliefs favouring alignment

common expectations and joint activities that affected their ecological niche.

Well, that's the basis of our argument.

Of course, it's no more, as it were, falsifiable or refutable within the terms of the data from the past than the alternatives that I began with.

But at least it makes rational, coherent sense and fits in with the Darwinist view of evolution of species and within species by natural selection.

It is a more prosaic and deflationary argument than the ones that archaeologists and anthropologists like to use and which I began with.

So you can take this away and read it carefully.

What we're arguing is that about a million years ago... Sorry, can you move on, Daniel?

And again.

So let's just stick with this.

I think we can go through this rather quickly.

Move on to the next one, if you would.

Right, let's go back to a million and a half years ago.

Let's look at the stuff.

We know there's a skeleton of a kid, only nine years old, according to Professor Christopher Dean of University College, he's an emeritus professor of dental anatomy, and he studied the teeth.

And whilst at one time this individual had the same height as myself, I'm about, I'm rather short, about 1.57m,

Nevertheless, although he had our adult size, he was only a child of nine years old, and his skull had almost certainly stopped growing.

It was only two-thirds or less than the size of ours.

But these people were clearly making hand axes and lighting fires, or at least carrying fire around from time to time, and visiting caves.

We know there was one in South Africa, Vondelberg Cave.

and doing stuff that is sort of halfway between what a chimp does and what our modern primitive peoples are supposed to have been able to do, let's say, 10,000 or 20,000 years ago during the last Ice Age.

But there's a big time difference here.

And when we think about this kid...

Clearly, he was developing much sooner than we do.

He became an adult, probably before the age of 15 years old, whereas our brains are not fully formed for at least another 10 years.

So this would have limited... Let's have the next slide.

You can take these away and look at them.

I don't have to read all this out in detail to you.

But in short...

These people were precociously developed and therefore much more limited.

They would be behaving perhaps more like, let's say, a modern, I don't know, four or five-year-old child of modern adult height and with a small brain.

Well, they were not doing too badly if they kept making things, making stuff with their hands, doing things, and then forgetting about them because their main purpose was to survive, and they had to eat and find something to eat, and they couldn't spend all their time in these rather unproductive activities.

So let's say that...

Let's take the active influence approach to this and suggest that from the perspective of the free energy principle and active influence, the differences that we're seeing contextualize the

experience dependent learning and planning and influence on a small scale, but they reflect the structural neurobiological priors that could be inherited by epigenetic and genetic processes within the hierarchically

mechanistic minds that were evolving and which certainly were not the same as those of modern chimpanzees and gorillas that don't do all these things that even our homo ancestors were doing one and a half million years ago.

Well, okay, I accept that the absence of evidence need not imply the evidence of their absence, but

That fails to satisfy most people, or many people, particularly scientists like ourselves.

Certainly Darwin's argument has power, but if we take a look at early human evolution,

From the perspective of the free energy principle, our proposal invokes an overarching methodological paradigm grounded in an existential principle fundamental to the evolution of living organisms and is consistent both with the long periods of time and the vast periods of space in the old world that we are dealing with, let's say 60,000 or even 80,000 generations across three continents, and

nevertheless, explain allows us to interpret, from the point of view of natural selection, what was going on, albeit imperceptibly slowly, by natural selection and adaptation.

At least some of the irregular irregularities of phenomena attributable to Homo in the Pleistocene record reflect the kinds of plausibly anomalous behavioural outcomes

that doubtless occurred often in a snakes and ladders model of evolution in early members of our genus, regardless of what species we want to call their skeletal remains, whether Neanderthals, Homo erectus, modern Homo, whatever.

Okay, these are plausible outcomes of behavior by individuals who fail to maintain orthodox behavioral responses when faced with cognitive surprises and who showed

almost certainly, particular neurobiological propensity for exploring unorthodox possibilities.

A propensity that's involved further in humans and in great apes,

which, unlike even our very young children, seem unable to envisage how things might be as well as how they actually are, as the Canadian psychologist and climatologist Professor Anne Ruston has written.

And with that, I will end my little introduction, which I hope will explain a rather complicated approach to producing a novel interpretation of science.

how human behavior was evolving during a very long period of time and across a very large period of space on our planet during the Pleistocene.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Michael.

Yes, that is the end of the presentation.

Great.

Thank you for the presentation.

We will now move into discussion.

So I'm going to open up a blank page and then Hector, Carl, and Dean, please feel free to join.

Dean first.


SPEAKER_02:
I want to just, first of all, Michael, I don't know.

I'm not sure what your stature is in person, but

after that presentation you're a giant in my mind so and that's that's not said out of out of me needing to compliment you i think that thank you for the presentation i'm curious now because the approach that daniel and i took was one of trying to parameterize a space between the two papers i'm curious now what hector thinks in terms of sort of holding up that other

that other side of this set, in particular with the paper on to copy or not to copy and how we might now sort of gain some depth perception around things like zone of abounded surprisal now that we've had sort of the introduction with the presentation that Michael just shared.


SPEAKER_01:
Hector, feel free to give a first comment.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so you want me to comment on to copy or not to copy on this one or how they interact?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, the zone of bounded surprise in particular, given sort of the groundwork that Michael has just established.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, perfect.

I would like to start by thanking both Michael and Carl for, I mean,

this collaboration because I was thinking in the aphorism by Newton, well, Attribute to Newton is not original from him,

of on the shoulder of giants and and i think i feel a bit shy here among these huge intellects and and i feel very privileged too so i want to thank them both and carl especially because he has been so kind as to revise our two papers i mean in one he's called for but in the other he revised it and give us very good indications and advice so i'm very grateful

because we all know how busy he is, so he took the time to help us and I'm very grateful.

And coming back to the papers, the thing is that Michael came up with this original idea of explaining this appearance and this appearance of hand access in terms of the free energy principle.

And when we were working on that paper, I thought that the same argument could apply naturally to the case of great apes.

The thing that there was this puzzle in Great Apes studies when they studied this kind of social transmissional culture or cumulative culture, cumulative technology.

And what happened is that there are many reports on chimpanzees being innovative,

meaning innovative like they invent new things, new behaviors or new exploitation of resources by applying new tools.

So there are many instances of this, but there is a puzzle here as there is the other puzzle with appearance and disappearances of technology, that there is no cumulative technology.

So this is a puzzle for me because if you have one creature who is able to be so inventive, how is it possible that it doesn't accumulate complexity in the technology?

So the same cognitive machinery, so to speak, should be able to produce more complex artifacts.

So there is no kind of accumulation of complexity across generations.

And that's a big puzzle for me.

So I thought maybe the free energy principle was useful here too.

So I just made this analogy.

So it's Michael who opened up this new avenue, thanks to the work of Carl.

And I just took advantage to think maybe it is because new things are too surprising for great days.

So there are creatures that cannot cope with high levels of surprise.

And I mean, if I'm talking too fast or too much, just tell me.

I think you're following the argument, I assume.

Is it OK?

So the idea is that if something that I observe is too surprising, I have to deal with this high level of surprise.

Also, by reading a paper by Andy Clark, the title was Relictive Coding in Behaviour and Brain Sciences, if I remember correctly, he talked about how one can see very surprising things

if he's able to credit the sensory information as opposed to the top-down prediction.

And this again helped me to make the connection.

So maybe the problem is that from the point of view of the observer of an innovation, if something is too surprising, I have to

consider if I trust the sensory information as opposed to the top-down prediction.

And this kind of, I need to decide, I mean, I'm talking and I need to decide like it was some kind of animistic thing, but you know what I mean.

So there is the weighting up of sensory information and top-down prediction.

So my idea was that perhaps what happens here is that these great apes,

when they observe something new and it's surprising, they kind of do not credit it.

So it's like, they basically do not register that because it's kind of,

is a mismatch with the prediction.

And for some reason, they are not able to create this central information.

And this brings us to the concept of the zones of bounded surprisal.

So this zone is an imaginary concept.

It's something we use to explain what happens.

So it's like, if you have a wide zone of bounded surprisal, it means that things that are not in accordance with your top-down predictions

things that deviate much from these top-down predictions can be handled because you are able to bounce your price.

So you have cognitive mechanisms that help you to bounce your price even when you are facing huge mismatches with regard to your expectations, to previous expectations.

So that will be the main thing here.

We propose that in great apes, there has not been these changes in the brain that allow them to bounce through prices where things deviate markedly from what they expect.

Or indeed, when they deviate slightly from what they expect.

So they can accumulate complexity, provided the things they observe that are new are not

very different from what they expected.

And I think I will stop here and I can make more precision, but that is the basic idea.

I don't know if Michael is in agreement or he wants to add something because I hope I have my limitation with language too, so perhaps he can help me out.

Michael, do you have something to add or to precise?


SPEAKER_03:
Not really.

Fundamentally,

I accept what Hector is saying.

His idea was certainly novel to me when he put it forward that we have to think about the observers not merely the practitioners because anthropologists and archaeologists and indeed many people working in the cognitive and psychological sciences have tended to put the emphasis

in terms of skills on the person who performs them and not the person who, or not the observation of those skills, which is so necessary, of course, and I didn't realize this until Hector pointed it out to me, so necessary, of course, for their transmission to take hold at all.

And this struck me as being a most important insight, so obvious that one wonders why one never thought of it oneself.

In the same way,

That one wonders why it is that so many paleoanthropologists and archaeologists are more concerned with the stuff than with why the stuff isn't there.

These are such obvious problems.

They go back to Sherlock Holmes and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.

But we tend to be obsessed with what we can see and feel and touch rather than with what sort of

process might have led to explaining both presences and absences at the same time.

And this is where I find the whole notion of active influence so important to tie in with evolution.

It was Professor Friston himself who enthused me to go back to the lectures that I used to attend 50 years ago when I was an undergraduate, that were given by Nicholas Tinbergen of Oxford.

I would steal away from the lectures of anatomy given by Sir Wilfrid Le Gros Clarke to attend those of Nicholas Tinbergen and other people.

uh i've come to realize just how important uh lawrence's and tinbergen's and um of course van fish uh and one fish as um daniel knows uh were and how worthy they were of getting 50 years ago the nobel prize for physiology or medicine um

50 years later, we're still trying to get to terms with the significance of their insights, which shows just how difficult it is for us to absorb novelty.

But nevertheless, I'm no giant, I'm a dwarf.

We stand on the shoulders of giants, not only Lorenz and Tinbergen, fish, Darwin, of course, and going back to Bayes in the 18th century,

One critic of our Psyarchic paper said that we were Pomo.

In other words, we were Pomo, postmodernist.

No, no, we go back in a good scientific empirical tradition and theoretical tradition back to the 18th century.

nothing post-modern about us at all.

I think all of us would reject any suspicion that we were involved in post-processual and post-modernist argument, unlike many of our colleagues in what I call the social studies.

Like the late Lou Binford, an archaeologist from America of some note, I prefer social studies to social science.

I think can at times be something of an oxymoron.

I suspect that others will dispute that with me.

However, I'm no giant, I'm a dwarf.

It took me all my time to cope with something we were never taught at school, matrix algebra, which I had to learn when I was doing my research on prehistoric skulls.

And from then to cope with

Bayes' theorem and the approaches or the uses that can be made of Bayes' mathematical statistics using matrix theory, which I've gradually caught up with, and I can follow it, but I certainly wouldn't be capable, unlike Professor Friston, of...

of deriving it, but I can certainly understand the significance of something that I think a lot of our colleagues in the humanities and social studies simply are not prepared to confront at all.

I think they prefer much more subjective, if you like, post-modernist thinking to rational scientific analysis.

Thank you.

Carl.

Lost the screen.

Can you see me?

I can see you.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, we see you.

Carl.


SPEAKER_03:
My eyesight is no longer quite as good as it used to be.

So I sometimes tend to huddle over the computer.


SPEAKER_01:
it's all good it's all good carl maybe you could come in and um share how this collaboration came to be or from your view from the inside or however else you'd like to comment on what we've seen so far yes well thank you very much for the opportunity um i i also have to do a lot of huddling because of my failing eyesight um


SPEAKER_05:
So just to reiterate what a joy it was to hear that presentation and Hector's follow up.

So this is for me an adventure well outside my comfort zone.

So I'm here as a passenger and spectator and learning a lot.

I didn't know half of this stuff, even though I did a lot of biology and

a little bit of evolutionary biology as a young man, but this is intriguing and foundational insights into the way that we are.

I'm going to make a few comments.

It's going to be more of a stream of consciousness, but I qualify this again.

This is completely outside my comfort zone.

I'm just talking as a layperson here, or a lay physicist perhaps.

And I'll just make a few observations.

But Daniel, I'd be particularly interested in your synthesis because, of course, you have a, probably more than any of us, the broadest oversight from the evolutionary perspective right through to the Bayesian mechanics that

is entailed by things like active inference.

Just to forewarn you, I'm going to call upon you to do the synthesis and to draw and join the dots that haven't already been joined, although there's been a lot of dot joining from what I can see already.

So the stream of consciousness comes really from this commitment to

ideas that are certainly not postmodern.

I think I'd probably have to go back to Plato and certainly sort of get stuck around the era of Helmholtz and the like from a physicist's point of view.

And pursuing that, looking at this sort of remarkable snakes and ladders phenomenon from

through the eyes of a physicist.

It certainly makes complete sense that if we're looking at a process that would be described as a non-equilibrium steady state that is slowly evolving, that could be, if you like, a mathematical image of the evolutionary process.

The definitive feature of these non-equilibrium steady states

that have the biological aspect is that they entail a revisiting of the trajectory to neighborhoods of certain parts of phase space.

So if I read phase space as basically the state of evolution or what phenotypes are doing or what is encoded genetically in a very, very crude, broad level,

There can be no other solution to a particular trajectory that is apt for describing a non-equilibrium steady state than the occasional recurrence of certain states of being, literally being close or revisiting neighborhoods of certain regimes of face space.

So the snakes and ladders image

seems to me a very apt image to actually describe pullback attractors, which are another way of articulating these kinds of dynamics or this kind of dynamics, in the sense that they have this aspect of recurrence and they have this aspect of self-contained itinerancy, which are the hallmarks of any system really that exists over a substantial period of time.

And it would be interesting to think, can it be any other way?

And I would submit no.

If you have a physical process that is unfolding at multiple time scales, and it is endowed and can be recognized either historically or in the moment by being in certain characteristic states that literally characterize the system in question so that it can be named.

your whether it's a species or whether it's your behavior or whether it's an artifact or whether it's a process um then it must be the case that it has this uh it has this kind of itinerancy where things come and go so it will be interesting just to um you and a um as a pure exercise for pure mathematics to support things like the foncare recurrence theorem

into a snakes on ladders format um and vice versa because i think there's something fundamentally true it has to be that has to be the way that things are um and i i see that um in many fields um the um and two immediately came to mind um the first was um

current notions of not the spread of ideas or the spread of tools, but the spread of cancer.

There are two views of cancer.

There's a sort of 20th century view that you get one cell in your body.

fails to recognize that it should not be growing and just keeps on growing.

And you'll get these progressive and inevitable growth of the cancer set of cells.

And at some point they will disseminate and seed themselves around the body.

You get metastases and secondaries and the like.

And ultimately, unless it's cured, then it will destroy the phenotype.

There's another view which is now becoming more prevalent, which is a much more snakes and ladders view.

And this view is that we're all the time generating little cancer cells, but 99.9% of the time they don't get a foothold.

so that we're in equilibrium, hopefully on the right side of an equilibrium, always being host to little cancer cells.

It's just that it's very rarely do they actually establish themselves to the extent that they can get a foothold and reproduce to actually produce a tumor.

or a neoplastic growth and and that that struck me it would be nice to put a snakes and ladders sort of picture on the way that that particular biological natural system is viewed and it's certainly very consistent with current views on cancer the other thing the other system

that seems to comply with this notion is not, again, the spread of ideas or the spread of tools or cultural means, but the spread of viruses in epidemiology.

It's very interesting that there are certain viruses, for example, that get a foothold and explode exponentially.

We've just enjoyed or witnessed an episode of that with the recent COVID-19 pandemic.

But there are other very, very similar episodes that don't get a foothold and they die out very, very quickly because they can't spread.

And I know this personally because we were looking for data when modeling, using actually exactly the same maths that underwrites the energy principle active inference.

We were modeling the coronavirus crisis recently, and we hope to get some priors on certain parameters by looking at

legacy or historical data.

And it's interesting that there is data out there on very similar viral epidemics, but they died out too quickly to generate enough data to make sense of.

So things like MERS, for example, was recorded, but it went away before it actually produced enough data to get a handle on it.

So again, you know, this phenomena of sort of things repeating themselves, you know,

climbing up the ladder, but then sometimes falling down a snake very, very quickly.

So you have to wait until the next occurrence seems to be a fundamental aspect of ensemble dynamics wherever you see it, either within the body in terms of neoplasia or in terms of epidemiology in the spread.

And I use the word spread deliberately because of that latter perspective on

basically to copy or not to copy.

So if you're copying, then you're in the game of spreading.

And if you don't copy, then you don't spread.

So I think just coming back to the question,

What is it that determines whether a particular cognitive surprise or a novel approach to a way of behaving or indeed a way of being catches on or not?

And that dialectic, I think, is absolutely intriguing.

I should just say, of course, that all of this formulation

rests very, very sensitively on a separation of temporal scales.

In the background, there is always this separation of scales that you get with evolution.

And in this particular instance, what we are talking about is really whether certain things can survive generationally

in the spirit, I would imagine, of sort of evo-devo and cultural niche construction.

And then the question then is, okay, at a fast time scale of interactions between phenotypes, what's going to make that sufficiently endemic to be propagated at a transgenerational time scale?

I think that's a really interesting question.

you know, again, it's the kind of question which, as a neuroscientist, and certainly as a clinician, you are often confronted with, you know, things, for example, like epilepsy, you know, what is it that constrains, that determines whether a particular epileptic surprising dynamic discharge in a particular part of the brain can be propagated and disseminated throughout the brain to give you a fit, or as opposed to it sort of

auto-avituating or quenching itself because the neighbouring cells are just not interested, they just don't recognise that particular pattern and it's inhibited.

And I guess the answer, I mean, I think we've already had the answer, both Michael and Hector have articulated it, but

I guess the answer lies in the mechanics of the spread of ideas and shared frames of reference and whether it is too surprising to be incorporated into your conspecifics or your community or whether it is learnable and can be

incorporated or absorbed into your generative models such that it can then be spread to the next person in the standard sense of sort of niche construction.

And Hector mentioned specifically one key determinant of that, which is the, perhaps it was Michael, but it was the ability to change your mind.

the ability to change your mind is absolutely fundamental.

If you want to frame this in an active inference context, just confronted with a cognitive surprisal, as it has been articulated, a set of difficult-to-explain sensations or sensory evidence, then there are two ways in which you can resolve that surprise.

The first way is to change your mind,

and to adjust your internal generative models or do some basing belief updating on the inside to make sense of this thing.

And that might depend upon some experience-dependent learning over a suitable time scale so that you're changing your model, your generative model of the world to make it more apt to explain this novel observation or an observation of one of your conspecifics doing this kind of thing.

The other thing,

The other way is not the perceptual response, the belief updating on the inside to make your predictions more like the sensations.

It's to actually act upon the world to make your sensations more like they were predicted.

So this is foundational in active influence.

There's two complementary ways of minimizing surprise or prediction error.

You either change your mind or you change the thing that you're surprised about.

know at every level at every temporal scale so just read in terms of whether I am able to change my mind about witnessing fire there are two ways I can say yes fire is a thing and you know I can then incorporate or imbibe that into my world model and

become the kind of creature that actually engages with fire, or I can act to put the fire out and then I don't have to worry about it.

Both are perfectly appropriate ways of minimising surprise.

The difference,

At a very basic level, the thing that determines whether I perceive or act or whether I engage in perceptual or active inference in the moment to moment depends exactly on something which was again mentioned implicitly earlier on, which is the precision afforded the sensory evidence relative to your prior beliefs.

As a physiologist, if you don't know this, there are beautiful illustrations of this.

So if we just forget about the notion at the moment of sort of long term revisions or belief updating of our generative model over multiple experiences to an instance of somebody making a fire or providing me with a Valentine's gift of a hand axe.

and just think now to the moment to moment ways of making of sampling the world and making sense of the world it's the case that in order to move in order to change the world I have to attenuate the precision afforded my sensory information because if I didn't do that I would not be able to ignore all the evidence that I'm not currently moving

So the most beautiful example of this, I think, is something called saccadic suppression.

It's when we move our eyes and we do so about four times a second, we actually attenuate the precision of the sensory evidence so that we are able to actually move our eyes, which basically means you can't see the optic flow induced when you make a sharp or saccadic eye movement.

yet 50 milliseconds after you've made the eye movement you're certainly now attending to the visual information that you can see so you can't you can't actually see anything while your eyes are moving because you've got this sensory attenuation which is basically putting the priors um you're in charge uh suspending attention to the sensorium while you are acting um failures of that um

can have quite horrible consequences.

So a failure to ignore the evidence that I'm not moving, and a failure to attenuate or suspend attention, attenuate the precision of sensory evidence or afforded sensory evidence, looks like things like Parkinson's disease.

So, you know, we think that this precision is encoded by certain neurochemical transmissions, particularly dopamine.

A deficit of dopamine basically means

an inability to attenuate the evidence from your strep receptors, all the signals coming from the body, and that you're not currently moving.

So if you have the prior belief, I'm going to move, I'm going to sit up, walk, drink from this cup, you may have that prior belief, but it's immediately counteracted by and dispelled by very precise evidence that you're not moving.

So you can never actually initiate a movement.

And what you actually see clinically is basically a psychomotor poverty or a bradykinesia.

The point I'm making here all reduces to something very, very simple, which is the precision afforded sensory evidence.

And if you can't get that right, and notice it has to be estimated at every time scale, either in terms of psychotic suppression on a

a 10 millisecond timescale right through to, one might actually argue, an evolutionary timescale.

And I make that argument because precision can also be thought of as a rate constant.

So if I've got some sort of sensory evidence and some prior beliefs, and I now view

my belief updating at any level, whether it's sort of, you know, my neural activity encoding my beliefs at the moment, or whether it's my neuronal connectivity or, you know, encoding what I have learned or it's neurodevelopment or indeed evolutionary timescale, the precision can be read as a rate constant.

So now what we're talking about is a certain quantity that is absolutely crucial for whether I,

adopt this, or incorporate, instil this novel experience into my model or not, that depends upon a precision or a rate constant, which means that one would, if one wanted to ask the question, you know, why do some species have the ability to, to learn?

whereas other species don't, then I think the answer is quite simply in their ability to optimise and adjust their learning rate, i.e.

the precision afforded the evidence at hand that drives the learning.

I'm wondering whether there are a couple of ways to take that sort of mathematical take on this really single, really important quantity.

And just to make it intuitive, I'm trying to get back to the copy versus not copy.

So if I can copy, that means that I'm impressionable.

What does that mean?

It means that.

I will accumulate new evidence very, very quickly.

What does that mean?

That means I have the capacity to assign greater evidence or precision to that sensory evidence and suspend the precision of my prior beliefs.

I'm not rigid in my thinking.

I can learn because I am impressionable.

What would that look like?

Well, it would look like you were young.

It would look like you have just been born and you are designed to learn because you have yet to build neurodevelopmentally your model of the world, which means that averaged over a lifetime, the degree to which you are likely to learn and implicitly enable the spread of ideas and ignite this particular

episode of a new tool or a new way of doing things or being, then it would look as if you are younger for longer.

So I was just intrigued.

I think Michael was making an explicit reference to the fact that

There may be a key difference between certain species, maybe the duration or the timing of the point where you basically switch off your learnability, you switch off your impressionability and you become an adult and you bake in then.

And then from that point on, you become old and wise and stuck in your ways.

And instead of actually trying to change your mind when something changes, you don't, you become mature.

not conservative in a political sense, but you actually try to keep things status quo, commit to the social norms.

But before that, you don't.

You explore, you go to discos, you do bungee jumping, you make new friends.

But if it's the case, then, that the spread of ideas depends upon being a child at heart for longer, then

that observation about at what point do we get to that epigenetically determined stage of neurodevelopment becomes absolutely crucial.

And just an even longer, this is the final point, an even longer time scale.

I'm wondering whether the same maths can be borrowed

or the same concepts at least, can be borrowed to think about this kind of evolvability from the perspective of people like Stuart Kaufman and the likes and selection for selectability.

So again,

If you're now reading these rate constants or precisions in an evolutionary setting, what you are talking about is basically the mutation rates or the selectability, which of course itself can be subject to selective pressure.

So if you commit to this style of thinking about belief updating in a mathematical sense,

at many different levels or different spatial temporal scales, or at least temporal scales, then it may be that the selection for selectability, or the selectability in and of itself, is exactly the same kind of quantity that is the learnability and being young at heart for longer.

That just is the same kind of quantity that is required right down to the level of

psychotic suppression and sensory attenuation that determines when we act to keep the world constant, as opposed to no, we actually have to attend to this evidence and update our beliefs.

And if that's the case, then this notion, well, I just wanted to close on sort of the importance of

cultural niche construction looked at through the lens of this rate of adaptation, precision, selectability at different levels, and how all of these couple to each other in a sort of bootstrapping way, and whether that would be a useful view of the spread of ideas, sometimes spreading and sometimes not spreading.

Can I just ask, did we, or did you latterly sort of leverage sort of the, well, actually, no, this is basically setting up Daniel for his perspective.

But I'm just wondering how much people in Evo Devo and evolutionary psychology, I'm thinking here of people like Cecilia Hayes and cognitive gadgets, how much they...

think about these these issues and whether there's the opportunity or whether they have a snakes and ladders like view of things from the point of view of evolutionary psychology and that's it that's all I have to say thank you Daniel your turn thank you wow


SPEAKER_01:
Barely know which side of that hand axe to flake.

The multi-scale learning is a great point and perspective.

We can just imagine the extreme cases in the total context

acceptance of sensory evidence world then that thing defined by its revisiting potentially infrequently of characteristic states that thing ceases to be that thing in that whether that's seen in some positive

light a neutral entanglement light or a death-like light it will cease to be that thing because it will have just simply informationally if not biomaterially accepted the generative processes in positions and then the other extreme case would be no attention uh see no evil hear no evil

And in that case, the trajectory from a Bayesian mechanics perspective is massive.

It's a trajectory with so much inertia that it can't be moved.

And that sounds like it would ever happen.

But in fact, when we heard from Hector and Michael that like upon seeing an innovation,

a great ape does not take up that innovation, their prior on how to accomplish a behavioral outcome or even at a higher order, some functional outcome can be seen as massive.

The Bayesian physical inertia of their top-down prior dominates these potentially sparse or non-linearly related cues coming up from the bottom.

So simply by not paying attention to the bottom-up cues,

there is the imposition of this top-down mass.

And so that's a Bayesian mechanical way to understand, well, if we had no priors at all, no prior, no problem, but then we dissolve.

But if we have the Titanic,

prior, then it's a fragile strategy.

And so if the niche were very simple and unchanging, that may be locally an adaptive strategy.

And on certain axes of phenotype where there can be regularities, we do see those kinds of strategies.

Like a bacterium that has selected to live in a constant temperature geothermal niche,

may come to entrench in its protein structure and in its gene regulatory networks and so on an embodiment that sharpens and sharpens and sharpens its capacity to compete in that regularity from a temperature perspective and therefore at the detriment of fitness in changing environments.

So that's one aspect is seeing learning as this multi-scale synergetic and ongoing renegotiation process of the updating across multiple scales.

Some spatial temporal scales of which there are no problems with talking about those using the cognitive ontology like perception, cognition, and action.

then some scales especially beyond the physical mechanisms that those cognitive ontological terms arose from it becomes like well what does it mean for the population to pay attention to something or what does it mean for the niche to pay attention to something

So that was one angle on the rates and it speaks to the importance of having flexible and interoperable mathematics and statistics and analysis frameworks

So we can just qualitatively, even in conversation, start to see that as a starting point instead of needing to argue up to that point of that being important.

For example, in pursuit of transdisciplinary synthesis conceptually, epistemically, or so that we could explain, predict, design, control, create pragmatically.

can we take that multi-scale insight as our starting point and then i think that leads to a question in the chat which i will ask now mark fruchtman wrote

early in the video was the complaint that there was a lack of evidence as to why certain things occurred in the archaeological evidence record how does active inference not suffer from the same issue and so it's a key question thank you Mark for asking and was the motivation for

one of my underlying motivations for even reading and investigating with this lens was great.

If we can describe every thing and we have this very interesting mathematics and so on, how do we go from a technique and a method to moving beyond some limitations of previous analysis techniques with respect, especially to the historical record.

We can go to Dean or whomever else has a thought.


SPEAKER_02:
I can throw something in, but I'm not sure it's going to satisfy directly the question.

Maybe somebody else wants to throw something in.

I do want to indirectly answer the question, and I'll come and I'll loop into what I think might be satisfying part of it.

I think one of the things that in particular that to copy or not to copy paper emphasizes is the observer's perspective.

So rather than just looking at that as something written down on a page, taking up or absorbing that position, the observer's perspective, I think what the two papers and one of the things that we tried to highlight and we're so grateful that Michael and Carl and Hector were

willing to let us look at two things at once, was the idea that the papers both raised the specter of, and I put quotes around this, the narrative follows.

What the implications of start with a story about seeing phenomena X actually are.

Now, one of the implications of that is that when you have a story, you can't have gaps in the plot.

So people who are really story biased and story forward, they want those gaps filled in as quickly as possible.

That's how we comprehend.

But the interesting thing is if we are actually actively inferring, as opposed to just seeing it as a subject matter or a topic, we can take a game theory approach and in game,

There will be random gaps like Charles Saunders Pierce says an exhaustive inquiry.

Well, if it's exhaustive, we're also going to need recovery and reflection and, and so on.

So there will be gaps.

And so the snakes and ladders metaphor to me is like, okay, perfect.

Now we're starting with a game as opposed to the retelling or the manufacturing of starting with a story.

So there's very different mechanisms that,

in the two approaches, right?

There are very different assumptions in the two approaches.

And then the question around modeling as perspective swapping kind of pivots on the stuff that Michael was talking about in terms of how is the change-based model depth capacity either affording or not affording that ability to

play with time as opposed to being captured by it.

Because in a story, you've written down what the sequence is.

It's now been applied.

Now you can interpret that, but in terms of that actual effort of starting with a story, it's now stabilized per se, relatively speaking.

So let's start with a game

and Carl's heard this before because I asked him a question about a year and a half, maybe two years ago, is starting with a game is a prediction matter expertise strategy or a bias.

Starting with a story is a subject matter expertise strategy or a bias.

And you can understand why if you're dealing with historical records to fall into a default of, okay, well, we have to start with the story.

But I think what

Hector and Michael are at least asking us to have a conversation around is, well, so what if we do bring this other way of viewing the circumstances, taking that game strategy and putting it on the same shelf as the story strategy?

So again, if you look at the assumptions around why

gaps have to be filled in as opposed to there will be gaps because the game is on.

Something as simple as that and being able to hold the two things up at once can sometimes at least tell you a little bit about maybe some of the conditions that you as the observer are inserting on what it is that you're observing or examining.


SPEAKER_01:
Was it Sherlock who said the game is afoot?

Maybe.

Right.

Okay.

Yes, Carl.

Indeed.

Michael or Hector?

How is this landing with what you're thinking right now?


SPEAKER_00:
Michael, go ahead.


SPEAKER_03:
always know better then i can pick up from you i'm not quite sure where to begin um perhaps thinking in terms of the evolution of both the brain and the body in the genus homo uh we

And possibly Neanderthals also, maybe from as early as three quarters of a million or even at least half a million years ago, seem to have undergone an evolution towards a bimodal growth spurt or growth curve caused by the adolescent growth spurt following a period of childhood slowing down of growth, which is unique.

in our genus, to our genus, and seems to be related in adolescence to some changes in terms of the agility to react to complex situations, or not as the case may be.

But even before that, in early childhood, I'm now talking about the first

three or four years of life, our infants seem to have exceeded already quite considerably their cognitive ability, particularly with regard to working memory, when contrasted against the present great apes.

In other words, there has definitely been not merely an expansion of the brain, but in particular changes in

the connective systems within the brain, which clearly must have an evolutionary physical basis in terms of structure, both inter and in particular intra neuronal structure, which when I began to study medicine and physiology over a long time ago now, 1960, we could barely imagine

It was only in the very end of the 1950s, I think, 59, if I'm not mistaken, Professor Friston can correct me, that at Cambridge, Henry Huxley began to do intra-neuronal studies on action potentials.

We were doing them in the lab at Oxford as undergraduates about four years later.

And then I was doing them under Professor Powell Glees at Gttingen.

a few years later still, with a practical application, because we were studying the changes in these following orthocresile phosphate poisoning, which had a structural situation in hens, which we were working on, similar to those in humans, who had suffered from a massive outbreak of poisoning at Agadir in Morocco, when a lot of local people were sold

American jet fuel oil, rich in orthopresyl phosphates for cooking with, and there was an epidemic of many deaths, which is well known in medical history.

And so some of these early studies, even then, were having applications which now seem almost paleolithic when we think of the work which is being done on intranuronal and also on synaptic connectivity.

intranural neuronal transmission and the effects not merely of genetics such as for example synaptic cooling but also of epigenetic modifications which no doubt we shall learn a lot more about in the coming decades but which even now seem to be telling us that the increase in the kind of connectivity or

what's the word I'm really looking for, perhaps connectivity is not the best word, within the brain is far greater than anything which is possible within even growing chimpanzees, let alone the adults or other great apes.

And this must have evolved somehow, probably in relation to the appearance, I suspect, of the slowing down of childhood growth

followed by the uniquely human Homo adolescent growth spurt, which was completely absent one and a half million years ago in early Homo erectus, according to scientists.

Professor Christopher Dean and others, and which must surely have been a response, or the evolutionary change must have been a response to not merely some kind of magical physiological change, but more likely to the effects of what we might call behavioural responses and fundamentally

It takes us back to active influence and to fundamental changes which are naturally slow to evolve.

And this is the part which is not recognised by most of our colleagues who work with living organisms or living climates, and for that matter, living human communities and individuals.

Their perspective is not that, I hope they'll forgive me for saying this, which those of us who've been brought up in the natural sciences naturally come to expect.

They don't have the kind of cosmic time scale and cosmic spatial scale of things and of the slowness and the imperceptibility of change

which come naturally to those of us brought up from school days in a different tradition.

And I think this is very important because I think there is a big divide still between what six years ago we knew as being

name the two cultures, I think this divide still exists, as that critic of our paper who claimed we were postmodernists clearly represents.

The more, shall we say, intuitive relativistic view in which there is something which some of them believe to

what to call an ethnographical present, which I think is a contradiction in terms, otherwise there could have been no evolution in behaviour, but which wants to compare, instead of contrast, as I would have it, what goes on in a few generations, let us say, in a community, be it a small one or be it a large one today, with what went on over many, many generations, as I said,

between 2 million and 200,000 years ago, there would have been at least 80,000 generations if each was 25 years long, and even that is pushing it a bit, given that adulthood in Homo erectus was very likely achieved before the age of 15, and reproductive success was probably, or the next generation was probably only a few years away.

This is important because as Professor Christian Lamont, talking about cancer, our longevity has allowed us to, and of course, better hygiene and medical knowledge, but particularly our longevity has permitted us to survive in ways that were unthinkable, perhaps in many parts of the world, barely

well, less than 100 years ago.

It wasn't merely thanks to antibiotics or even better hygiene, but to increases in standard of living going back perhaps a few hundred years.

But let's not get into that.

What I really want to say is that next week I have to have a small basal cell neoplasm removed from the side of my nose.

which only at the age of 80 or 81 became noticeable, indicating that some of these diseases, which we now regard as being part and parcel of our humanity, or the aortic stenosis, which I was diagnosed with, was my first and only ever incident of...

cardiac failure about a year ago and has been successfully treated thanks to

modern catheterization processes that allow prosthetics to be placed on heart valves by a long catheter from the groin this kind of thing would have been unthinkable a few years ago in fact I can remember as an undergraduate as a medical student watching the first ever open heart operations done by Alf Gunning

which was regarded in 1960, whenever it was, 63, 64, as being something that might never succeed.

And nowadays, these operations on our heart are just regarded as everyday occurrences in cardiovascular units around the world.

Things are changing, and they're changing with an acceleration which we can only barely appreciate.

Even those of us who've now outlived our

four score years and ten, and are on the verge of defunction.

However, we have to think in terms of the, and this again is important, of the exponential, if you like, rather crudely, scale at which things are happening and which are so influencing many people

many of our colleagues in the humanities and in the social studies and indeed studies of animal behavior, including climate behavior, of course.

And this, I think, is detracting from an appreciation of the long time scale over which evolutionary processes have necessarily to take place.

I don't believe in Goldschmidt's hopeful monsters, magical genes.

Some people believe that there's a magical gene in Homo sapiens that switched on our cognitive ability.

I think this is wishful thinking.

Indeed, it's magical thinking in my view.

However, I suppose...

my own training would lead me to want to say that, but I'm not, there have been exceptions, and one exception I should like to mention by name is an emeritus professor of archaeology who is eminent in paleolithic studies at York University now, Professor Geoff Bailey, who over 40 years ago was pointing out the incommensurability of the timescales of recent archaeology and, if you like, ethnography with those of

the Paleolithic and the Pleistocene and human evolution.

And this was not really well regarded at the time, although it influenced me very greatly.

And so there have been honorable exceptions who have certainly influenced me.

We do, as I say, stand on the shoulders of others.

We try to make one or two

small comments, advances in both methodology and in theoretical influences and deductions.

And I think that we're finally coming to possibly begin to see how to bring together, thanks to especially Professor Friston's insights and

methodological what I'm trying to say methodological proposals and advances we're beginning to see that it might be possible to square the circle to bring together the evolutionary very slow evolutionary development of the hierarchical

mind which characterizes our genus and actual processes which can underpin this, undergird it, can bring together the Darwinian view which

most of us espouse in the West, with a few exceptions which are too well known to be worth mentioning here.

I'm sure Daniel knows more about them than I do.

But it's beginning to bring together the theory of evolution of species by natural selection of and within species, and the within part is important.

And it's beginning to bring it together

with what we can appreciate about human behaviour, which is so different from that of the Great Eight.

And here I just want to make one final point, which is that in another paper which Hector and I were co-authors along with Professor Wright-Reed of UCLA,

and Biobehavioral Reviews last year, we pointed out that there has been too much, in our view, hopeful or wishful thinking about the human nature of great apes.

Certainly, their behavior is very different from that of many other orders of mammals.

not to mention other classes within the animal kingdom.

However, there is a big difference and I think this difference is best emphasized by going back to the growth curve of humans and of human behavior in relation to our childhood in particular.

Our infants are capable

by about the age of three, of combinatorial thinking in ways that are virtually impossible or outside the scope of the behavior of most great apes, most of the time, and almost certainly in the wild.

And this, I think, demands an explanation which is more than simply

saying, no, the apes are really more like us, it's just that we don't recognise this.

No, I think that there is a difference, and the timescale has to be taken into consideration, which it often is not.

And, most important, and this brings me back to my last point and the first one, which is that finally we're beginning to get together, thanks to Professor Christian's insights, to seeing the possibility of tying together the

biological evolution and, if you like, the psychological evolution, certainly, I would say, the neurobiological evolution, which has characterized our genus and characterizes it today in a unique way.

And with that, that's my case.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Michael.

many many ways to go the dinner plate balanced on top of the stick and i think that's the cognitive moment where the top-down constraints and opportunities of our enabling architectures which for a long time included primarily what was on board

And then over the last several thousand years, progressively included niche modifications and stigmatic modifications like writing.

And so just like in the SPM toolkit for studying brain function, there are brain regions that have statistical connections that aren't necessarily anatomically connected and vice versa.

And

when we consider information spaces we have similar connectivity patterns some are like information anatomy and some are more like information physiology in narrative or rhetorical spaces that becomes part of our extended cognitive selves and

leave to others in the best possible way those who want bright lines of what is a self there are analytic frameworks that respect continuities and discontinuities with an emphasis on the respect

The continuities, we want them to be differentiable and integrated and generalized coordinates of motion and the continuous time active inference models and the path integral formulation.

And then the discrete time generative model, which is also a map, not the territory, helps us understand salutatory maneuvers over multiple timescales.

And

Looking back at the literature and the discourse, discussions like, well, is evolution gradual or general and jumping?

These have been some of the biggest touch points.

Are things slowly changing or fast changing?

Those are where certain lines were drawn

And the methodological developments, Bayesian graphs and so on and so on, have provided a instrumentalist lens that, as a matter of fact, does integrate these frameworks methodologically.

That is a claim that hardly anyone...

descents from and then what happens with respect to our past present and future when we realize that we're after the moment of intra and among disciplinary tension not pushing the the rock up the hill anymore

or trying to bring somebody else along, but gardening in a space that already is how we need it to be.


SPEAKER_03:
Could I make a comment, Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
It just occurred to me that when we think of the formant frequencies that

affect all of the harmonics and other aspects of our vocalizations whether speech, chanting, song or even whistling perhaps it is unlikely or improbable that these very many variants which occur in different languages throughout the world with their very very different characteristics

and which almost certainly had begun to evolve quite considerably by the time that early writing appears, about 5,000 years ago.

But it's still unlikely that these can be taken back into the past on a slow evolving timescale such that

they can be related directly in a direct evolutionary line to the vocalizations, let us say, of great apes from a common ancestor that we have with them six million years ago.

If we accept this unlikelihood, then it seems equally unlikely to me that we can talk about cultural transmission or technological transmission

in a slow, uniform manner, invariant manner, over the past, let's say, two million years, from which we have information about different technical skills and technical abilities, or at least, shall we say, technical possibilities that were exploited by our genus Homo.

And therefore,

I would argue that it is equally likely that the unawareness of what individuals were actually enacting, the unawareness by bystanders, onlookers, or even the very protagonists of those activities themselves,

was in continuous evolution over, let us say, 80 or at least 60,000 generations in a continuous invariant manner.

This seems unlikely, and it seems equally unlikely, that the same is true of different linguistic, shall we say, abilities or aptitudes.

In other words, as Professor Friston has remarked in more than one paper, it does seem that the advantages that were taken were taken not in a continuous manner but in a discontinuous manner when particular communicative skills had developed in some groups such as to be able to widen their social scope

proactive influence and had evolved by natural selection within a shared framework of adaptive prior beliefs, favouring alignment of common expectations and joint activities affecting their ecological niche formation or development.

And this, it seems to me, is a very expedient way of looking at how things happened or are likely to have happened

Whether we will ever be able to produce a theoretic in terms of a formal Bayesian proposal for this, I don't know.

I would like to think so, but I really don't know how, I don't have the competence to begin to do this myself.

But I think that it is, if it is possible, it will certainly be, to put it mildly, a challenge

to those who tend to think that there is a rapid jump.

Well, a rapid jump took place, which, shall we say, a small gap.

There's only a small gap that separates us from the great apes of the equatorial latitudes of the old world.

I think that that took a much longer period of time.

And I don't think that one could, I don't think that

to compare what modern, even shall we say in inverted commas, relatively simple or primitive communities do or how they act is commensurable with the behavior of modern great apes.

Frankly, I would like to challenge this and I would hope that it might be possible to produce a model which will permit the

a theoretic which will permit the evolutionary process to be at least interpreted in an alternative fashion.

Sorry, I didn't mean to be long-winded.

My apologies.


SPEAKER_01:
the classical information is inscribed on the holograph in the classical sedimentary layers is Daniel you're muted sorry in the in the holograph we have the inscription of the classical information

And the quantum cognitive moment is the unpacking or the rotation of what is on the holograph into the information space.

And that I think was provocatively raised when you asked, what if this was all there ever was?

What if there wasn't a secondhand ax to find at that field site?

That's the interpretive moment.

And how we interpret it is everything.

So in our final 10 minutes of this podcast,

continuous 53.1 um if each of us could provide a kind of closing just several minutes or any several thoughts on um anything they'd like to add into this session or any directions that they would like to seed or prompt for next week's 53.2


SPEAKER_00:
I have something, Daniel, that I would like to contribute before we close this session.

I would like to take advantage that Professor Freestone is with us because I have some questions for him that have to do with the free energy principle and the to copy and not to copy, if you allow me to just formulate it.

And first thing I would like to do is that there were some lapses in my argumentation before.

I want to make clear that chimpanzees learn socially.

This is something we know for sure.

So there is social learning.

and there is even cultures as professor andrew whitney in san andrews has proven has demonstrated so there are some cultural tradition what is lacking is accumulation of complexity what is called by michael tomasello ratcheting up okay so from one generation to the next every generation builds upon what was produced in last generation so you have a tool implement and you modify it you make it more complex

So our technology is the result of many people accumulating their knowledge.

So it's kind of a joint endeavor.

This I wanted to make clear.

And what the models proposed, theoretical and other kind of models, is that coping with fidelity is key to have this accretion of complexity.

So what I wanted to correct is that

The puzzle is that high rates of innovativeness does not relate in a creation of complex technology because there is a lack of coping with fidelity, what is called true imitation.

for some, and for Rusan and Birn, I think they call it impersonation.

So I see someone doing something, I copy the means and the result.

So chimpanzees are more prompted or likely to emulate, which is copying the end result, but by their own devices.

So they can do different things to produce the same result.

And it appears that coping with fidelity is key.

And I'm cutting this long explanation.

I just wanted to correct this for the sake of purity of science.

And now my question for Professor Friston, if you allow me.

There is something interesting that the team of Andrew Witten in San Andreas observed, and that is in our paper.

that there was one instance that i know of when there was this kind of accumulation of complexity in chimpanzees and the thing was possible because these chimpanzees that combine two different techniques to make something more complex it could be a kind of primigenious example of what we call this a creation of ratcheting up of behavior they did it because they had performed or enacted

these behaviors before and this is for me it's very intriguing because thinking of how um

In 2010, there is this paper by Friston and other people where they talk of the generative models under the free energy principle, and they talk of inactive inference.

Like generative model or not, structural representations, I think that you enact, you entail with your whole body, so to speak.

Correct me if I'm wrong, Professor Friston.

So I'm thinking that these guys, these chimpanzees that were able to have this complex tool product,

they had enacted the behaviors independently before.

So I'm wondering if this enacting the behavior before allowed them to become surprised.

Because this would go to the core of this idea of an active inference.

Like, if you have performed those things separately with your body, then the surprises

kind of bounded and you can produce this more complex product.

I mean, I don't know if that was clear enough, but this is something that is intriguing to me.


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

Carl, as your last thought, feel free to address that or anything else.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, yes, I'm just reflecting on that, I think, very important question.

I mean, it is certainly the case that all of the active inference formalism, both in neuroscience but also in terms of, you know, ensemble dynamics and self-organization of collections of things, rests upon...

a generative model of the consequences of my action, even to the extent you could argue from a teleological perspective that all our perception is just in service of deciding what's the best thing to do next.

next and literally how to move next uh just acknowledging that only a very limited number of ways you can actually change the universe you can either move a striated muscle or you can secrete something there's not much else you can do and so um yeah it becomes very important in terms of

your characteristic state of being and to have the right generative models that choose the right ways to move your muscles or to speak things.

And that places embodied action or having embodiment and activism at the centre of the generative models.

And it certainly makes sense to me from the point of view of

both a statistician and a machine learning enthusiast, that it would be much easier to revise or update a generative model

in the sense you were intimating in terms of accommodating the next kind of behaviour.

I'm not sure whether this is composing a sequence of behaviours, but certainly being able to incrementally embellish or adopt a behaviour if you had already a precursor that was inherent in the structure or could be

scaffolded within your generative model so I mean the idea here is that everything that goes on on the outside has to be in some structural and dynamic way recapitulated on the inside in order for you to control the outside and this and this of course is is at the heart of early formulations of things like the free energy principle um in cybernetics you know um good regulator theorem would say literally that and subsequent um

formulations in terms of uh laws of requisite variety that the degrees of freedom on the inside um have to correspond to the degrees of freedom on the things on the outside to have to be controlled mainly the environment and so i think i think that's absolutely right that if you had already established through having an internal model of a particular behavior a particular way of deploying my actuators and making sense of that and you know being able to

to infer it was me that did that, and this is me doing that, and this is the kind of thing that I do, then you are in a much stronger position to learn or incorporate or to imitate something that you have witnessed de novo.

And mathematically, the reason why that becomes easier is

that the cost of belief updating, in its most general mathematical sense, so I'm not talking about personal beliefs, I'm just talking about any belief entailed by the structure, the connectivity, the plasticity, or indeed, say, neural activity, any belief updating comes along with a cost, and that cost can be variously articulated in terms of a failure to generalise informationally,

Thermodynamically, it has a cost by Landauer's principle.

But mathematically, it's interesting that the cost is the relative entropy between your prior and posterior beliefs.

So this will be like a computational cost, a complexity cost.

What that means is to make these steps, be they gradual or be they big jumps, they can only be made

if they're, to use one of your words, if they are suitably bounded in terms of the complexity cost, which means the degree of belief updating, literally the relative entropy or the KL divergence between the implicit posterior and prior after the update is sufficiently small, which means literally you're changing your mind in a sort of mathematical sense in the most efficient way possible.

So if you're already close to

and have the right kind of generative model to do imitation of a de novo behavior in virtue of the fact you've done it before, that means that the complexity cost of actually committing to that and revising and belief updating your generative model now becomes within a tenable range.

It becomes acceptable.

So that would certainly make sense if I was simulating that.

And we've been talking about ways of

all sorts of different questions, the questions in the chat, these questions.

And the plea from Michael, how would you make this mechanics work in terms of resolving various hypotheses and evincing insights into how all of this works?

I think at the end of the day, you're going to have to simulate it.

This has not been done very much in the setting of the free energy principle or active inference, certainly, but there now are

a number of papers coming out within the past year or a few months.

And it might be interesting to go to those.

And I'm thinking of, for example, a paper by Caspar Hesp's group that looked, I think the final write up is something like One Small Step for Mankind or something, but it was originally entitled Ideas Worth Spreading.

So it's explicitly using the Bayesian mechanics of belief updating to look at how spreadable

how copyable certain beliefs were.

framed in the current age of the internet and sort of tweets and the like.

And the same kind of theme has also been taken up by colleagues of Connor Hines and Maxwell Randstad in terms of simulating epistemic communities where coming back to Michael's use of the importance of epistemic spread and copying and imitation being basically an epistemic spread.

That's now starting to be simulated.

So I think we are on the cusp in the world of active inference, at least, on having a mechanics out there that's actually realized in silica that you can start to intervene on the model things of this kind or that kind.

And speaking to Dean's question earlier on, it strikes me that people in climatology must face exactly the same problem.

Is this missing data or did this thing actually go away?

And of course, it's a really important question to answer that in principle, you could do it if you've got a model of those legacy data.

But you have to have a model, which means you've got to basically have an in silico sort of digital twin of the way you think it works.

And then you can compare two generative models or digital twins on the way it works and see which has the greatest evidence in light of the historical data.

That clearly hasn't been done either in climate change or your field.

But in principle, that would be the way to do that.

I'm sorry, I've gone over time.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_01:
It's totally fine.

Carl, my reflection on that as we, again, anyone else who wants to have any last words is in the PAR et al 2022 textbook, there's attention to two kinds of surprise.

Plain surprise, which is an information theoretic quality, quantity associated with an observation with respect to its prior.

And the second being Bayesian surprise, which is what you just described, the cost of movement, which is related to the divergence of movements.

And I think in that difference between that was surprising and I surprised me or I have changed,

are two aspects of the scenario because to just be surprised doesn't require one to change at all one can just say every day wake up check the news i can't believe that they're doing that you can just be surprised again and again and then there's the bayesian surprise with the belief updating and that is really where the semantic

advances of the Bayesian mechanics are just beginning to mature.


SPEAKER_02:
I hate the last word, but I hope it isn't.

So the provocations have been dropped in 53.0 and 53.1 and Daniel and Dean have avoided being provocateurs so far.

What I'm really looking forward to is

in 53.2 whether we can declare game on.

Because I think if we do, if we have that to look forward to, we can push the narrative to the end of the timetable and we can start to continue to enhance the conversation that we initiated today.

So I just want to say thank you to all of you for all of the care and passion that you


SPEAKER_00:
shared with us and i'm just i'm just happy as can be so thank you thank you any final comments hector or michael no just thank you for having us and sharing this time with us i mean it was being great discussion thank you well thank you very much uh it's been most most profitable session excellent carl any last thoughts


SPEAKER_05:
Again, I've enjoyed it greatly.

It's a real pleasure to actually speak to all of you, but in particular, Michael and Hector, you're actually using words, spoken words.

Very embodied, very inactive.

Lovely.


SPEAKER_01:
Excellent.

All right.

Till next time.

Thank you, everybody.

Bye.