SPEAKER_00:
hello everyone it is august 2nd 2023 we're in the active inference for the social sciences course i'm daniel friedman and this is going to be a lecture on collective behavior now of course disclaimers could abound and there's so many ways to go about this topic of collective behavior that in actuality in enactment i really hope it is multi-scale and collective

i'm really looking forward to your comments and your engagement with this area with this lecture with this course so if you're watching live you can add comments into the live chat or questions and i'll check them out at the end also in the youtube live chat and in the video description there is a link to where you can submit questions for all of the teachers of this course

that's going to be a coda form and just more generally let's have fun enacting ecosystems of shared intelligence together and I hope that this lecture can be something like one attempt to make that happen epistemically

gonna have many fun things to talk about collective behavior what differentiates it from simply behavior i mean aren't all behaving systems assemblages is not the brain composed of multiple parts brain and body multiple people what are we really talking about with individual behavior why do we need adjectives at all for behavior what is a collective and how would we even know it except through its behavior so they're going to be all kinds of fun topics

Avel provided me with this image and suggested that it would be a great place to head towards.

And so we can think of this as where we're going.

And where we're going is understanding the agent or the human,

in a social relationship through social action and the recipient of social constraints and observations through that interface or blanket or holographic screen the agent or the human is engaging on this socio-cultural landscape and so we can think about that agent of engagement with a social world and the dynamic of socio-cultural constraints now that's where we're going and that's how someone else has framed where we're going

i'll tell you here is how we're getting there how we're getting there it's going to be a lot of fun there's going to be a lot of ants and the door is going to be wide open so everyone is a nest mate on this slide and we're going to be with our regimes of attention and our stigmatic trails just absolutely up down left right all over this socio-cultural landscape all right so here's the plan for the collective behavior lecture

it's gonna be presented as a sequence of views.

Each view or perspective is gonna consist of at very least a central citation and then one or more reflections on that citation.

four views on collective behavior taken as a bundle will constitute a main section of this lecture and there are going to be three main sections of this lecture split on one hand into three groups of four and on the other hand into two groups of six splitting into force the main three sections are going to be background and context

which is going to provide some views and insights that are from outside of active inference.

Because surprise, surprise, what was true before active inference or outside of active inference is also true within and after.

Then we're gonna turn to active inference specifically.

We're gonna talk about active inference insights and fundamentals for collective behavior.

and applications and implications of utilizing or of conceptualizing of a social system as an active inference system.

So those second two sections are each going to center around also specific recent work in the field.

To split it into two groups of six, the first six views that are presented, so all of background and context, and then half of the insights and fundamentals are going to be in support linguistically or rhetorically of a declarative statement.

Whereas the latter six

views are going to support or open up to a question and that'll lead us to the final section the fourth section which is some open questions at that time i will look at the live chat and review any questions or thoughts that people have

And I'll also just open the door and leave it open with asking questions because that's something that we're going to be engaged in for so, so long.

So let's go right into the first section, background and context.

Here are the four views and the four declarative statements.

Big picture, many, if not all of the concepts, discussions, questions, and views on collective behavior from before or outside of active inference also apply after or inside active inference or in the active inference ecosystem.

And so to support and to build out that point, I'm gonna talk about four different works and some takeaways.

First, watching behavior is complex.

Here we'll look at Deborah Gordon's 1992 paper, Wittgenstein and Antwatching.

Second, all intelligence is collective intelligence, which was a presentation of the same name by J.F.

Cloutier earlier this year, referencing a paper of the same name.

Third, we have never been individuals.

A work by Gilbert et al.

from 2012.

A symbiotic view of life.

We have never been individuals.

A little bit of the play on we have never been modern.

And the metaphors and frameworks and language that we use to talk about behavior, to talk about collective behavior, what adjectives we put in front of what nouns, that matters.

And a great work that Ali shared with me that I think makes this point super well is by Navarro and Gabrielides from 23.

And that work is the morphology of collective intelligence, network, swarm, multitude, or assemblage.

so let's head straight to Professor Gordon's 1992 work on Wittgenstein and ant watching and so

just also for context professor gordon was my phd advisor and so i was able to engage with this material and perspective through asynchronous means such as this paper but also seeing it actually play out on a socio-cultural landscape in the desert in southeast arizona that's where the complexity really flowered and so

Research in animal behavior begins by identifying what animals are doing.

In the course of observation, the observer comes to see animals as performing a particular activity.

How does this process work?

How can we be certain that behavior is identified correctly?

Wittgenstein offers an approach to these questions looking at the uses of certainty rather than attempting to find rules that guarantee it.

Here, two stages in research are distinguished.

First, watching animals.

And second, reporting the results to other scientists.

certainty about what animals are doing has different uses at each stage and this is really a beautiful and subtle point by distinguishing stages of the ethological encounter the behavioral scientific encounter whether we're talking about ants on the ground or people in the cities separating out the observational moments

and the uncertainties that are always at play there from this secondary communication about behavior, at which point having really clear, defined articulations of behavior becomes so important for scientific reproducibility, integrity, accessibility, and so on.

Personally, I find that this paper anticipates a lot of the specifications that today we would consider part of the Metabasian perspective, which is to say, we're making inferences as cognitive systems about other cognitive systems.

She wrote, my questions about ant watching do not arise when I'm watching ants.

Most of the time, I do not think much about certainty when ant watching.

Replace that for the social human setting with people watching.

Sometimes we're just watching people and that's okay.

That's part of the moment.

I do not think much about certainty when ant watching.

I enact it.

The questions do not come from doubts about the certainty of my seeing, but from the ways that doubts about the certainty of seeing have shaped scientific practice.

The resolution of the problem would come from changes that would allow observers to talk about what they are actually doing when watching animals.

Truthful accounts of scientific animal watching don't yet exist.

This truth is not yet formed because we have not yet learned to talk about it.

What a wonderful expression.

And delightfully, I came to see the confused foragers as patrollers, searching for new food.

I saw the other foragers as already decided about their destination, not available to be distracted by a new source of food.

And so we have this really fascinating dialectic where in the moments we're observing in this pre-definitional space, not questioning, though maybe we went to the field site to ask and answer a question, get data about a question, but in the moment we're in the flow of observation and not asking questions, though the uncertainty may be the highest.

Afterwards, when we're communicating to our scientific colleagues, I defined an outgoing forager as a forager as an estimate with no object in the mandibles and heading off in a straight line, passing a demarcated point three meters from the colony entrance.

then people why three meters why not two meters or why can't it be carrying something on the way out those questions arise in that precise space of communication and i wanted to open the lecture with this view because it puts a space between i see that person putting out a fire they're a firefighter in that space between

is the interpretive moment and possibility.

And reimagining the social has so much to do with this process of, let's just say, ant watching.

second view in this background and context section and here i wanted to draw from a wonderful presentation that jf cloutier a facilitator and participant at the active inference institute presented as part of his robotics and embodied project where yes he's building lego robots that do symbolic active inference but also opening up

some great philosophical directions and ones that have a lot of implications for how we think about natural artificial and synthetic intelligence this presentation is called all intelligence is collective intelligence and it was based upon the title and drawing upon a recent 2022 citation by fallen days at all and some of these maxims or expressions that jf provided

I thought were so provocative and also brought us back to that initial question.

Why collective behavior?

I mean, what system isn't a collective?

So why do we need the adjective if we're talking about behaving systems?

What is individual behavior?

Individual what?

Oh, just one bird.

Oh, just one person.

Okay.

Made up of what?

And so JF wrote some expressions and you can see from the link and look a little more with some images and more of what he wrote.

But a few of these I thought were just excellent.

Intelligence is a process enacted by interacting parts, not a property of individuals.

Again, whatever that would even mean.

Inaction is death, being by doing.

Action without prediction is reckless.

No prediction without sense-making.

no sense made without a self versus the world or a self in the world a collective is differently intelligent than its members maybe trivially different maybe better in every way maybe another direction in every way why do individuals participate in collectives why are people in groups

because sacrificing the autonomy to the collective provides benefit survival or even thrival benefits that's that i to we no making of sense without the self acting in or on the world it's not just some essence that's disembodied this is what embodiment is all about an autonomous agent is a self-organizing collective of parts

Parts of a collective can themselves be autonomous agents.

Collectives form to improve the chance of survival of their members,

an agent in a collective benefits from the intelligence of the collective so to me this presentation and line of research pursued by jf and others absolutely puts a bow on the what is an individual what is a collective why do we even talk about quote individuals or quote collectives when we recognize the multi-scale nature of complex adaptive systems

Third perspective.

A symbiotic view of life.

We have never been individuals.

This is a 2012 paper by Gilbert, Sapp, and Tauber.

And just to read a few aspects of what they wrote in the abstract.

The notion of the biological individual is crucial to studies of genetics, immunology, evolution, development, anatomy, and physiology.

Each of these biological sub-disciplines has a specific conception of individuality, which has historically provided conceptual context for integrating newly acquired data.

Few descriptions.

Animals cannot be considered individuals by anatomical or physiological criteria because a diversity of symbionts are both present and functional in completing metabolic pathways and serving other physiological functions.

Similarly, these new studies have shown that animal development is incomplete without symbionts.

Symbionts also constitute a second mode of genetic inheritance, providing selectable genetic variation for natural selection.

which connects it to the evolutionary concept of an individual.

So if we pursue the metabolic, oh, it's all the metabolic networks and how they're all connected, that's the individual.

All right, well, that includes the microbiome and symbionts.

Well, no, it's the physiology and the decision-making and the neurophysiology.

Those are also in play with the symbionts.

Well, at least evolution only selects upon the germline, right?

Well, no, actually there are these multiple mechanisms of inheritance.

Whether they're relevant in a given situation or not is situational, but in principle they exist and they're increasingly coming to be recognized.

Additionally, for the immune system, commonly described as, quote, self versus non-self or self-identification or self-other discrimination.

After all, we talk about autografting and allografting.

But of course, there are aspects of, quote, self or self under some definitions, like an epitope from a protein in cartilage that an autoimmune disorder might target.

So the immune system is mobilized against self

under some definitions, sometime, and is not mobilized against other, under some definitions, sometimes.

Like we're not constantly mounting a massive immune response to our gut microbiome or skin microbiome.

recognizing the holobiont the multicellular eukaryote plus its colonies of persistent symbionts as a critically important unit of anatomy development physiology immunology and evolution and cognition opens up a new investigative avenue and conceptually challenges the ways in which the biological sub-disciplines have heretofore characterized living entities

here we have the cover of the famous work Leviathan it's a large person constituted of other people really making the point clear but if we zoomed in on quote an individual person wouldn't we find something like societies of cells what is an individual when is an individual what and what's on the line

thought those are such big questions maybe could we connect it to a little bit of more of a bibliographic piece of data just to show a snapshot and to open up this discussion to you all about what's on the line with what's an individual and so what i did is i i searched for some literature trends on pubmed and here is the results per hundred thousand citations for collective behavior

And so we see collective behavior first being mentioned in the 1950s, at least in this literature database, and rising up on through around 500 or 400 or 500 per 100,000.

So 1,000 out of 100,000 would be 1%.

So half of a percent of all the citations on a major bio literature database

had collective behavior in them.

So that's a huge amount of work and it looks like it goes down, but when you actually look at how many citations there are, it's been about four to 5,000 publications per year.

It's just that the rest of the literature database may be expanding at a faster rate.

So thousands of paper per year and an appreciable fraction of work has to do with collective behavior.

And so I thought, wow, that's exciting.

That's great.

Well, how are we doing compared to behavior?

now collective behavior is this lower line in red and yeah there's a blip but behavior is up between 15 and 20 percent of citations in pubmed now maybe behavior is also referring to the behavior of a given material that may or may not be a superconductor or might be using different understandings of behavior

But what can we say and what can we know about the difference between individual and collective behavior?

Now, interestingly, here, I searched for individual behavior as a specific term.

So we see a lot lower, but individual behavior

mean can the tide have already turned can it really be the case that after 2020 this is a real meaningful decline i don't know it's too early to say we can't do technical analysis just like that but very provocative and gives us some ways to look at the broader scale or collective scientific cognitive process associated with these incredibly important philosophical and and

biological questions about individuality because of course to distinguish collective behavior from individual behavior or why will you why would you even need an adjective at all it's going to come down to what is an individual and what's on the line so much and the last view here

drawing upon the work, Morphology of Collective Intelligence, Network, Swarm, Multitude, or Assemblage.

And Tony Navarro and Alejandra Lopez-Gabrielides wrote, network, swarm, and multitude are some of the different metaphors that have been used to understand the concept of collective intelligence.

All of them have reflected our relationship with the internet and its development.

With the advent of artificial intelligence, AI,

We wonder about other metaphors that might offer a new understanding of collective intelligence to address today's environmental and socio-technical challenges.

They bring up network swarm and multitude to advocate for the fourth option, assemblage.

Understanding collective intelligence as an assemblage allows for the inclusion of different human and technological agents and overcomes the anthropocentrism, human centrism,

human exclusionism, of other models based on human will, whether extended as in the multitude or suppressed as in the swarm.

Connotations here.

In this way, ethical decision-making and responsibility are distributed among different cognitive actors with the capacity to choose and interpret.

And to the extent that they make decisions, albeit algorithmic ones, they're also accountable.

And I love this.

And I think it foreshadows where we're going to be going with active inference, which is

Different cognitive actors have the capacity to choose and interpret.

We might connect that to sensory and internal states of an active inference agent, but perception, sense-making, signal processing, inbound information, and decision-making and responsibility and accountability.

and the accountability that we associate with human socio-technical systems that's the action selection control theory outgoing dependencies in the markov blanket so right there coming from outside of active inference we see the identification of the need to have flexible frameworks including linguistic and metaphorical that allow us to talk about

heterogeneous, diverse, cyber-physical systems where different entities are engaged in different practices and ways of incoming sense-making and outgoing decision-making.

And it's going to turn out that active inference is an incredible and flexible expressive framework that's going to allow us to talk about those kinds of systems pointed to here.

and it really matters they point to some of the most important aspects of issues today on to active inference insights and fundamentals well here as in all the other areas there are so many pieces of literature that could have been drawn on that's why i restricted myself to just four views

Also, this section is going to mark the midway point.

We're not there yet, don't worry.

But the midway point of the lecture, where we move from the six declarative expressions onto the questions, because it's more open than not.

And there's more space for you to respond than you may imagine.

But what are the views going to be here?

And what are the literature that support that point?

So first, active inference in the free energy principle, which is a principle that provides a lot of

theoretical grounding and physics-based perspective on active inference, but we're not gonna go too much into it today.

Active inference and the free energy principle are scale-free formalisms for cognitive systems.

With collectives, as with individuals, the general framing in itself does very little.

However, with properly constructed generative models, we can get explanation, prediction, design, influence, and implementation tools.

And here I'm gonna draw on two pieces of work, Epistemic Communities Under Active Inference by Mao and colleagues in 2022.

And just from a several days ago, the work by Connor Hines and colleagues, Collective Behavior from Surprise Minimization.

We'll unpack the point more when we get there.

Second, collectives can be understood as consisting of action perception loops, which subsume, entail, or supervene upon individual level action perception loops.

Niche modification, stigmergy, can also be modeled this way.

We'll draw upon the paper Active Inference, an active inference framework for ant colony behavior by myself and colleagues in 2021.

then we'll move into the questions and things will start to open up so if it feels like we've been climbing uphill we're two-thirds of the way with the uphill climb it feels like we've been going downhill we're two-thirds of the way with a downhill how do the concepts of generalized synchrony and homeostasis which are so core to active inference relate to collective behavior here we'll discuss the work by raf kaufman et al from 2021 an active inference model of collective intelligence

lastly in this section how can active inference be used to explore the balance between individual and collective behaviors and the bi-directional influence of collectives on individuals and of course vice versa here we'll draw upon the computational boundary of a self developmental bioelectricity drives multicellularity and scale free cognition by mike levin in 2019 so let's get right into the work by mau and connor and colleagues

First, I'm just going to bring this paper up.

However, first you can watch more about it in guest stream 17.1 from March, 2022.

Here's two collectives right here.

And also Mal will be covering this work in a lot more detail later on in the course.

I just wanted to bring it up because I think it's one of the exceptional examples

can be deployed to show like hey just thinking about the social as an active inference system is awesome it's an intuition pump it brings us into the active inference ecosystem but then what do we do when we're there and what we do when we're there is we develop generative models that actually take us towards where we want to be again

Framing a situation as being related to active inference, or you could do an active inference model of that, does very, very little work by itself.

However, making generative models of situations, even if they're speculative generative models or qualitative or hypothetical, that can start getting towards doing work.

But if someone said, well, that health condition, you could do a linear regression.

Okay, but which treatment do we do?

Well, it could be done with a linear regression.

We could use a linear regression to figure out what method to use.

Okay, but you know, more or less?

Hotter room or colder room?

We'll just use a linear regression.

So that's the conversation that we're having a lot with active inference.

A lot of times people are talking about whether a given situation can or cannot be modeled with active inference or just in the abstract, what does active inference say about this situation?

And again, the framework itself is general to the point of doing little work and we love it that way.

It enables us to move into systems of interest and deploy generative models.

So what they did in this paper

was leverage the active inference framework to provide an in silico model on the computer chip model of confirmation bias and its effect on echo chamber formation.

They had a system of interest, people's social engagement on so-called social media, and they had even a phenomena of interest, which was echo chamber formation.

They built a model based on active inference where agents tend to sample information in order to justify their own view of reality, something we call self-evidencing.

We show that once agents have reached a certain level of certainty about their beliefs, it becomes very difficult to get them to change their views.

The system of self-confirming beliefs is upheld and reinforced by the evolving relationship between an agent's beliefs and observations, which over time will continue to provide evidence for their ingrained ideas about the world.

Well, where I'm from, we drive on the right side of the road.

And so you drive on the right side of the road.

I drive on the right side of the road.

We're not going to have an issue.

Everywhere I look, I see cars moving around.

I see people passing on the right on the sidewalk.

It's all making sense.

We're bounding surprise.

We're doing active inference, surprise minimization.

Goals, reward never need to come into play to give an account of how those systems could arise and be stabilized.

These epistemic communities are consolidated by those shared beliefs and in turn tend to produce perceptions of reality that reinforce those shared beliefs.

And on the top right is just a little teaser of what a Bayesian graphical model looks like of the kind that they deployed in this paper.

And here we see some of the results from their parameter sweeping, exploring different combinations of parameters and looking at topics like the polarization index and re-attendance rate.

And so all kinds of statistics that can be drawn upon connected to the generative model and also all kinds of opportunities and interfaces to relate this to empirical data.

well as suggest experiments so mao is going to talk more about this and it's awesome work and then late breaking news only several days ago five or so days ago an amazing new pre-print was put up by connor heinz and colleagues and it was just too cool not to include here and reflects the very rapid pace of collaborative development in the active inference ecosystem and this is their work collective behavior from surprise minimization

and they made every point I wanted to make here and now.

Collective motion is ubiquitous in nature.

Typically, such macroscopic patterns arise from decentralized local interactions among constituent components, e.g.

individual fish in a school.

There's that word individual again.

Preeminent models of this process describe individuals as self-propelled particles, subject to self-generated motion and social forces such as short-range repulsion and long-range attraction or alignment.

However, organisms are not particles.

They are probabilistic decision makers.

They're cognitive particles.

We introduce an approach to modeling collective behavior based on active inference.

this cognitive framework casts behavior as the consequence of a single imperative to minimize surprise again if you want to you can contrast that with reward learning where the imperative is to maximize reward in active inference and the free energy principle we're taking a path of least action not the laziest path or the most passive one but a little bit more technically a path of least action

we're minimizing surprise we're bounding surprise with variational free energy and it turns out that that helps us minimize surprise and maximize model evidence and it can include things like novelty and curiosity seeking very naturally so this doesn't mean we're squeezing the juice out of life at all we demonstrate that many empirically observed collective phenomena including

Cohesion, milling, and directed motion emerge naturally when considering behavior as driven by active Bayesian inference, without explicitly building behavioral rules or goals into individual agents.

No reward, no goal, no master of the collective.

Furthermore, we show that active inference can recover and generalize the classical notion of social forces, as agents attempt to suppress prediction errors that conflict with their expectations.

By exploring the parameter space of the belief-based model, we reveal non-trivial relationships between the individual beliefs and group properties like polarization and the tendency to visit different collective states.

we also explore how individual beliefs about uncertainty metacognition beliefs about beliefs determine collective decision-making accuracy what if when you voted or shared your perspective on what we were going to have for dinner you also conveyed an uncertainty estimate how confident are you about that being the case

Finally, we show how agents can update their generative model over time, resulting in groups that are collectively more sensitive to external fluctuations and encode information more robustly.

From a distributed systems perspective, you can imagine two different kinds of distributed systems or networks.

One of them has a dampening-like quality.

So something that enters on one side dampens as it diffuses.

We can also contrast that with another kind of distributed system or another kind of input or stimulus or context that amplifies.

And the goal or one nice property to have a systems would be like, we want to dampen what we don't want to pay attention to and

up signal or increase the cascading availability of what we do want to attend to.

Now that's a little circular since in some ways that's the definition of attention.

However, making unified models like they do here gives us integrated approaches

to explore a broad range of collective phenomena here in spatial movement but also involving the cognitive states of the particles and they make a really nice representation here to connect to other approaches a traditional approach to classical self-propelled particles is agent environment agents take rules and they make decisions based upon those rules that are either given or learnt

You know, when you're this close to the bird next to you, do that.

And when you're this close, do this.

And then social forces are these kind of as if or actual constraints that then modify the agent's perspective.

And what we see in the active inference setting is that the agent and the environment are mediated by an interface

the Markov blanket this is the sensorium this is on the inbound side perception and on the outbound side action and they give some more details it's a really exciting paper and it's just cool to see again that even in the preparatory days of a lecture like this like there's always new collective activity in the ecosystem and that's what makes it fun

last of the declarative sections of this lecture colonies here but more generally collectives can be understood as consisting of action perception loops which subsume entail or supervene upon individual level action perception loops niche modifications or stigmergy can also be modeled this way what we did in this paper was

bring something new to active inference in at least two different ways.

First, it was the first model of an ant system of interest.

Now for some of us myrmecologists in the audience, all of our broader entomology colleagues, that may be enough.

But what was also really interesting about this work and the opportunity to collaborate on it was it was the first active inference model presented with explicit stigmergy, not just the philosophical consideration of the traces that agents leaving in the environment might then have them change their behavior in the future, but explicitly engaging with this process of multi-agent stigmergic behavior.

Active inference may be informative in the study of ant colonies at three distinct temporal scales.

Nestmate behavior, which is to say emergent among tissues of a nestmate, you could keep on going collectively down, and interactions with the biotic or abiotic environment.

So first level, at the level of a nestmate, one of those things with six legs that looks like an insect.

At the level of the colony,

Colony development is emergent among nest mates and their interactions with the niche.

That is where many people would traditionally assign collective behavior.

They say, well, one nest mate walking around is individual behavior.

That's the individual ant.

And then the colony is where collective behavior comes into play, right?

And we're going to see that reified very soon.

But lastly, we point to the evolution of populations, which is an emergent outcome amongst colonies within an ecology.

In this work, we focused on the connection between the first two levels of analysis, focusing on the case of stigmergic colony foraging, using a modification of previous active inference computational implementations.

We didn't use the word individual, and there's a reason why.

Because we're saying what we mean more clearly when talking about ants, when we talk about nest mates, colonies, and populations of colonies.

that sidesteps or transcends the discussion of what is an individual and what is a collective.

Because with respect to the colony as an individual, if you want to use that word, the population is a collective.

With respect to the nestmate, the colony is a collective.

With respect to the tissue,

the brain or the mid gut the nestmate is a collective so we don't need to play the adjective game we can just articulate what we're interested in about these systems of interest and complex adaptive system phenomena and so what we did was we explored a kind of classical behavioral setting which is food being placed between the arms of a teammates and in this case rather than a rat

i'm just pausing for a second while i believe that my internet is reconnecting and we should be back each ant was described by an action perception loop an active inference action perception loop and they were able to move within a three by three grid

as well as perceived pheromone density within a 3x3 grid.

And then they laid down pheromone, they added stigmatic trace on the way home if they had found a seed.

And so this does a few interesting things and Livestream 29 is where we unpack this a lot more, but I just wanted to make two more points here.

The first is that in a reward-centric perspective on ant behavior,

The pheromone is seen as a semiotic cue and the seed or the food is seen as the reward.

And so then we got to use the cues.

We got to use the pheromone density to like figure out where the good stuff is.

That's that paradigm.

We flipped that with active inference.

Now the preference, we don't need to say reward, but the preference, that which is sought after proximally, but teleologically, that which is sought after, preferred over, is the pheromone.

the seed becomes the semiotic cue that it's time to turn on your pheromone depositing and come home.

And so that flips our approach to understanding what foraging is about from we're lost in the sauce, trying to figure out where the good thing is out there to we're surfing the hundred foot wave and we'll know it when we see it and then we'll turn around.

very different perspective and then one other point that i had to make for the context was that we used a modification of a previous active inference computational implementation what was the the paper that we drew from in fact it was the acquisition of culturally patterned attention styles under active inference with axel and alex at all and what this paper did

was they looked at the situation of visual foraging on a vase, a piece of pottery where the eye was only able to perceive a 3x3 matrix of pixels

and then the eye scanned around looking to recognize broader patterns that were then culturally acquired.

So maybe one culture or one subculture likes the checkerboard pattern, and another one likes vertical lines, another one likes horizontal lines, or these other kinds of repetitive structures.

What's so interesting is that the eye, when it is foraging, does not leave a trace, though it can feel like it, doesn't it?

but the eye forges around in order to get the bigger picture based on local information.

What we did is we said, well, instead of imagining that as the gaze location of an eye, let's imagine that as the skin in the game, exoskeleton on the ground of a forager.

So let's think about that movement as something that an embodied forager does with its real body.

And then conditional in this setting upon it touching the seed or the food, it can lay down a pheromone trail, which the eyes can't do per se.

And so just really interesting because it's not like this was an ant paper and now we're gonna try to cram it into social sciences.

It's actually like computational work in the social sciences.

was able to translate to myrmecology into ants research and so it's a very fruitful and bi-directional relationship between studying ants and studying people now we're going to move into the openness of questions in this second half of the lecture so

how do the concepts of generalized synchrony and homeostasis which are core to active inference relate to collective behavior and here we can draw upon the work by raf kaufman pranav gupta and jacob taylor from 2021 called inactive inference model of collective intelligence and this was also unpacked in guest stream nine and so here's a little collective over here and that was about two years ago way back when

What they did in this paper was they considered a setting with two trolley cars moving around a wheel.

And so here's how they contextualize that work.

Formal models of collective intelligence have lacked a plausible mathematical description of the relationship between local scale interactions between autonomous subsystem components, individuals, and global scale behavior of the composite system, the collective.

they do a really great job faking out what they mean by individual and collective in this paper we use the active inference formulation aif a framework for explaining the behavior of any non-equilibrium steady state system at any scale deposit a minimal agent-based model that simulates the relationship between local individual level interaction and collective intelligence

Then they had a really creative approach to disentangling how different capacities translated to different collective outcomes.

And here's what they did.

We explore the effects of providing baseline active inference agents, model one, with specific cognitive capabilities.

Model two added in a theory of mind.

Model three added in goal alignment.

and model four added both theory of mind and goal alignment.

What does that look like?

Again, we're not gonna go into all the technical details here, but broadly, this is what it looked like.

Here was their simplest baseline active inference formulation case.

And then in the subsequent experiments, they added in either one or the other or both of the cognitive capacities that they described.

They studied the single,

dyad case and they very cleverly expanded that into a large scale multi-diad case they utilized their own representation of the active inference partition in order to facilitate the construction of this model and so in this case we see the blanket with the sensory states coming in the active states going out markov blanket

here we see the environment and then internal belief states or cognitive states so very cool work that helps us get a vocabulary around not shut the book on but focus on how how do different agents come to synchronize

what is generalized synchrony well it doesn't mean lockstep turn taking is generalized synchrony because these two agents the time that they're talking has very high mutual information on the other even though the correlation with their speaking might be negative

Agent A is speaking when B is not and vice versa.

So from a linear regression perspective, there's a negative correlation.

But from a mutual information perspective, where you can't ever have below zero information, at worst, it's just noise, you always have zero or positive amount of information of systems about other systems.

And so that opens the door to understanding generalized synchrony

which is a broader conception of how individuals in collectives are interacting.

homeostasis maybe we could even imagine that these are multiple cells in the pancreas and they're trying to coordinate on insulin sensitivity or maybe this is multiple people who are securing the defense of a community and they also need to coordinate synchronously and asynchronously and so there's a lot of ways in which this very very lightweight apparatus of the active inference partition

helps us bring together and compose all these cool what-ifs.

Well, what if it had theory of mind?

What if it had goal alignment?

What if agents had theory of mind and goal alignment?

What if we put them in a five by seven grid and then we did this?

And, and, and, and.

That's what we get to do with active inference.

And lastly here.

How can active inference be used to explore the balance between individual and collective behavior and the bi-directional influence of collectives on individuals?

And so here I draw upon the amazing and singular work of Professor Mike Levin, who wrote The Computational Boundary of a Self, Developmental Bioelectricity Drives Multicellularity and Scale-Free Cognition in 2019.

This was also explored in Livestream 25 series.

So just to pull out a few of the great pieces of this article, and there's a stigmatizing trail of many other papers for those who follow.

Professor Levin writes, I propose a definition of an individual based on its information processing structure.

The scale and types of goals that a system can pursue defines or determines the boundaries and the content of the putative agent.

this view what defines a coherent unified self out of its constituents components and the surrounding environment is the set of parts that operate towards reaching specific goal states so this is a teleological or a functional or anticipatory or sentient or adaptive or informational concept on individuality which we can add to the earlier consideration raised by gilbert at all

Here they discuss some of the more mechanistic biological considerations like genetics, immunology, evolution, development, anatomy, and physiology.

What Levin has done here, and consistent with this is the informational theory of individuality by David Krakauer et al, is connect this more generally to system capacity.

And so there is what is here represented as like a time diamond.

where the scope or the scale of the system in the now is like the radius or the circumference on this diamond and then the part of the diamond that recedes off into the past that's retained from the past is memory and history and the part that advances or protends into the future is the anticipatory or the planning capacity

This opens the door to describing diverse intelligences, including possible alien artificial intelligence or synthetic intelligences, as well as nested or compound intelligences.

So here, the example is the ant colony.

So here we have cells, these little pinkish diamonds nested within a nestmate.

which is the green diamond, nested within the colony, which is the blue diamond.

Now, notice that the nestmate is called an organism.

I couldn't help but to connect this to Wheeler 1911, whose work is the ant colony as an organism.

Superorganism came later.

The superorganismal framing on the ant colony

reifies the concept that the nesme is the individual or the organism.

because why else would you need to call the colony a superorganism?

I mean, I think colonies are super.

I think it's great to call them whatever you want to call them, and they probably don't mind either, but the idea that a superorganism is composed of other organisms means that the nestmate is an organism, whereas this diagram, in my perspective, would be as accurate or more to say nestmate here, because under different concepts of organismality, which is to say individuality, if we want to connect it there,

the colony can be considered as the organism.

And of the so many other pieces of this work that are fun to bring out, the way that Levin clarifies his assumptions

gives us first off some planks that we can jump off of for good and helps us come to terms with maybe like how do we what do we assume about behavior about collective behavior how do we want to show up when we're studying collective behavior in general and when we're studying social behavior after all we're in active inference for the social sciences and so Levin writes the ideas are explored here from the perspective of the following three core assumptions

First is a commitment to evolution.

Every capacity has a natural history and emerged from simpler variants.

Second, it is assumed that all metaphors are to be judged by their utility in driving scientific progress.

There is not a binary categorization of scientific pictures, which should be taken literally or not, which can be decided a priori upfront.

Third, much of the discussion centers around goals related to teleology, a hotly debated topic.

Here, goal-directedness is taken in a non-magical, cybernetic engineering and control theory sense of a feedback system that operates to maximize some specific state of affairs.

which can be modeled as a dynamical system with attractors in its state space.

And later work by Levin and Fields and others expanded this concept of intelligence just to phenomenal heights and flavors.

So active inference helps us understand that cognitive glue

Maybe it's mechanistically enacted by bioelectricity in a given system or at a given scale, but active inference gives us the analytical glue to approach those systems with an open mind and an open scaffold.

And so those are some of the insights and fundamentals of active inference as applied to collective behavioral systems.

Now onto the last third of this lecture.

applications and implications of active inference for the social sciences regarding collective behavior this is really where it is wide wide wide open what kinds of insights can active inference offer about the role of learning adaptation conflict and cooperation in collective behavior and how can we approach that from a cognitive security perspective

Here, we'll draw on the work of Scott David and colleagues, Active Inference and Modeling Conflict.

What implications does active inference have on the study of human collective behavior, particularly in social, economic, and digital contexts?

Here, we'll draw on the work by Poirier et al., Communication as Socially Extended Active Inference, An Ecological Approach to Communicative Behavior, Livestream 48 series.

what considerations that are relevant for thinking about assemblages and interactions what what considerations are relevant for thinking about assemblages and interactions among different entities in cognitive ecosystems here we'll turn to the work of friston et al et al 2022 designing ecosystems of intelligence from first principles

And how does active inference accommodate collective behavior within and across generations?

And here we'll look at a variational synthesis of evolutionary and developmental dynamics by Frishton et al in 2023.

So when it comes to applications and implications of active inference in social sittings and settings,

again there's so much to do there's so much to learn so we welcome everybody who's curious this is the time to write your live chats submit your questions prepare yourself to explore and to be an active forager in this space and if you're listening you know that you already are so in the work active inference and modeling conflict

scott david rj corday and myself asked what kinds of insights can active inference offer about the role of learning adaptation conflict and cooperation in collective behavior now as with all these other papers there's always so many things that can be said

What we did is we tried to connect beyond the very classical Markov blanket and agent environment partitioning, which we've seen many, many, many times.

We tried to connect this to the specific kind of generative models that we use in modeling.

So here we led early by clarifying this is what we're talking about with active inference generative models.

It's not like something I'm hiding in my pocket and maybe I'll show you if you say the shibboleth.

This is what we're talking about when we're talking about applying active inference models to social settings.

It's a discrete time generative model here, just a motif.

We applied that kind of generative model architecture

to one of the most well-known models of sense-making and decision-making, which is the OODA loop, Observe, Orient, Decide, Act, by John Boyd.

Now, this may seem to some like a quite sparse framework, like, yeah, you get the observation, you figure it out, you make a decision, you take the action.

It doesn't do that much work by itself either.

However, OODA is used in tactical and strategic settings every single day.

And so we wanted to connect

OODA loop to the generative models that we use in active inference.

And so we highlighted on the generative model where different stages of the OODA loop occur.

Perception happens in the sensory states.

Cognition or the orientation happens in the perceptual inference, the downstairs of that part of the figure.

and then decision making happens in the upstairs with the expected free energy calculation in this case and finally action is selected and enacted and that results in impact and the cycle begins again now in active inference it's more like an unfolding flow but to a first pass approximation it does the trick why does that really matter that we understand the mechanics of decision making well we're talking about active inference in the social setting

That means we're talking about two sophisticated cognitive entities, maybe two businesses, maybe two individual humans, maybe a person and a business, maybe different kinds of systems that we don't even know about or we haven't even seen yet.

And that generative model is the internal states that is then participating in this minimal dyadic collective behavioral encounter.

we can expand that to thinking about commons, resource commons, attention commons, open source ecosystems.

And for this, we utilized one of Scott David's favorite acronyms of which he has so, so many, which is BOLTS, business, operation, legal, technical, and social.

bolts is not an exhaustive acronym otherwise we would need everything but it's a heuristic that encourages us to think holistically about different systems let's just say that we were a business or a person and we wanted to see if a given policy was a good way to go to complete our mission and it looks good except it can't be done operationally well then that has to be taken into account or everything works out but it's illegal

That's not the way to go.

Everything works out, but the business doesn't check out.

It's not gonna be sustainable financially, or technically it can't be done, or socially it's not palatable.

All of these features of socio-technical systems, which again, we just make a little mnemonic of with bolts, need to be taken into account for comprehensive and high integrity, high reliability systems design.

In this setting, we have entity A and entity B interacting through the bolts

niche they each have their own blanket states sense and action and the niche where those nest mates were laying their pheromones the niche is bolts and so you could make a restricted model where it's just two entities engaged in a financial dealing just a business only engaging on b or you could think of this multi-domain full spectrum situation in terms of bolts

then you would have a larger and a more complex interface between these two entities.

But we also wanted to think about the case where there might be cooperation between these entities or there might be conflict.

And so here we have entity A and B, the dyad is in the spotlight,

entity c is a non-belligerent state or it's a bystander or it's a witness or it's a referee or it's a friend or it's a colleague but entity c is also engaging only through their blanket states on bolts

And lastly, we connect it to the abiotic niche, which may not care how much you're buying or selling a gallon of oil for.

The abiotic niche may have its own dynamics.

We may use active inference to model that, or we might use some other approach to model it.

And so this sets a really, really general state space for us to understand conflict and cooperation.

And where we situated that work, lastly here, was in relationship to other work

exploring strategic and tactical decision making.

And so on the lower end of this image are tactical and operational frameworks that are used in decision making.

On the top are strategic or scholarly frameworks that are used for more of like geopolitical considerations.

And then from left to right, we have more qualitative approaches

going to more formal and quantitative approaches and we believe that the application of active inference through this type of model the active inference conflict model helps us touch the qualitative natural language and graphical composable aspects and the quantitative and formal aspects as well and similarly through nested decision-making cycles we can talk about tactical operational

activities and the broader nested strategy just like we looked at the nested cones from professor levin's work

next what implications does active inference have on the study of human collective behavior particularly in social economic and digital contexts well there's a lot to say about this but tisone and poirier wrote in 2021 the paper communication as socially extended active inference an ecological approach to communicative behavior and this was in the live stream 48 series here's remy raising his hands so that we knew that he wanted to speak

they introduced an ecological account of communication according to which acts of communication are active inference achieved by affecting the behavior of a target organism via the modification of its field of affordances constraining a target organism's behavior constitutes a mechanism of socially extended active inference allowing organisms to proactively

regulate their interstates through the behavior of other organisms.

In this general conception of communication, the type of cooperative communication characteristic of human communicative interaction is a way of constraining interaction dynamics towards the goals of a given joint action by constructing and altering shared fields of affordances.

This account embraces a pragmatist view according to which communication is a form of action aiming to influence the behavior of a target and stands against the traditional transmission view according to which communication fundamentally serves to convey information.

Understanding acts of communication as active inference under an ecological interpretation

allows us to link communicative and ultimately linguistic behavior to the biological imperative of minimizing free energy and to emphasize the action-oriented nature of communicative interaction this is really a rich and excellent work that remy and pierre produced and there are several pieces that that i think add a lot of meaning and value to the ways that we think about communication but most broadly what is communication for

do we talk to and why what do we like to talk about and why why would anyone say that and why how does technique considered broadly technology and technique whether it's digital or social or cultural technique mediate and influence communication

The media is the message.

The medium is the message.

And think about everything in that area too.

And how can active inference, beyond just giving these incredible composable formal tools, how can we think about joint action and co-modification of fields of affordances?

Hey, could you pick that up from that shelf?

Okay, I'll open it for you.

Now let's hand it to our friend who's gonna make the food.

all of these ways in which individuals shape each other's field of affordances is something that we can talk about really fluidly with an active inference penultimate view what considerations are relevant for thinking about assemblages and interactions among different entities in cognitive ecosystems

here was a a large multi-author paper from carl friston et al and the versus colleagues designing ecosystems of intelligence from first principles from december 2022 and the big picture as i see it here is

what is the role of the social sciences after all the course that we're in now in ecosystems of diverse heterogeneous synthetic intelligences by synthetic intelligences i refer to assemblages with intelligence whether it's natural or artificial leave that debate for another day

because in their application, we're talking about synthetic intelligence.

Synthetic intelligence needs cognitive security.

Cognitive security needs cognitive science.

And they began this paper with the following.

This white paper presents active inference as an approach to research and development in the field of artificial intelligence, AI, artificial, with the aim of developing ecosystems of natural and artificial intelligences.

The path forward in AI is often presented as progressing from systems that are able to solve problems within one narrow domain to systems that are able to solve problems in a domain-general manner at or beyond human levels .

We believe that approaching ASI

or for reasons outlined below, even AGI, likely requires an understanding of networked or collective intelligence.

Now, intelligence in action is behavior.

So we're talking about collective behavior.

And they laid out their timeline and the stages that they see in terms of sentient, sophisticated, sympathetic, and finally shared intelligences.

But I think it's worth to dwell a moment on the one figure of this paper.

Figure one, belief updating on a statistical manifold.

And so here we have some curve in an information geometric space.

It's a parameter space of a probability distribution.

And on this manifold, on this line on a plane, lower dimensional manifold projection,

there's a temporal process belief at time t t plus one t plus two where initially this gaussian that's very distributed becomes updated to a sharper peak distribution that's going to be resting basically at some special point on this curve whether you're very familiar with accelerated optimization on information geometric manifolds or not

it's really interesting to consider why they went with this image.

And for those, again, who are familiar or just coming to be familiar with some of the formalisms of active inference,

this is what this very talented and transdisciplinary team went with when seeking to provide some of the only non-textual descriptions of their work so I think it's really interesting and the big question is well what is the social reassembling the social Bruno Latour what is the social what is social

Does social mean only adult humans talking with each other?

Does social include non-human species?

Does social include non-biological intelligences?

These are all things that are not just questions of theory.

And so connecting flexible, extensible frameworks like active inference and all that comes along with it

to this bigger question about applications and implications of applied active inference in the social setting.

That's what I hope we can explore in the questions at the end of this live stream and in the discussions that we have in a couple of weeks and ongoing.

lastly how does active inference accommodate collective behavior within and across generations and so here i'll draw on the recent work a variational synthesis of evolutionary and developmental dynamics with carl friston myself and others and we had two images in this work which otherwise had a lot of prose and formalism on the left we see that active inference particular partition

external states internal states blanket states here at the organismal level one worm and in an in nested deeper system the population which gives rise to the starting positionality of the organisms think about drawing an organism from a gene pool from a birth pool and the impact that those organisms have

on the bigger picture maybe it's a bacteria that is fermenting so it changes the ph or the ethanol concentration of the kombucha that is this kind of multi-scale interaction that we believe provides an approach to understanding eco evo devo ecology evolution and developmental interactions

And the other visualization that we use here is of nested systems.

So contrast that with the kind of time diamond that we saw from Mike Levin.

Now here, imagine that we're going to cut across the center of this diamond.

And now it's gonna look like a muscle fiber, fibers of fibers, because we have, let's just say this outer blue line

maybe the um the colony and then each of these smaller entities is a nestmate and they're composed of cells and cells have constituents too

And here we utilized the apparatus of the renormalization group, which draws upon physics, to articulate the separation of scales so that we can be clear.

When are we talking about multi-scale systems, which we can articulate and renormalize across vertically?

to use an encultured metaphor.

And then within a given scale of analysis, what is the lateral or collective behavior?

So how do we get those interactions amongst nest mates that are both constrained by the colony top down, again, using a spatial and encultured metaphor, top down, scaffolded or enabled or constrained by the colony, but then what nest mates do matters.

And that influences the colony.

And we used a few new pieces of formalism, primarily developed by Carl, to help express that setting.

And again, we think it's going to be really useful for describing otherwise quite challenging scenarios in ecology, evolution, and development.

And so we come right back to that, what is a self?

What about nested selves?

and with that i turn to some open questions what can be said other than there are so many open questions to discuss there's many things we can explore in the discussion that i'll be facilitating in a couple weeks and of course beyond

We have a Coda interface for you to submit questions that all the course teachers will take a look at and give their best attempt on.

And

conversation is collective behavior now sure keeping it inside of your head is also collective behavior no matter how you think about it but when we enact in the social then we're really making it happen so with that I will just show my um citations

And the slides will be shared too.

Also, there's some extra readings that various individuals along the way suggested to me.

So that includes social ecologies and abductive logic, enacting like a state.

These are not the titles.

The titles are inactive dynamic social cognition and active inference.

That was live stream 47.

Thinking like a state embodied intelligence in the deep history of our collective minds.

That was live stream 33.

Active inference, applicability to different kinds of social organizations explained through reference to industrial engineering and quality management.

That was live stream 27.

Resonating minds, emergent collaboration through hierarchical active inference.

Jelle Broomberg's and Eric Reitveld's work on self-organization, free energy minimization, and optimal grip on a field of affordances.

And the well-known Thinking Through Other Minds work by Vessier et al., Thinking Through Other Minds, A Variational Approach to Cognition and Culture.

Well, I hope this has been an interesting and relevant lecture for you.

was fun to prepare there are so many perspectives and so much territory that there's a lot in collective behavior but again i'm just really looking forward to the discussion that we can have in a couple of weeks i encourage you whether you're listening on your timeline

at a moment that enables you to join that live conversation, I would encourage you to join or to join the live stream so you can participate through chat or whether you want to find some other way to get involved.

It's been a great time.

And with that, I will close.

Thank you very much.

Until next time.