SPEAKER_02:
okay we are now going into chapter six to part two of the book uh Frasier or Andrew or anyone want to give an over uh a opening statement or look towards part two of the book


SPEAKER_05:
I guess to say that this is really part two is where we're putting the active in active inference.

So we're actually going to be doing active inference now, which is going to be very exciting.

And just to say for part, well, this chapter we're doing now, this is the first time we're looking at the hidden states being something that's dynamic, the environment being something that can change.


SPEAKER_03:
That's quite a big change from what we've seen in part one.

So that's what I'll say.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, something else that's really important right now for Chapter 6 is we're going to really be looking at temporality, which I don't think gets necessarily its own long exposition on what is meant by that, because it's more about we jump right into how we're implementing this.

But essentially, one, we're looking at the idea of a flow.

in hidden states as well as a variety of other things how do they change over time we're looking at things like temporal derivatives these sorts of things come up a lot in very interesting experiments on motor control

But many other things as well, and so, and then furthermore, we're going to be.

Sort of positioning the model in in time such that it kind of has a look back and look forward and it's going to be operating more iteratively that is receiving 1 observation at a time.

uh rather than some examples in previous chapters we saw had to do with like batch uh sampling and the rest so i just want to highlight that there are going to be a lot of interesting things that have to do with with time uh being sort of embedded in the in the model yeah so observations coming in one by one


SPEAKER_02:
and let's this is um from the part two pages which are before chapter six it's just on page 124 and 125. so that's a good short entry point to kind of read it and uh what is going to come up in this main section of the book if we look back to the overall part of the book

that this middle section is, this is like the active inference section of the book and the fundamentals is kind of the dot zero or the background for it.

And then part three is applications and extensions.

So this is kind of going into this section of the book where Namjoshi has organized the actual core that goes beyond something that might be covered in some other textbook.

All right.


SPEAKER_05:
Can I just say really briefly one thing?

I mean, I second all of that.

Sanjeev does say in close to the beginning of chapter six that appendix C8 on dynamical systems is going to be relevant.

I highly, highly recommend that for those who don't have any background in dynamical systems to have a look at Appendix C8.

It's not very long.

It's only about two pages.

Summing up all of dynamical systems in two pages is quite a mean feat.

But this is going to be the bedrock of everything that we do going forward, is we're going to have this state dynamics.

The hidden state is going to change throughout time.

So we've already seen that we have an observation generating function that takes hidden states to observations.

Going forward, we're also going to have the state dynamics function, and that's going to cause us a lot of pain.

So it's going to be very, very important going forward, this idea of the state dynamics.

So appendix C8, very, very relevant for this section.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah these are all really related important functions of the the ability to take in observations one by one rather than just batch the uh ability of the model to account for latent states that are changing in time and to model observables and unobservables where causes are one type of unobservable

and uh also that that connects to kind of the broader discussion around dynamical systems and that kind of comes up in the inactivist and philosophy and thinking about what is uh what is object and process and um order and change in what what time scale should different parts of systems be modeled in

which are models that reify things that are fixed, which are models that actually account for change.

What kinds of change can a given statistical model account for?

Like a linear model could have all of its parameters changing for slope and for intercept, but unless otherwise set up, it's not going to change from being that kind of linear model.

And then filtering.

Frasier put.

We're going to be doing a lot of filtering in the next two or so chapters.

Yeah.

What is the current hidden state given my current observations?

That's in a sense the same question that even the first thought experiment was about the brain in the box and the first chapters on latent state estimation.

And that was setting up a sort of

uh related and antecedent and other relevant latent state estimation strategies in statistics like doing a linear regression and then fitting a slope based upon a linear regression which which may even come um into play again for a generative model but it kind of just sets you up if nothing else with this question what is the current hidden state given my current observations

And filtering is going to take that into a more capable, more sort of nuanced setting than just fitting a batch of data to a linear regression parameter.

But in principle, very similar.

to a kind of model that has this ability to do online real-time streaming, like lifelong, and then also this relates to the live stream from earlier today on test time scaling laws, which is kind of like the temporal horizon of the generalizability

of a given model training.

So this was a pretty long presentation.

a really interesting idea and kind of relates to some some topics um that are coming up here but not not to get too off the track here just to say that it's the same question that's being addressed in the first chapter with a thought experiment the intro chapters with estimating like a latent state um how big is the food given the light intensity or what is the relationship of food and light intensity given the data that i've seen

In what was more like a batch regression setting and then certain features of that kind of pipeline and strategy is going to get changed into the setting of filtering, which has very helpful name because it's, it is kind of like an audio filtering something.

So like some audio signal coming in, this is okay.

So it's like an audio stream coming in from a microphone or like a EEG sensor or a thermometer, some kind of microphone or thermometer or sensor-like sensor.

And then there's a filtering process.

And there could be sort of

simple filtering processes like moving average type and the Bayesian Kalman filter on like just a moving average, something you might see from like technical analysis of financial data sets.

um on through more advanced filtering like for um audio filtering you could filter it based upon knowledge about the hierarchical structure of songs or speech and basically have a more structured model that would like use different knowledge about what words are likely to be in lyrics

to, for example, reduce uncertainty about lyrics or other features of the audio, which wouldn't really be accessible from just doing like a noise filtering, like a smoothing alone.

But that's very simple.

You could apply that to any kind of time series.

So that's the chapter six kind of perceptual filtering.

focus which is analogous to like a markov process or a partially observable markov process without the action and then chapter six goes into generalized um active generalized filtering which is just where you go from the setting of perceptual filtering where there could be varying causes externally like in that audio track

There could be two different parts of the song and then they switch between each other with some transitions.

So like latent causal states that give rise in some causal networked way to that audio stream or using frequency or wavelet deconvolution of EEG data

or using information across sensors to look at sensor error patterns in like an EEG dataset or an fMRI dataset, which is what's very core to the SPM work.

That's all on the perceptual filtering.

Chapter six is then gonna, or chapter seven, the active generalized filtering is going to include action in that setup as another cause that is also being modeled as action as inference.

It's sometimes called the autonomous states, with the cognitive and active states only separating out, whereas the agent is the perception, cognition, and action, all to the exclusion of the environment, three components of the particular partition.

But the autonomous states, once we get into the active setting, are what usually get directly targeted

for variational free energy minimization optimization.

Because given the, we're not trying to smooth out the audio incoming to the microphone to be unsurprising, which can be done trivially by just flattening it to zero.

the inference for the training or for the test time for the perception and cognition and action is really you only want to control the cognitive and active states in how that they they relate to um some overall like loss or training function

Because directly including the observational free energy into the training can just lead to transforming the data to be uninformative rather than addressing the data as it actually comes in.

Or like, again, I don't want to go too far off before we go into six, but action has all of these other secondary elements

questions that are going to come up six is going to focus on just the filtering in the perception setting so anyone want to add anything or ask anything um yeah this is


SPEAKER_01:
Certainly related, but not one-to-one with what you mentioned.

But with chapter six, as we get going, there's something that comes up with respect to flow and how hidden states change over time.

And as we said, this sort of like online observation by observation process, as opposed to sort of doing everything at once in a large batch or otherwise.

And this sort of hinges on the idea of an agent that's dynamic and able to potentially adapt in dynamic environments.

Thus, the very idea that the hidden state itself could change is sort of embedded in the model, which is something we haven't expressly seen before.

And so that leads to this notion of states having flow.

there being kind of like transitions between states that brings up the idea that um there are like these state transition you know functions or or sort of a state transition model within our model just like this whole time we've had likelihood models that relate observations to states we're now seeing how hidden states sort of relates to itself temporally and that's sort of where the

The derivatives come in, and this idea of state transitions is essentially going to be very important for the remainder of the book.

It's going to come up in both the continuous state and time settings that you've been looking at and will continue to look at for the next couple of chapters up to the end of active generalized filtering.

And then it will also be very important whenever we shift into discrete time and space models in the instance of POMDPs, which a lot of folks will have seen in active inference literature as well.

I think it's worthwhile to kind of hone in on some of these really important topics that right now we're just getting introduced to.

And it's worthwhile to sort of prioritize

Paying attention to those as we move through the chapters given they'll come up again and again.

So.

Yeah, that's it.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and that brings up this point, which is.

We have talked about how chapter 6 and 7 are going to differ with 6 focus on perception as filtering.

And 7, bringing in action.

chapters six through eight are in a continuous random variable setting.

So yes, it gets discretized like in some small way by a digital computer when it's stored, but all the math is gonna be like smooth, differentiable settings.

And then chapters nine and 10 is going to look at state spaces where there are discrete numbers of options.

just looking at this part two overview, focusing on chapter six through eight, continuous random variables get split into two approximation strategies.

Laplace quadratic approximation, which is essentially going to fit a downward fitting quadratic regression.

over a point in a distribution and just kind of move those two variables, the variables that matter for the quadratic, which are kind of like the mean and the variance of a Gaussian, but it's kind of curves down the other way and it has a few different parameters to fit.

But that's one classical approximation to some varying continuous surface.

And then there's another approximation strategy that's going to be more amenable to Bayesian causal graphical model types, the mean field approximation and the physics types.

has a variational inference.

I don't know if there could be like a Laplace variational.

So I'm not sure how we read exactly every arrow or absence of arrow, but it's definitely one that's used in the variational inference setting, as is the expectation maximization, the EM, which came up earlier in the chapters.

Looking out, I don't really read this as just as only as like a total idea map, but just how the textbook is going to order these topics.

I'm not sure if others feel similarly.

But just like they're roadmaps for the chapter.

They're not a knowledge network or like the only ordering.

All right.

Now looking to chapter 6.

First, just equation 6.1 to the points from what Fraser and Andrew said about time and about state dynamics.

It's just with the dot is one notation for a change.

um through time and also sometimes derivatives are with a prime i don't think in this book and other times with a delta lowercase d in front so kind of multiple um derivative notations and um how the integrals and derivatives are notated is going to matter in the generalized coordinates but for now it's just a single variable with its derivative and this looks almost like the equation

from some earlier chapter where we had like the latent generating process and then we had i don't know what the equation number but the latent generating process uh like the the true regression of how does food size relate to light intensity and then the observation um the observation generating from uh that

here the the minor notation difference but puts it into the dynamic hidden state setting is basically um modeling the rate of change of x as latent state that can change and then some sequence of observations associated with that so that's um the environment and the generative model

of how the environment changes, the star being like the true environmental state dynamic change, the X dot from the generative model side being like the agents representation of the state transition model.

And it's getting observations in this case, just to match that environment.

uh so chapter four kind of came to which was the variational basing inference chapter but brought up the background and introduced several formats of the variational free energy

free energy, functional, some number that has some properties where you might want to target it for approximation from a dataset.

Section 6.1 is going to go into Laplace encoded energy and some Laplace approximations, so kind of quadratic placed over a moving or over dynamical continuous landscape.

some quadratic placed over that, where there's a flow and a filtering on those hidden states and observations.

And as the last name sort of suggests, these are classical statistical methods, not doing, not doing

free energy minimization necessarily themself, but using it to fit on this free energy landscape.

On this other side, part one is provided us with this question of the static hidden state.

And this is kind of a parallel path.

getting to that same sort of point about wanting to model situation where the hidden state can change through time.

And sort of analogously to what we discussed earlier, there could be like the hidden state changing, like different food particles, the closest food particle could change through time in size so that the observations of the light intensity change through time.

So it'd be like within a fixed relationship between food particle size and the light intensity, you could have quantitative variation in that.

You could also say, well, also maybe the relationship between the food particle size and the light intensity, it can change.

And that's kind of like a derivative of a model.

which is sort of how it's gonna be addressed through time in the generalized coordinates.

But hidden state change brings up these different ways to model dynamic systems.

And that's right on page 128 in Volt.

It's like, this is how dynamical systems are addressed.

And then that kind of brings the two prior streams that are laid out there together to this hidden state update rule or just update process that combines beliefs about how true latent states and observations and all that flow through time

beliefs about those like a landscape and solving the initial value problem to kind of drop into that landscape in a place where the optimization is, um,

able to start somewhere um that's like useful to start optimizing from I think there's a lot of subtlety there so just just to say that just to start the algorithm like from on its first iteration before

those two ideas can be used to make some iterative process that's amenable to that one by one observation real-time learning because it's not just a rule or a process for going from the batch of data to minimizing like the overall least sum of squares it's a method for going from the current beliefs

and then the next observation to the updated model.

And that brings in learnt beliefs about how latent and observed variables are and change.

Any questions or anything related to that?


SPEAKER_05:
Just to say this, you know, this is a massive change to what we've done so far, and it's going to stay with us for the rest of the book and beyond this book and forever.

So this is definitely a big juncture.


SPEAKER_03:
I just want to keep highlighting that basically.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, then going to the second part here.

So this was all section 6162.

Now, that

question of well how to model hidden state changes over time like all we have is this eeg trace or some sensor data and it uh how to model hidden state changes from sort of like a uh unknown signal

setting on through a setting with where you have a lot of knowledge about the domain a lot of beliefs about what it might relate to or other like sensors of the similar or different type so a lot of secondary questions but

Andrew Bickford- The real heart of how all those different data models are specified or different ways that you might use the same statistical model to like generate output data like synthetic synthetic data regenerative Ai.

Andrew Bickford- or to use it to update beliefs given observations that you know a little bit or a lot about all that kind of converges on this core question of modeling hidden state change over time Andrew.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah thanks um yeah i think so with this kind of like these temporal aspects and we're looking at generalized states and generalized noise i also wanted to comment on um this aspect of colored noise um it's it's very interesting because a lot of the things we've been looking at so far could uh in some respects be treated as like these kind of

markovian processes of like step by step there's one update that largely just depends on what's going on currently and not on the past or history or any kind of assumed correlations between particular things and so with noise uh yeah i just wanted to comment that so far whenever we've added noise to to functions and kind of consider them to be you know probabilistic rather than purely deterministic these are all things we've already seen uh in part one of the book

But whenever we were doing that with noise, we were assuming that the noise was itself Gaussian or like this kind of white noise, something like put in a sentence sort of like an ideally like, you know, random noise.

There's no.

patterns in the noise that are assumed to be there.

And that's why we end up with these sort of like, you know, whenever we plot the linear line of how observations are generated from states, then the observation noise is just sort of scattered around the line, no particular pattern.

But now we're moving into colored noise.

And so what happens is that we start assuming that actually there might be some sort of temporal correlation in the noise, that there's some kind of pattern within the noise itself.

So this kind of renders noise to be a potentially useful aspect for the model to sort of exploit for making predictions.

As opposed to just assuming, oh, this is just something that is always going to minutely throw off probably what would otherwise be a perfect relationship between my predictions in my internal model versus what I think is going on in the world.

So, yeah, it's all to say that it's a very interesting thing, and that's where we start seeing these sort of covariance matrices and the rest and looking at how noise relates to itself.

And then finally, some aspects of this are not purely just, oh, let's add another thing to the model to make it better at performance.

We do see in a lot of areas of neuroscience and other forms of time series analysis, different kinds of data, that whenever there's temporal correlation in the noise, that maybe helps us better understand what's really going on.

um in in reality and uh it's super fascinating how the the brain itself like noise is one of the things that neuroscientists have attempted the most to try and understand over time because it's within noise that we start seeing these patterns and like uh you know the the kind of frequencies of neural activity that that are generated that correspond or correlate to different kinds of

behavioral decision-making that an organism shows or otherwise.

So noise itself, previously we've been treating noise basically as this thing that kind of throws our model off a little bit, but as long as we can get a good enough handle on that, then it's fine.

but now suddenly noise is this kind of colored temporally rich and and covariating thing so just that's another aspect of this chapter is like like taking noise seriously rather than it's just some messy stuff that throws things off yeah great comment and fraser wrote i think section 6.1 6.2 6.3 are the theoretical core of the chapter i would agree six four and six five


SPEAKER_02:
are going to take that state space generative model that was of a single variable and put it into generalized coordinates of motion, which are the first derivative, second derivative, and higher order derivatives, leading to some generalizations about how different kinds of temporal dynamics in signal and noise can be brought into this model.

Fraser's right though that in the first three sections it's a focus on a variable at the sort of most core filtering layer um without going into the generalized coordinates which gets sort of layered into the same method but just as a different way to encode temporal information


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, just really quickly, I think the takeaways for this chapter, the core ideas are this idea of state dynamics, number one, that you can say is going to be changing.

Number two is this idea that we're going to have a very specific kind of approximation, namely the Laplace approximation.

I think that's number two.

And that is used throughout this chapter.

But I do think it needs to be stressed that that is actually quite an important

core sort of thing that we're going to, that shows up in this chapter and will show up in other chapters as well.

That's an assumption about the nature of the variational posterior.

And then number three would be this idea of generalized coordinates of motion.

I think I suspect those are the three kind of big

ideas that you would do well to try and grok um throughout this this chapter and then there's a whole bunch of other discussion about implications of this and various you know multivariate this is univariate things but i think that those are the core takeaways to my mind at least yeah that's a great comment


SPEAKER_02:
State dynamics, hidden states can be changing.

There are different approximation methods, like the Laplace approximation, which is long known.

And then there's this different approximation approach.

The mean field that has some different functions or some different analytical relationships or software implementations or abilities, like, to be run incrementally.

Using a update learning.

Function then there's the generalized coordinates of motion.

which is one particular way to, a kind of physics informed way, like position, speed, acceleration, that sort of physics derivatives.


SPEAKER_05:
I was just going to say, for those interested in, there are a lot of people interested in implementation and experimentation with the code.

Obviously, we're going to do our best to implement some things ourselves.

But example 6.1, univariate Gaussian filtering, and then 6.2, multivariate Gaussian filtering, are extremely fundamental examples that will show up again and again and again throughout the entire book, actually.

stuff to them and things like that.

It's not quite that simple, but they are very canonical.

So if you were looking for like bang for buck examples to study and even to implement, I mean, Sanjeev himself says you would do well to maybe play around with trying to implement, you know, at least 6.1, you know, the univariate case, that's a bit easier in code.

So I think that's something that I'll endeavor to create maybe in a Google Colab or something like that.

put it in the examples repo.

Because you could just spend forever playing around with various parameters and things like that and learn by the bit.

Because that's going to be the foundation of chapter 7, really, active generalized filtering.

We're going to do this whole story again, but just by putting action into the mix.

And then we're going to have a whole bunch of different things we can look at once we do that.

So 6.1, 6.2, they're very, very, very fundamental.


SPEAKER_02:
Great comment.

And the multivariate is in this case, like, and in many related kind of statistical cases or algorithmic cases, is like a vectorized or parallel version of the univariate case.

And then there's sort of a simpler multivariate, which is just doing all the operations in parallel, but they don't interact with each other.

And then there's more of like a joint multivariate where you also are looking at relationships amongst different variables.

But whatever you do with multivariate, however much you use information across the different variables, it comes down to what is the one variable doing?

And figure 6.4 shows basically what is happening, is there's some X star true latent variable and a belief about that latent variable, the mean centeredness of the belief about that variable.

Then there's an observation sequence in the blue.

and a belief about an observation sequence in blue and uh the x-axis is happening through time and the initial values of the beliefs are set to 15 and 13 which are too high on both um but they really quickly drop in to to the area and then kind of follow along with this lag it's correlated

but clearly informational tracking.

And,

You could assess whether this performance is good enough or what other kind of cousin models or transformations of data or other improvements could improve the error rate, like if you were refining the model.

But this is just showing, this is kind of in character what these algorithms do, which is from a given starting point, which is the initial value problem, it can track onto and then continue to follow

with some secondary questions about like time scales of learning and how to bring complex causal models into picture a loss functional driven observable model output setting where initially when it was way out of the range of observations the loss function was high

And then a gradient was followed to lead to a number that, while it doesn't really have a value like in itself, like the fact that it's 21 or 2,600 isn't really what's relevant, but you can look at this loss training trace like you would look at the loss training trace of another kind of Bayesian model or a neural network.

and use it to model or relate to other model like absolute fit parameters or model adequacy or comparative model performance in relation to these free energy functionals to add more like context because it is a low dimensional representation of what the model is doing.

And it tells you that even if you're in a flat, you might be still way off base or totally working in the wrong distribution family, et cetera.

But in this pedagogical example, it drops in and then stays like doing smoothing, filtering with this lagged, smoothed belief updating process that happens time point by time point.

And you could imagine other sort of non-base ways to do this.

Like you could do a sliding window and then just take the average of the last end data points and then divide by the new data point.

Or you could do a linear regression

against the most recent data points or you could fit a classical time series model with like autocorrelation or time series and recalculate it at some interval so there's a total and you could do the laplace approximation there are many ways to approach the the setting that this is described by in the equations

And in this chapter, the focus is on with this, I wonder if it would be clearer if this branch were more, well, here's variational free energy, but Laplace encoded energy is only on this side.

So I'm just wondering whether,

Here it's the Laplace approximation, but when is the mean field approximation come in?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I guess maybe the difference is that this is emphasizing the approximations we're making about the VFE itself, as opposed to our approximate posterior, which would be your mean field approximation there.

Yes.

At least that's kind of how I read it, that we're really concerned about the form of the VFE here specifically.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Setting up the domain generative model

so that the VFE is trainable representing what it's supposed to mean, like putting labels on images.

It's like, then, let's see how Laplace encoded energy is used in 6.1, and if that's the same or related to the Laplace approximation.

Or let's look at an example of 6.1.

Good call.


SPEAKER_05:
And 6.1 is expressed in terms of the language of chapter 5, where we've got prediction errors and precision weighted prediction errors.

We could equally well have not represented it that way.

It just happens to be

how we've chosen to represent things here.

I think that that emphasizes that we do have two different kinds of errors that we can, that are apparent now.

We obviously have our observation errors and state dynamic beliefs errors as well.

So it does kind of help highlight that we now have this additional thing.

Andrew, I think you've got to add up.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, sorry.

I don't want to detract from what was being said, but just like,

I mean, the big thing here is that by incorporating this notion of state transitions, or there being a flow to states, there are different ways that we can sort of model that relationship.

So, one way that we can do that, and it's frequently done in active inference and other things leading up to active inference, including this perception only sort of example that we're looking at in Chapter 6, is that the Laplace is essentially related to taking Taylor expansions.

And so, you know,

With the Laplace, it's specifically up to the second derivative.

So you can sort of think of that because the equation is not precisely the same.

But you can think of each state having its own position as well as its own speed, if it's moving up or down.

over time right that's a temporal like we're actually thinking of states changing as opposed to just potentially being static and then finally the second derivative which is something like an acceleration we can liken it to that and so we're actually doing this for for many things we're not just doing it for states we're also doing it for observations we're doing it for noise um so so all of these things kind of come together

But that's the big distinction here.

It's just that the Laplace approximation is a particular way of modeling these sort of temporal derivatives and how something relates to itself in time.

Yeah, there are other ways you could do it.

It wouldn't have to be Laplace.

You could go with a single derivative or like there are many other instances and like other writings on generalized coordinates of motion where we go up to like six different temporal derivatives, but the Laplace generally revolves around using two.

And then you could kind of potentially modify that in different areas, depending on what you're trying to do or how you think your agent should be modeled.


SPEAKER_02:
That's a great point.

The Laplace approximation can be run iteratively classically because it makes certain constrained assumptions, like by only considering up to the quadratic, not exploring optimization over

what higher orders of motion, like higher derivatives of what the Taylor series describes are parameterized, which is like the general polynomial setting.

But the Laplace approximation can just quickly scoot around a quadratic pretty similarly to how the variational distribution can scoot around a Gaussian.

But I believe, and let's nuance this if this is not accurate, but the Gaussian, the variational Gaussian that we move around is a true statistical distribution.

Whereas the quadratic is a heuristic, but it pierces down, and it's not necessarily a probability distribution itself.

It's just like a central tendency and curvature estimate, very locally.

Whereas the variational setting is more composable, and we're talking about real statistical variables, not just a local curvature.

Verena?


SPEAKER_00:
I have a question about those smooth trajectories.

So assuming that maybe we have to deal with discontinuous events or degraded information, how is this interpreted as a prediction error or does the generative model


SPEAKER_02:
need something like explicit change point dynamics or something like that i think a good example that explores that is um i'll put it in the chat too this is the rx infer example of a recurrent switching linear dynamical system so um there are

two different discreetly switching settings and then there's noisy data coming in that are um being on a first order fit by a smoothing filtering and then at the same time the the latent state estimation is like am i in state one or state two with low very low volatility and a high volatility uh regime

And then, uh, this is the estimates through time for that latent state.

So that's, that's kind of one way to model that, like to include what was the discontinuity of, of one type or of, of a causal type into the same sensor by, by just, um, testing, like, should there be, um,

one, two, three latent variables.

So it kind of goes, okay, now we're going to have a prior over how many latent states there are.

So it's kind of the process of going from building these hierarchical models that at the end of the day, like the thermometer or the microphone or the EEG sensor, it is going to be some continuous one by one stream of discrete data points.

And then there are like well now we can take into account sequences of that's the whole building statistical models that that explore state spaces related to that primary filter in question pressure.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, just really quickly, maybe an example from my own work.

I've got this robotic arm that has, you know, the states are the angles of the segments.

Right.

So and we have a belief about all of those angles.

But I'm approximating that belief by taking a couple of samples and then I stick those samples through my state dynamics.

but if you if if a link wraps around 180 degrees then some of those samples can wrap around and you don't know if you're at you know where you are or 180 degrees removed from now and that would be an example of a discontinuity so at the moment i just have to be careful to not ever bend

all the way around.

That would be one example of a discontinuity in my state dynamics that would cause me a lot of problems.

It just so happens that I don't actually have to worry about it in practice for whatever reason most of the time.

But those are big problems that do come up now.

You have to worry about, okay, well, is there a discontinuity here?

Is there some region where something isn't defined?


SPEAKER_03:
So that is definitely going to be the thing that's added to our list of concerns, basically.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I just want to maybe provide another intuitive example, even though both of these are nice.

So imagine, you know, someone who is a catcher in baseball, or basically someone who has to catch a ball for whatever reason.

You know, maybe they're just having fun playing catch.

So in previous sort of settings that we've seen in the textbook prior to Chapter 6, we have models that are probabilistic Bayesian models that would be able to predict potentially where a ball is at in time.

um but in order to actually be able to make a full prediction it would need to be able to see the entire trajectory of the ball coming towards the the catcher the person who's trying to predict where the ball is who wants to catch it they would have to like see and advance the entire trajectory and then even then

there's nothing in the model that's saying that that trajectory is specifically a trajectory in time that there's some kind of relationship between where the ball is at in time step one versus time step four so it's just a bunch of these like kind of static observations that the the agent is getting um whenever we provide for temporality in the way that we are

Uh, here, this is where we're able to have an agent who says, oh, well, the ball is here.

But it was here just prior and because I'm using these temporal derivatives, I'm able to sort of approximate estimate predict, not just precisely where the ball is, but.

what is its current speed and direction, sort of acceleration, and potentially more if you include more terms.

And so I hope that that gives a sense of like, we're able to actually establish sort of a trajectory that allows for an expectation of where the ball will be next.

Because if we just stay in this static world without a sense of time,

then it would be very surprising to us to see that the ball suddenly changed position from one time step to the next.

We have no sense of how that could happen if we don't include some sense of flow or temporal dynamics into our model.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

I was thinking about cochlear implant recipients.

who have a very degraded signal input over average 22 electrodes and to actually become the full you know voice or the full information over the words takes time through learning and this is not a very linear process so that was the reason why i was asking


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, just as like one place to explore, but I don't think we'll cover it, is that it's the hearing active inference setting for DeVry, which is related to the RX and for streaming real time.

So definitely like the audio processing and hearing is related to what people are working on.

Okay, I'm going to stop the recording there.
