SPEAKER_05:
hello and welcome everyone it's active inference guest stream number 48.1 on july 19th 2023 we're here with arthur giuliani and adam saffron also joined by michael edward johnson in discussion we're going to have a presentation

and then a conversation about deep canals a deep learning approach to refining the canalization theory of psychopathology so thank you all for joining and looking forward to this presentation and discussion i'm very happy to be here uh with adam and mike to talk about this work and to discuss more broadly um


SPEAKER_01:
this general direction that's emerged over the past few years to try to utilize some of the concepts from the active inference world and computational modeling more generally to understand what's going on both in psychopathology and in psychedelic therapy.

Yeah, so I'll give a brief presentation and we'll move into a kind of more general discussion of this work.

It'll start with some general considerations around psychedelic therapy, some of the neuroscience of psychedelics, and then move more specifically into the model.

So there is this class of drugs, the serotonergic psychedelic drugs, which includes psilocybin, DMT, LSD, and others.

And the past decade has seen a resurgence of interest in psychedelic therapy, psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy, where one or multiple of these drugs is used in conjunction with a kind of psychotherapeutic protocol.

And there's been a lot of investment of money and time and clinical resources into utilizing these drugs for treatments of depression, anxiety disorders, substance use disorders, and others.

And there seems to be quite a lot of positive signals suggesting that these kinds of therapeutic interventions can actually be quite effective.

So there's a number of studies suggesting that psilocybin assisted psychotherapy can be helpful for depression, anxiety, substance use disorder and others.

And as this work advances, there are more and more and larger clinical trials comparing it, for example, to

the standard treatments with SSRIs with multiple studies suggesting that psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy is at least as effective as the Lexapro kind of standard care.

all of this seems to suggest and the timelines are kind of pointing at this idea that psilocybin treatment for major depressive disorder may be only a couple of years away from becoming

approved as an actual treatment in the United States, which means that it's quite important for us to understand what's going on mechanistically in the brain so that these kinds of treatments can be best optimized, best determined how to be used for which kinds of mental issues people might be having and under what

kinds of treatment protocols we might expect the most success.

I think this will also ultimately hopefully lead to the development of even better drugs, even better treatment protocols, and much more personalized care.

So some of the basics of how these drugs work on the brain for those who are unfamiliar, right?

So these are the serotonergic psychedelics.

They are serotonergic because they act as agonists for a number of serotonin receptors in the brain and the central nervous system more broadly.

um it's thought that most specifically uh these drugs like psilocybin work through agonizing the serotonin uh 5ht2a receptor um and this has been uh

demonstrated multiple times by using blockers, antagonists of the 5-HT2A receptor, which seem to largely remove the effect of psilocybin or other psychedelic drugs.

And what this 2A receptor does when it's agonized is it excites the neuron, making it more likely to fire.

And this is kind of essential to some of the downstream effects.

So given that it seems that it's this two-way receptor that psychedelics are mainly targeting, the question then becomes, well, where in the brain are these two-way receptors most widely expressed?

And research has focused on, I would say, three key areas over the past decade or so, the first being the thalamus, which is a region involved in the gaining of sensory information.

um into the cortex um there's a lot of expression in the cortex itself um expression for example in the visual system um which is perhaps not surprising given the prevalence of visual uh hallucinations and psychedelic use um but therapeutically a lot of focus has been on the prefrontal cortex where there is also a dense expression of these receptors and then also more recent work has looked at the claustrum which is a small brain region

are responsible for coordinating the transition dynamics of cortical activation and this too is likely of essential importance to the psychedelic effect.

So kind of moving up one level of abstraction to fMRI studies, there are a few kind of like key takeaways which have been identified from a few different fMRI studies looking at psychedelic use.

Kind of the main theme has largely been this idea of increased entropy or increased complexity of the cortical activation.

in the brain.

So there are various measures of this.

On the right here there's a figure of one of the common measures of complexity and looking at various different kinds of states that an individual might be in and how that relates to complexity.

So you have individuals in vegetative states or anesthetized states having relatively low brain activity complexity.

You have individuals in awake states having higher complexity.

And then individuals who have ingested either psilocybin or LSD showing the highest brain complexity.

Now, along with this, rather than just this single unified score, there's work looking particularly at the changes in functional connectivity between different brain regions or different brain networks.

Um, and the general trend, uh, seems to be that you have decreased within network functional conductivity and increased between network functional conductivity, right?

Which this, uh, kind of can be interpreted as different, uh, brain networks, which typically don't communicate as much with each other, more likely to communicate with each other under the effects of psychedelics.

Um, and the kind of like internal coherence of networks, uh, is reduced under psychedelics.

People have maybe heard of this default mode network, which is responsible for a lot of self-referential processing, which is responsible, which is typically activated, for example, when individuals are off task, mind wandering, not actively engaged.

the default mode network has been kind of like consistently implicated in being having less of this kind of like within network connectivity less of this functional integration and this has been hypothesized to be one of the kind of key mechanisms of the therapeutic effect of psychedelics

In addition to looking at brain network activity on a high level, you can then also zoom in much more deeply and look at what's actually going on at the neuron by neuron level

neuron connectivity level.

Here we see a certain very consistent story around this psychoplastogenic effect or this neuroplastogenic effect, where there are a number of different markers of increased plasticity in the brain.

So one that's very common is this increased brain-derived neurotrophic factor.

which we see hours after psychedelic use.

for a variety of different psychedelic drugs.

And this is then accompanied a few hours later by visible increases in the dendritic spine growth in cortical pyramidal neurons.

So this is both the number of dendritic spines and the complexity of the spines.

You can see a very clear example of this here on the right, where you have on the top the vehicle,

And then the bottom, the DMT treated pyramidal neuron.

And the difference is very, very stark.

You don't even have to do any sort of actual computational analysis for it to be clear that there's quite significant dendritic growth from a single dosing.

And the changes to functional connectivity, which I mentioned in the previous slide, tend to persist, though in a less extreme form than what we see during the acute effects.

So the question then becomes, given all of this, how can we attempt to tell a consistent computational story of what's actually going on during both the acute effects, the post acute effects, and in terms of the actual downstream therapeutic outcomes?

So what's kind of been proposed

um as uh the one of the uh leading models of this is the relaxed leaf under psychedelics model um the rebus model of carhartt parasitristin um and so this builds on the kind of like active inference hierarchical predictive processing uh

framework where we can understand the brain as this series of predictors stacked kind of like hierarchically along brain networks and predictions are being made by higher level networks that are attempting to

predicts the errors of lower level networks.

And the process of basically doing this then produces this series of belief landscapes at different levels of spatio-temporal abstraction.

And these belief landscapes, of course, can encode beliefs with various levels of precision.

And it's the modulation of this, the precision of these beliefs, which is believed to take place under psychedelic use.

So here is a very high level version of this model and how belief relaxation might actually happen.

So given that you have this series of cortical networks, which are representing beliefs to different spatio-temporal scales, we can think of the thalamus as being the entry point where

sensory information is being gated into this hierarchical system.

And prefrontal cortex is being kind of like one of the highest level networks, right, which is then responsible for both representing the most abstract kinds of beliefs, as well as being kind of the primary inhibiting force for all of the downstream beliefs in the network in the system.

Right, so what is this heavy organism of the 5-HT2A receptor supposed to be doing in this case?

Well, it's going to be decreasing the prefrontal cortex's ability to make coherent predictions and coherent representations of belief, which will then disrupt its ability to inhibit lower levels of the cortical hierarchy.

At the same time, by disrupting this activation of the

or this disruption of the thalamic gating is going to result in additional sensory information entering the cortex that wouldn't otherwise enter the cortex.

You have these kind of disruptions at these two levels, which then result in beliefs being spontaneously represented in ways that they wouldn't normally be represented.

And the Rebus model, at least,

is suggesting that this mainly is going to manifest itself as a kind of relaxation of these beliefs so here is a kind of like very simple diagram of what this might look like um so you have some landscape of beliefs here and you can kind of interpret the uh position along the uh the x and y

or I guess the X and Z belief in A as being corresponding to some particular belief that might be represented by the network at this layer or at this level of representation.

And then the Y-axis, the height, as being the actual precision of that belief, right?

So here we have this kind of very deep part on the right part of this network around this landscape.

And this would be a very strongly represented belief, let's say.

what the acute effects of psychedelics are then understood to be doing, right, is to be flattening this landscape, to be less strongly representing these strongly represented beliefs, to maybe making it easier for the reversal of this landscape.

So to move from one attractive state to another attractive state, which is meant to be understood to be kind of therapeutic in various ways.

And then the post-acute effect being some kind of return to normalcy, but one that is not totally complete, one that still incorporates some of these newly relaxed beliefs, these newly explored beliefs.

Building on this Rebus model, Karin Harris and colleagues last year proposed this canal model of psychopathology, which basically kind of takes the intuition

that the relaxation, if the Rebus model is correct, if the relaxation of beliefs has a therapeutic outcome, if you take that way of thinking to its logical conclusion, you might then propose something like this, which would say,

if relaxing overly strong beliefs is therapeutic, then having overly strong beliefs in the first place is pathological in some kind of way.

And they refer to this

development of these overly strongly represented beliefs as uh catalyzed beliefs or and this problem generally is canalization or this process of developing them as canalization um and this is the canal model of psychopathology so they kind of build on this idea uh this you know set of previous work in the literature suggesting that there may be some primary factor of psychopathology and they suggest that this primary factor is canalization

um and in this work they discuss a number of different um psychopathologies which seem to quite clearly fit this um canalization type um characterization so it's very relatively straightforward i think to understand things like addiction depression anxiety disorders obsessive compulsive disorders all of these involve in one way or another

having some strongly held beliefs, typically negative beliefs in the case of depression, anxiety, obsessive compulsive body image disorder, or in the case of substance use disorder, some very strong beliefs about what kind of behaviors should be taken at any given time in any given context.

And then, of course, the effect of psychedelics is to undo canonization.

And the better able any sort of therapeutic intervention is to undo canalization, the more likely for a positive therapeutic outcome.

So I think this work has a lot of strengths and there's a kind of elegance to it.

in our deep canals work that we had been we've worked on uh we kind of identify a couple of limitations of this canal model and attempt to extend and refine the model in ways that i think ultimately make it more powerful while kind of keeping the the essential um elegant insight that canalization is kind of like intimately tied to psychopathology

So the first kind of limitation I think that we identified is that in the canal model, it's very heavily implied that all

forms of canalization are illogical in one way or another.

And as I mentioned just now, this is clearly the case for a large class of very common psychopathologies.

It's when we start to look more towards edge cases, I think, that these exceptions start to problematize this understanding.

um so if we consider psychopathologies such as bipolar borderline schizophrenia depersonalization disorder um

it becomes much more difficult to kind of easily classify these as simply problems of overly strong priors.

In many cases here, we have problems of priors that are not so strong or priors that seem to drift over time in ways that are problematic for both the individual and the people that the individual are close to.

And if we think about psychedelics then as being this kind of panacea to undo canalization and undo psychopathology, we also run into this other issue, which is that there are certain kinds of psychopathologies which are typically

issues for use with psychedelics, right?

So schizophrenia being a very clear one where there's evidence of psychedelic use being a trigger for the onset of psychosis in individuals who are predisposed to schizophrenia.

There's also evidence of the development of depersonalization disorders with strong psychedelic use.

And this is not what we would expect if psychedelics were simply

universally undoing or getting rid of psychopathologies.

There's also this idea, which I think Adam is going to develop quite a bit later, that the stability of beliefs is typically correlated with positive mental health outcomes, not negative ones.

And what is a stable belief, if not one that is highly canonized in some kind of meaningful sense within the system?

And a second limitation is that if you think about an actual dynamical system, one that is parameterized in some kind of meaningful way, like a brain, which is parameterized by synaptic connections and then instantiates neural activity patterns over time, and we think about what kinds of optimization landscapes are actually being induced by such a system,

But we find that there's not just one kind of canalization.

There's actually two kinds of canalization.

And in our Deep Canals work, we attempt to take inspiration from deep learning literature to tease apart these two kinds of canalization and understand them a bit more clearly.

And they are, just to give a preview, these two different things, overfitting and plasticity loss.

Um, so overfitting is the problem of you have, uh, your catalyzed particular kind of way and, uh, whatever sort of policy you've learned, whatever sort of set of beliefs you have, these don't generalize to some other context.

You're in context A, you may be very well adapted.

You move to context B and whatever you've learned doesn't apply there.

Then plasticity loss is a little bit different.

Plasticity loss has to do with not one's ability to generalize, but rather one's ability to adapt or to learn.

So imagine you're in context A, you may or may not be well adapted to context A. If you move to context B, the question becomes, are you able to adapt to context B or not?

not are you immediately already ready to deal with context b but given time in context b can you learn and change and we use a very simple recurrent neural network model to kind of make sense of this

And I think this is important because there can be different kinds of canalization on these different kinds of optimization landscapes.

And these have unique implications for the treatment of psychopathology.

And I think even more importantly, psychedelics work on these different landscapes in different ways.

And so understanding how they work is essential to developing

better drugs, better treatment protocols, and more personalized treatment.

OK, so what are these two optimization landscapes?

How can we make sense of them?

This is kind of like the big overview figure of the deep analysis work.

So we start with this intuition of a recurrent neural network.

And in a recurrent neural network, there are these two sets of parameters that you have at any given time.

You have the actual weights of the network, and then you have the hidden activation of the network.

And so the weights of the network are theta, and the hidden activation is h. And there's some input into the network at any given time step.

And then the output of the network is a function of both the input and the hidden state.

And the hidden state is updated at every time, the hidden activation pattern.

And this gives us essentially these two different landscapes.

One, what we refer to as the inference landscape or the type A landscape.

And this is equivalent to the neural activation pattern of a brain at any time.

So what gets read off from an fMRI and what gets read off from the EEG is going to correspond to this activity landscape.

But underlying or supporting this activity landscape is this other more fundamental landscape, which is the actual optimization landscape that is induced by the synaptic weights themselves.

And this is what is the result of synaptic connectivity in the brain between all the sets of neurons in the brain.

This is what is changing when we have various forms of heavy-end plasticity, heavy-end learning.

And this is what instantiates the possible sets of neural activity patterns.

So this is a way we can start to understand this, which is when we think about belief landscapes.

As I mentioned before, here's a very simple diagram where we have a two-dimensional belief landscape.

And let's say there's someone who's depressed or potentially depressed.

and they might have a negative self-image.

I'm a terrible person.

I can't do anything right.

Something like this.

This would be encoded as a particular position in this belief landscape.

When the neural activity pattern looks like this, this belief is what gets expressed.

And there's another set of neural activity patterns which would correspond to a positive self-image, a positive self-belief.

I'm great.

I'm wonderful.

Or even just, I'm OK.

I'm totally acceptable as a person.

And this would be a different set of patterns.

So based on the actual connectivity structure of the brain, these two patterns may be more or less likely.

So here, these are being represented by these two different neural activation landscapes, which are the result of two different positions in this synaptic weight landscape space.

And in this top space, the one that's in the middle here,

that then is represented here at the top of part C of the figure, we see that there's very high precision assigned to or very high likelihood assigned to the negative self-image and very low likelihood here assigned to the positive self-image.

But in some other part of the synaptic weight landscape, a very different kind of neural activity landscape might be instantiated.

And this one kind of has the inverse properties, where negative self-image is unlikely and positive self-image is much more likely.

So we can kind of then understand positions in the neural activity landscape as kind of corresponding to specific phenomenological experiential instantiations of certain kinds of beliefs, right?

So like the actual experience of holding a negative self-image or holding a positive self-image.

And we can understand positions in the synaptic weight landscape as being something more general.

So in the case of depression, um, there might be a specific set of synaptic weight connectivity, which would correspond to, uh, what you might call, you know, a depressed individual, someone who might qualify as having major depressive disorder and another set of synaptic weights, connectivity pattern that, uh, wouldn't qualify as that.

Right.

OK, so before I get into how psychedelics relate to this, I think Adam is going to talk a little bit about some work he's done extending the rebus model.


SPEAKER_02:
Hello.


SPEAKER_00:
so yeah i've been uh thinking about this a while and then along the way i met arthur who also has been thinking about this a while but in different ways and so um uh

Like Arthur's background is in basically consciousness science and a very peculiar field of computational consciousness science in terms of actual models of what it would be to have a conscious system, even potentially an artificially conscious system.

And so I'm coming from more free energy principle and active inference in my background.

And Arthur's coming from more mainstream machine learning.

And so we're coming together to explore this beast from different perspectives and been finding a lot of, I think, very interesting overlaps.

And so in terms of Albus, the basic idea is to take Rebus and expand on it.

I love Rebus.

It's a great framework.

And I've been trying to make it, I guess, more flexible in terms of being able to handle a wider range of assumptions.

So not just talking about relaxed beliefs, but also potentially strengthened beliefs and in different combinations.

This was always part of the Rebus framework, and that you can have all sorts of both direct and indirect effects when you're dealing with a large predictive hierarchy or any complex system.

You change something in one way, but then you'll get an effect elsewhere.

So you have this hierarchy of predictions.

For instance, you can potentially relax beliefs at higher levels, and that can indirectly cause strengthened beliefs at lower levels.

So you can both get relaxed and strengthened beliefs and psychedelics and all sorts of different combinations.

And so with Albus, the idea is so I've been calling as opposed to a belief relaxation when you get this sort of basically bottom right here, you might see it.

So this red would be basically

something like a synchronized complex of neural activity, often involving the thalamus, which would be thought to encode your predictions or your top-down stream of priors, which then are suppressing the ascending stream of prediction errors.

um and so under rebus you're seeing here uh relaxed predictions a smaller uh complex of synchronized activity and the gates are down just like arthur described more things are coming in uh rebus will sometimes be described in terms of uh so when we're talking about rebus um this idea of relaxing beliefs we're thinking at the um

functional or computational level.

Like David Marr, in analyzing the mind, you have these three, I suppose, supervenient levels, aren't there?

Compatible and synergistic.

So computational, functional.

Like abstractly, what is the system doing?

something like the pseudo code of the system and then implementational mechanistically has realized and then in the middle some sort of algorithmic algorithmic intermediate abstraction layer how are these computations realized via these mechanisms some bridging principle description and so when it comes to rebus you can adopt it in different ways and relate to it differently so you can relate to it at the functional level

or you can relate to it at the algorithmic or implementation levels in terms of where you're taking the account.

So for instance, you might think something like rebus effects is a very valuable model of something like what they call quantum change with psychedelics, but you don't necessarily believe in predictive processing, but you still might be, you could say like a rebus type theorist.

Or you might be thinking in terms of like Rebus, like in a more narrow sense of thinking of predictive processing information flows.

But then when you get to like the overall person and integrated organism, the agent, you might have different interpretations there.

So

with the work with albus basically the idea would be to take predictive processing and to and um models of psychedelic action and suggest that sometimes um not only uh do we have these relaxation of belief landscapes but we might have the opposite of strengthening

And so specifically, if you're activating these 5HD2A neurons, which would be at the deeper levels of the cortical sheet and also the deeper levels of the cortical hierarchy more inwards and higher up, and these would be the units that would loop to the thalamus and thereby be able to form large synchronous integrated complexes.

But then when you excite them too much, they don't wait for each other to sync up.

They fire whenever they can out of sync, and this relaxes the belief landscape.

However, it's not clear this should happen the whole way through for any amount of increasing the gain on these neurons.

So in theory, just increasing the gain a little bit, unless that might help them to sync up, that might strengthen the belief, whether it's a situationally specific suggestion of you in this context, or maybe something old coming to the surface and, if you will, manifesting.

So Albus basically, in a nutshell, would be saying to take rebus and keep going with it and look for different combinations of both directly and indirectly strengthened and relaxed beliefs.

That's basically it.

And so I'm not going to go into too many more details.

Arthur and I just submitted this for publication.

Wish us luck.

Hopefully the reviewers will be useful, maybe even kind, but preferably useful.

And yeah, I'll kick it back to Arthur.

But before I do like this work,

I think it's immensely important that we get these details right.

These are extremely powerful medicines that could revolutionize things, or we could have a backlash if we do it wrong, if we're careless, if we don't see the risks.

But also, if we're overly beholden to a single way of viewing things prematurely, we might also miss opportunities to help.

potentially enormous opportunities for instance like you might not think of helping people um like for instance microdosing for cognitive decline you might not have thought of that um and that might be a really big deal that you do think of that so uh i guess

Before going back to Arthur, one more thing would be just in terms of, at least for me, experientially, the way I sometimes think of it is with relation to well-being and suffering,

both things matter like the strength and the strength of your positive beliefs and the strength of your negative beliefs and sometimes the negative beliefs have positive aspects and vice versa so it's it's both like you might relax your beliefs and like to use like a harry potter metaphor like be somewhat like out of the so much out of the grip of the dementors that usually uh

that under some circumstances might be pursuing you, that you have room to be different, to become different, to think different things under this different state.

But additionally, and not mutually exclusively, not necessarily incompatibly, maybe synergistically,

the strength of what beliefs you're able to have in that moment and maybe draw upon from the past could be deeply important uh your values the kinds of beliefs that you call upon in times of need and they give you hope um maybe those are just originally suggested to you right there in the session but maybe there's something else another belief in that um strengthening it

be a good thing and even without a clinical context like microdosers for instance it's not clear that exactly they're trying to relax their beliefs like the range of use cases the way we want to relate them how we want to be in the world um it seems complicated to me so i will get back to arthur


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thanks so much Adam.

Okay, so with that context of all this, I want to talk a little bit about how we might understand at a very high level what psychedelics are doing to these two belief landscapes.

So before I showed you very quickly, I guess I can go back to it.

In the Rebus model, there's only one type of optimization landscape.

And so there's only one type of canalization.

And what is supposed to be happening is a relaxation of beliefs, which is strong during the acute effect and persists in the post-acute effect.

So with ALBIS, though, we might be able to think about all of this a little bit differently.

We can, enduring the acute effects of psychedelics, interpret what's happening to the Type A landscape as being less of a kind of universal relaxation

and more of a kind of destabilization, where under certain circumstances beliefs are being strengthened, other beliefs are being relaxed.

This is changing quite rapidly over the course of time.

So a certain belief might be transiently strengthened, a few minutes later it may no longer be supported or supportable.

And this actually functionally enables a kind of exploration of a wide space of belief instantiations during the acute effects of the drug.

As far as the inference landscape is concerned, post-acute effects, as Adam was saying, it could be the fact that certain positive beliefs are explored and can be strengthened.

Other negative beliefs might be weakened.

This is the ideal psychotherapeutic outcome.

It may be on average that something like a general relaxation of beliefs is what you might see, but the way that you get there is likely going to be through a much more complicated process.

I think what's then interesting and related also to what Adam said about thinking much more broadly about how psychedelics might be used in terms of neurocognitive disorders in addition to traditional psychopathologies is to think about what's happening to the learning landscape, the underlying synaptic weight landscape.

And what do we understand is happening here?

Kind of quite clearly is there is neurogenesis, psychopathogenic effects.

There's gender growth.

And what is this enabling?

Well, this is enabling greater connectivity between within and between networks.

And so kind of from a functional

learning perspective learning theory perspective what this means uh is that gradient information can flow more easily through these networks um and what this means is that it's easier to get from one part of the network to the other part of the network there are fewer of these kind of optimization uh local minima there are fewer of these kind of like tricky saddle points um

And what this means kind of functionally is that this plasticity loss that I discussed earlier is going to be less of an issue.

And here it seems to be kind of like regardless of the acute, the actual phenomenological effects, there are very strong downstream effects on this structural connectivity.

And I think there's some interesting work suggesting that there may actually be independent mechanisms

that are affecting these two landscapes.

So there's recent work suggesting, for example, that psychedelics, as well as ketamine, is able to kind of like particularly bind to receptors in the brain that produce better results in the kind of release of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor.

And then the downstream changes in synaptic weighting and that this may be potentially totally independent of the 5-HT2A organism, right?

And this has very interesting implications for future drug design and development.

Okay, so I'm going to, before my next slide, turn it over to Adam once more to briefly talk a bit about personality theory and the relationship between psychedelics and personality.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello again.

So

So for the past few years, I've been doing some work with a personality researcher, Colin DeYoung, on intersections between the way agency is modeled in the free energy principle and active inference framework and the way that persons are considered in different situations in personality science and looking for points of intersection.

And so personality is actually an extremely deep concept.

And if you think of it, I guess we call it the normal form of a system in terms of what is the way you can describe the most of the system with the minimal message length, the account for the most with the least.

And what we're trying to account for is the states that people tend to occupy.

People aren't always happy.

People aren't always sad.

People aren't always friendly.

They're not always angry.

It's all sorts of things.

There's a range that people are encountering.

But they tend to occupy some states more than others.

And you might call that their personality.

Many systems would have their own personalities in terms of trying to describe something like their essence.

And so they're attracting states.

And so with Colin DeYoung's work, he interprets personality and these major domains of personality that people have discovered, a reliable factor structure, ways you can chunk the variants, the big five,

as a trait hierarchy, but where these different traits are interpreted as cybernetic control parameters, specifically cybernetics in terms of the study of goal seeking systems governed by various forms of feedback that different stages of the process of pursuing goals, evaluating outcomes, updating that

and you understanding that basically personality as different modes of being in the world for cybernetic systems, interpreting them as parameters for goal pursuit, because we are goal seeking systems trying to pursue the goals we value.

And so I guess moving to this and with relation to what we're talking about now, both in terms of personality formation, reformation and the structure of personality,

So to get to the P factor, within personality theory, this big five traits, the set of big five traits, there's a richer or more detailed factor structure, a hierarchical structure for personality that's been discovered.

So above the big five, neuroticism, agreeableness, conscientiousness,

you will have a metatrate of their shared various that's observed called stability.

It's also been called alpha by, I think, Digman.

And then above the traits of extroversion and openness intellect, you have this metatrate of plasticity, or called beta, and the shared variants of these two.

So what's interesting is that within the field of, within HITOP, which is this effort to try to characterize psychopathology using the same kind of data-driven methods

personality science a principled account of the structure of psychopathology the way that personality has a structure trying to account for this there seems to be a common factor across many forms of psychopathology that's referred to as the p factor and it tends to be the inverse of stability it's high neuroticism uh low agreeableness and low conscientiousness and this is actually uh

was referred to in the article as this peak factor, thinking of it as a lack of flexibility, you could make a case for it.

But more straightforwardly, it seems to be a lack of stability.

For something to be a lack of flexibility, you would maybe be thinking of something more like plasticity, like someone having low plasticity.

But empirically, that's not what's observed.

And so if empirically that's not what's observed, that's a very important detail we should stop and take note of.

So you might say that rather than emphasizing the first principle component of psychopathology, it's possible that this canal model is actually focusing on the second factor.

It's not a contest.

It's still enormously a big factor, like the work of Stephen Hayes and others showing that a lack of flexibility is transdiagnostic.

But just empirically speaking, the first principal component of psychopathology might be more closely related to a lack of stability rather than insufficient plasticity.

I guess one more thing to think of in terms of stability and plasticity, like as I said, it's not exactly a contest.

They're both important, both need to be considered, and they're deeply interrelated.

So Colin describes them as being in a state of something like dynamic tension.

Like if you're insufficiently plastic and inflexible, you're not going to stay stable for long in a changing world.

But if you don't have a stable base to move from, it's going to be hard to be plastic and reconfigure yourself in a sustainable way either.

However, you could also see someone being overly rigid and excessive stability in a way that undermines their plasticity or overly flexible in a way that basically is destabilizing.

So a dynamic tension, but involving synergies also.

And I think in terms of the structure of personality and well-being, this is what we need to keep in mind, that both are needed, stability and plasticity.

And this is also just within... It's actually what this was inspired, I think, in Colin's thinking to consider these metatrades this way from machine learning.

I think actually reading Grossberg and stability-plasticity trade-offs.

And that's why he interpreted these metatrades in those terms.

So I guess one more thing is...

There is a Petersonian backstory here that I don't know if I want to get into, but we can discuss it later if there's interest.

So yeah, back to Arthur.


SPEAKER_02:
That was great.

Thanks, Adam.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, very, very helpful context, which hopefully make this slide here much more clear to everyone.

So given these two meta traits, stability and plasticity, which, as Adam beautifully described, are in this dynamic tension with one another, we can go back to these two optimization landscapes and these machine learning concepts that I discussed earlier and try to understand how these things might all relate and ultimately relate to psychopathology.

So I had hinted before that there

where there's kind of two types of canalization, we might say, one being overfitting and another being plasticity loss.

And we can interpret these as kind of like being extremes, the kind of like canalized end of how these two optimization landscapes might manifest.

So in the type A inference landscape, this looks like overfitting on one end, heavy canalization, and underfitting on the other end in the machine learning context, right?

So overfitting being

having very strong rigid beliefs that are, in a particular environmental context, adaptive but are very unlikely to be adapted in any other context.

Underfitting being having beliefs which are not adapted to the current context and also unlikely to be adapted to any other context.

As far as stability is concerned, I think we can understand stability, this metatrade, as kind of representing the balance of these two things, right?

You have high stability when you are neither overfit to a particular context or underfit.

So this means you're well fit to this context that you're in now, and you're also likely to be well fit to other future contexts.

Um, I think this is also in complexity science sometimes described as metastability, right?

Um, so you're in a stable point that'll also likely be able to take you to other stable points in the future.

And this kind of like ability to stay stable over time is then a stability meta trait.

We, uh, can then look at the type B, the learning landscape where the kind of extreme version of canalization is this plasticity loss where it's very difficult to adapt to new contexts.

Um,

The inverse of this is then catastrophic forgetting, where the problem is not one of adapting to new contexts.

The problem is one of meaningfully retaining adaptive strategies and beliefs from previous contexts.

And so obviously, neither of these are desirable.

What is desirable is some kind of balance between these two.

Or one is able to adapt just enough to new contexts without being

without forgetting previously learned things um but here the relationship uh to the meditative plasticity is a bit different than stability right so as is being represented on this graph um you know the more plastic you are basically the less canalized you are in the space the more easy it is to move around um but actually extreme versions of this end up manifesting as catastrophic forgetting at least in the machine learning context um and i think this in particular has relevance for um

psychopathology and relevance for this idea, maybe complicates this idea, right?

That, uh, psychedelic therapy is, uh, in and of itself likely to always lead to positive outcomes.

Okay, and we can attempt to understand this by making an effort at trying to map or understand various forms of psychology in the context of these two different learning landscapes.

And so before I get into this too much, I think it's important to say that this is very much a kind of like preliminary and provisional attempt at making sense of these things.

I hope that this is kind of the start of

much more fleshed out dialogue looking at how we can kind of understand psychopathology with respect to missionary concepts um but i think this at least gives like a good starting point for maybe trying to understand where and why um psychedelic therapy is useful isn't useful um which is a bit more nuanced than this simple idea of like psychopathology means canalization and psychedelic therapy means reducing canalization right

Okay, so let's try to make sense of this a little bit.

So for the kind of classic set of psychopathologies for which there has been a lot of great research done with psychedelic therapy and a lot of clear benefit has been seen, I think we can kind of class these within this upper left-hand corner here, where these are disorders of both overfitting, which means in the moment, overly strong beliefs get represented.

These are strong attractor points in the neural activation landscape.

and plasticity loss in the Type B landscape, which means that not only is a certain kind of dynamics instantiated, which make, for example, in the case of major depressive disorder, extremely negative self-evaluations very common, but it's the case that even given the correct changes in environmental context,

even given in the case of psychedelic-assisted therapy, a lot of the work with major depressive disorder is being done with treatment-resistant depression.

And what is treatment-resistant depression but a set of beliefs, a set of neural activity patterns, which are resistant to adaptation to new environmental contexts, being whatever sort of psychotherapy or previous drug was used.

So this is high plasticity loss, high overfitting, right?

I think we can then, and these are, you know, kind of, fortunately, you know, for psychedelic therapy, and I think maybe for psychiatry in general, these are all very, very common and very, very costly psychopathologies, right?

So if it is the case that psychedelic therapy can treat these effectively, that's fantastic.

But I think we can maybe look at a more complicated, you know, if we start to expand other psychopathologies, the story becomes a little bit more complicated, right?

So let's look, we can look at the bottom left-hand corner here, where we have cases of, in the inference landscape, still overfitting.

But in the learning landscape, something else happening, a form of catastrophic forgetting, or a form of kind of drift of the,

the belief landscape that's being instantiated here.

So I think two kind of representative pathologies here are typically referred to as some form of bipolar disorder or some form of borderline personality disorder.

So in both of these cases, in the moment-to-moment neural activity as it unfolds, there are very strong sets of beliefs being instantiated at any given time.

And these are very difficult to change.

The key differentiating point here being that over longer timescales, over the timescales of days or weeks, the kinds of beliefs that are instantiated change quite a lot.

So someone who's bipolar, if they're in a manic episode or in a depressive episode, the nature of the belief landscape being instantiated is very different.

for borderline individuals from a daily or weekly basis, the nature of one's beliefs about the people that are close to them can change very rapidly, very extremely in certain cases.

And so here, the benefit of psychedelic therapy is a bit more mixed, where there is likely the case that to the extent to which the kind of overt type A beliefs can be updated and changed to be more positive, be hopefully more relaxed.

um that's positive but to the extent to which plasticity may be being increased when it's not actually needed when there's not actually like a meaningful therapeutic benefit to that um it's a bit questionable i think you know there's clear borderline or rather bipolar for example is often uh individuals with bipolar are often excluded from psychedelic files um

under the assumption, for example, that psychedelics may trigger a manic episode or may trigger psychosis.

And I think that is a valid concern.

So on that topic, then this bottom right-hand corner would be cases of both underfooting and catastrophic forgetting, with, I think, schizophrenia being the most clear manifestation of this.

And here there's very little work currently looking at trying to treat schizophrenia with psychedelic therapy, I think, for pretty good reasons.

Though I would say

to the extent to which there are secondary manifestations, secondary issues like depression, anxiety that people with schizophrenia might have, these actually may be treatable with some form of psychedelic therapy.

And then lastly, this upper right-hand corner here,

would correspond to underfitting in the Type A landscape, along with plasticity loss.

So I think a good example of this is something like ADHD, where there are not very particularly strong beliefs that are being sanctioned at any given time.

But it's difficult to change these set of beliefs nonetheless.

Um, I think here there's a case, uh, where it's not totally clear, um, how the benefit will actually play out.

Um, in both of these cases, uh, you know, I've heard interesting work around like microdosing may be of issue, uh, interest.

Um, I think, yeah, more research has to be done to be seen.

Right.

And then what would microdosing be doing?

Right.

Microdosing would be like very slowly, uh, kind of like

decreasing plasticity loss just a little bit, potentially also decreasing underfitting, as Adam had suggested in the ALBIS model.

And here we have just a brief overview of more or less everything I've described about how these two landscapes are different.

I think most of these things I've said before pretty clearly.

So the Type A landscape.

It corresponds to the neural activity pattern.

This is the hidden state of the RNN.

Over-canalization is going to be stereotyped mental circuits, very strongly held beliefs.

Under-canalization is going to be these inconsistently deployed circuits.

It looks like overfitting in the canalized case, underfitting in the non-canalized case.

going to correspond to stability, to metatrate.

I hadn't discussed this before, but I think there's a relationship between cognitive flexibility and this inference landscape.

Psychedelics are mainly going to affect the work at the acute level care

And this is by directly exciting the neurons or inducing forms of hadabian plasticity.

And the outcome is going to be a mixture of relaxation and strengthening of the kind that Adam described in the ALBIS case.

The Type B landscape then is working on the synaptic weights.

And these are the actual network parameters in our RNN model.

Over-canalization is this inability to learn or adapt over time.

Under-canalization is the inability to retain information, and this corresponds to plasticity loss and catastrophic forgetting.

This also is kind of the traditional plasticity metatrate, which I think corresponds to this longer-term constructive psychological flexibility.

The effects are going to mainly be post-acutely with psychedelics.

And these are the more downstream metaplastic effects, the psychoplastogenic effects.

And I think on the whole, the effect here is a relaxation of canalization.

And yeah, these are just the references.

So those are the slides I have.

That's kind of the overview of the deep canals model.

I think now I'll turn it over to Mike, who's going to share some thoughts both about this work and some of his own work and kind of this approach to understanding psychedelics more broadly.


SPEAKER_03:
Great.

Yeah, thank you for that overview.

That was great.

So I guess I'm just in general very, very optimistic about this corner of neuroscience, that there are these very intuitive models that are very sort of clinically significant.

And I also think, you know, there is a lot of responsibility to sort of get things right here as well, as Adam noted.

So yeah, I have just a few comments.

And for the viewers, I'm not speaking for Arthur and Adam.

I'm just grateful for the invitation to join the discussion.

So I wanted to note quickly three research themes dealing with the implementation of this class of model.

uh so just broadly kind of pointing at uh both deep canals and uh andrew this uh and uh and albus um so um in 2019 i wrote neural annealing and that was sort of uh developing the canalization frame within the context of energy buildup in the eigen modes of the system

So you have the nice annealing metaphor.

You have a temperature parameter and entropic disintegration.

Robin Carter said a beautiful paper on that, the Entropic Brain.

And then you sort of have a post-heating result where the microstructure of your system

uh is sort of a result of the uh sort of how hot and how long the the heating was so it's it's an alternative take on belief relaxation and i do think that like there are some pluses in terms of sort of explicitly making the annealing metaphor um and uh

I think that's two things that I'd point out.

One, top-down predictive models as energy sinks and eigenmodes as the places where energy can build up or almost hide from top-down models.

So you get this phenomenon of semantically neutral energy or semantically illegible energy, you can say, which is how

perhaps psychedelics, music, and meditation all sort of allow energy building.

The energy that they contribute to the system can evade the top-down models.

And yeah, just to note, one item that I'm looking at now is what is deep canals has the inference landscape versus learning landscape distinction.

And how would one sort of build that distinction within the neural annealing framework?

And I guess one metaphor that I'm considering is the self as sort of a magnet to sort of apply a constraint, a uniform focusing constraint on the system as it's going.

The second item that I wanted to mention, so I have this piece, Autism as a Disorder of Dimensionality.

And this brings in the concept of network density, that it may very well be that people on the spectrum have literally more neurons and or more synapses.

And there's this great Michelangelo quote, I saw the angel in the stone and I set him free.

And sort of the thicker networks you have, the more stone you have to work with.

But you actually have to do the work.

So you sort of have to do sort of, well, normally you sort of inherit these highly pre-trained optimized circuits, almost like ASICs, application specific integrated circuit.

And then this is kind of more an untrained network, and you have to train yourself.

And within the deep canals framework, this would show up as both underfitting and higher capacity for plasticity.

So I think that's going to be an interesting thread to pull.

Finally, so I just posted last week principles of VASO computation and as an implementation level account of active inference.

And this is a big rabbit hole.

I don't think we have time to go down today.

But I just comment that I really like the way deep canals explicitly splits out the learning landscape and the inference landscape.

that I think that making this distinction is increasingly going to make sense.


SPEAKER_02:
Back to Arthur.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

Awesome.

Well, thank you all for the presentations.

Arthur and Adam, feel free to pick up where Michael left off, or I can bring in some questions from the chat or from what I've written down.


SPEAKER_03:
Just a quick comment.

I do think that in the deep canals framework, it's going to be interesting to sort of look into metabolic demands and like sort of different metabolic disorders are pretty hot in brain science right now.

And I do think that it'll be interesting to look at sort of

what the metabolic profile is in terms of each of the four items in a quadrant, if one quadrant or another quadrant is particularly associated with more metabolic demands in the system.


SPEAKER_05:
Arthur,


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, no, that's fascinating.

I'm actually, I'd love to kind of hear a little bit more about this comment you made about the cell as a magnet that's applying these constraints.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, yeah.

So there's the psychedelics, the effects are not

or you sort of get pulled back into position after some time.

And I can't say that this is a full theory at this point, but in the neuroscience notation,

2018, I talked about the self as kind of the god of the gaps in terms of aligning different scales.

You have circuits which kind of pull in different ways.

You have the mesoscale systems which pull in different ways.

And you have the overall brain-wide systems that pull in different ways.

And kind of the self is sort of the thing that tries to make everything work together.

And an alternate frame would be this alpha is just this slow gravity toward this alignment.

I don't have anything particularly more to share.


SPEAKER_02:
I see.

Yeah, that makes sense.

It's interesting.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, to combine the heating up and the magnetism,

different metals and connections there to alchemy and everything different metals when heated up and cooled down in specific ways change their magnetic profile so of course this is all just concordances but they're very interesting and then also to the um the metabolic angle that reminded me of the um

the trilogy by Dale pendel with pharmacognosis and and the other two books where treated alongside traditional psychoactives we could say like caffeine and nicotine and some of the other substances that were mentioned here also there's tea sugar and these are treated as psychedelic or at least as a in the same

pantheon of neurocognitive modifying in the sense that the um destinies of individuals and of of empires ride on the uh sense making and decision making influence of sugar for example so it definitely broadens our perspective to include the the so-called classical

molecules like lsd but also maybe we could think more broadly about um antioxidants or about different lipids or about different metabolic um connections michael pollan's uh recent book uh this is your mind on plants i think like it kind of has that


SPEAKER_00:
what you're saying in mind, because like it includes caffeine, not like introduced as a psychedelic, but just discussed among also psychedelics.

I think her memory focuses on masculine, but just it is a different way of being in the world, potentially radically different.

Like if caffeine is in your life or it is not, it's a different life world.


SPEAKER_05:
And different extended niche.

um I'll go to a question in the live chat so anyone can can give a thought so Matt asks is there any way how to approach the individual reactions to psychedelics in terms of positive or negative results of treatment using the ideas of deep canals so how can we approach predictions and explanations at the individual scale with what you're sharing today


SPEAKER_00:
One thing for... This is kind of like a meta-comment, but if we're actually going to do computational psychiatry,

and we actually are going to and precision medicine so the the goal being to create models of sufficient detail that they could actually guide our practice and guide our practice in a way where we know for an individual what they might need in any given context so precision medicine with respect to like standard antidepressants um you know people sometimes they'll go for a long time before they find ones that work and sometimes things are made worse and they might deal with

antidepressant withdrawal as they're looking for the right one.

And if they're in a state of acute distress, that can be a hard lot.

And so like if you can help to speed up that process of finding what works, the ability and what might hurt also to avoid that.

I mean, the ability to help people is immense.

And so for that, it's like part of this.

So the meta comment is like, I have to just say, I'm not convinced that an active inference we're doing the job.

I think we're not acknowledging our uncertainty.

And I think the models are under specified with respect to the complexity of the effects we would expect on different scales and in characterizing the systems.

And we need to be more patient and modest.

but what we don't know before we've gone rushing in headlong into telling the rest of psychiatry how they should comport themselves and what models they should use based on psychedelic science and plausible models, hopeful models,

but very early days.

And with the reality being complex in the ways we're seeing here, this was not an easy set of lectures or a set of talks.

What we were going through, this is... And yeah, if we're actually going to be able to handle these powerful medicines responsibly, we've got to go into the weeds.

And so the one more meta comment was, I think I saw someone say, oh, how can something help everything?

You're like, yeah.

I don't know if this is right, but it's almost like a violation of no free lunch theorems or something.

It's like, how could something just be...

good across the board without you know something is off you've calculated wrong somewhere um you had to pay the price either in like some trade-off that wasn't acknowledged or but that being said there are some things which are generally good for a lot of things like being more flexible or like if

if you can get something like metastability, like, so there's almost like, I think I'm a church member of the, I'm a faithful member of the church of criticality.

I think Mark Miller might've indoctrinated me with like optimal grips, but basically like the ability to have like an optimal grip on existence in your soul, not too tight, not too loose, and being able to move around and be like flexible and itinerant.

It's like something kind of like mindfulness is just,

like Sri Racha for the soul.

It's good for everything, almost.

You just, you know, put on this, put on that.

Makes it better.

I buy that there might be some things that are good across the board, but I wouldn't call the...

uh psychedelics necessarily um putting you in this like state of optimal criticality or anything it's like in general like the rhetoric i'm uncomfortable with of saying psychedelics do x i would prefer us to say like um which psychedelic psychedelics tend to do x but just a little more qualifier like not weasel words but just like a little bit more like uh

This psychedelic might do X in this context with this dose in this setting, but that being said, there do also those seem to be across the board, broad sweeping, not sweeping, but overarching statements that we can make.

that express a lot with a little and so like i don't want to be so much of like a splitter and like a a a prickly person finding all the details that like these powerful things we can basically give to people to guide like our research i don't want to leave that on table either so yeah so i guess um uh that's a bunch of metal level commentary that did not address the thing so


SPEAKER_01:
I think that's useful.

It's very helpful, I think, to have all that context.

With respect to the question itself, I would maybe offer this, which might be helpful, which is, you know, I think you mentioned it, Adam, and it's very frequently mentioned, this idea of set and setting, right, as being like heavily predictive of the quality of the acute psychedelic experience, and often also to some extent, the quality of the post-acute experience.

And I think we can understand this in the deep canals model quite straightforwardly.

So I'll just quickly pull back up one of these slides here.

Yeah, so what is set and setting?

So set is mindset, which would basically be some combination of your current position in the synaptic weight landscape and the current state of your neural activation landscape.

So your place in both landscapes is your mindset.

And the setting is what is generating this input, what is generating the x into the network.

And that's some complicated function of the environment.

And then we can understand the evolution of movement through the inference landscape during the acute effects of the drug as then very directly and straightforwardly being a function of these two things.

Because both of these things are basically what's affecting how this landscape evolves over time and how you move through the landscape.

Um, and so, you know, with this in mind, I guess we can then start to characterize and think about like, okay, well, what kinds of, uh, you know, we can maybe be a little bit more mechanistic about like, how does input from the environment, the setting actually given, you know, that we relatively fix the actual synaptic lens, uh, way landscape, how is that changing the dynamics over time or the other way around, right?

Like how are.

is fixing the input, the environmental context relatively stable, and looking at individuals who are at different fixed points at different points of time, going to change the dynamics of the event.

And I think given that this is a highly stochastic process, given that these dynamics of albus are at play, where certain beliefs are being strengthened, other beliefs are being relaxed,

I think at least having this hold on, OK, well, set and setting is really important.

And it's important because these are explicitly conditioning the way in which both the landscape, the infant's landscape is shaped and how you move around it and how it's being dynamically perturbed.

Yeah, hopefully that answers a little bit the question.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

I just want to jump in there just thinking about biomarkers.

I mean, if we're looking for something that's of high clinical specificity, we want to sort of be able to measure what's going on in a very careful way.

So first of all,

What is the temperature parameter?

We talk about psychedelics increase the temperature parameters, but how high?

And do different substances and dosages differ in interesting ways?

Probably yes.

And then also measuring the temperature parameter in different parts of the body.

So you might have a different temperature

uh, like not literal temperature, but, uh, computational like entropic inspiration, uh, in different parts of your body.

Um, and also, um, the plasticity status in different networks throughout your body.

So I guess, uh, I see a big frontier here, uh, as thinking some doing some careful thinking around.

biomarkers and proxies and inferring these sort of things that we are talking about as core, and I think they are core, and we should be able to find good markers for them.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's totally correct.

Yeah, I just want to repeat it for my own sake, which is that, yeah, these two things, which I think were maybe... One was...

is i think already a core part of the deep panels work right which is that i was showing these single images of these toy optimization landscapes but of course um the human being the nervous system right uh has multiple many of these landscapes hierarchically organized right um and they influence each other in a complicated way um and the kind of like

yeah the project for it is to understand where these landscapes are what they look like and how we can find biomarkers to them yeah and begin you know if these two kinds of characterizations are true um this overfitting underfitting plasticity loss and catastrophic forgetting then it

It's a very meaningful project to be able to quantify that objectively somehow in an individual.

And that's when you can start to get to this point that Adam was talking about, of precision medicine and understanding like, okay, we'll actually attend that way.

These networks are catalyzed in this kind of way.

And because of that, we can say with much more certainty that this kind of psychedelic intervention is going to likely be helpful.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm wondering, I don't know if this potentially brings in some of the work with vascular and neurovascular and visceral integration that you're doing.

So there's a sense in the FANergy principle where the overall phenotype and extended phenotype, in terms of its constructing and coupling with and constructing its eco niche, its success in manifesting this phenotype,

there is one for energy functional for this overall effort as a kind of prediction that's enacted through the dynamics but you could also like break it down in terms of like subsystems with like local gradients and like local autopoetic processes that are in like they're brought together into an overall system hopefully with synergies um but and they have to be to be an organism and an agent we call this like

a thing to the extent it has thingness.

It's coming together.

So you could, I guess, think of maybe an energy landscape, something like, let's just say, right now in this moment, my explicitly felt beliefs.

But my body also, though, might have a different opinion

different parts of it and it in terms of like what it's implicitly optimizing it's revealed preference from its an action that may or may not correspond to how i feel about it i might it might be difference of opinion i might even be tuning in i might be ignoring it because i don't want to and so it's kind of like the score kept by the body might have its own um uh be describable as its own like information geometry which is being tracked two degrees and is in different degrees of


SPEAKER_03:
uh alignment with um different ones at different levels of a control hierarchy i have some plausible hey yeah absolutely uh i i think so um yeah uh and like i i think of i think the body is sort of um uh a parliament of different uh networks and uh

you know, alignment is the scarce resource, coordination is always the scarce resource.

And like, how does the body keep alignment?

And when does it go wrong too?

And I guess I see this as sort of, I mean, harmonically mediated.

Each part of the body has some choice of what else in the body to listen to.

And depending on the particular sort of location in the information topology,

different parts of the body have different carrots and sticks by which to try to control other parts of the body.

So if your stomach is very unhappy, it's going to start grumbling, and then it'll let the body know, okay, I need some food.

Like, I really seriously need some food.

And then the rest of the body, they can sort of turn away from it, and then it'll just get louder,

And then you have to turn it away from it more and it'll get louder.

And that's, of course, a negative dynamic.

If it gets what it wants, maybe it sort of gives a very harmonious hum and sort of tries to give carriage to the rest of the body.

So, yeah, I just, there's an ecosystem there.


SPEAKER_05:
I'll go to another question in the live chat so Burt asks what do you think of the average of solving within a generative hierarchy and the impact of temporary openness moving it upwards and then I asked to clarify what do you mean the average of solving and Burt wrote where predictions meet incoming signals like discussed in rebus where top-down predictions are softened in precision and thus and thus solved for


SPEAKER_00:
I think Arthur will be able to get into the details of that better than I would.

But the one thing I'm wondering there is sometimes like, again, I love the entropic brain.

But sometimes I wonder, in terms of the connections, how we're having more or less entropy and whether that matters, the how.

So for instance, you can think of a free energy landscape that's been flattened, or you can think of one where you're better able and you have more energy for this.

The manifold activity is better of climbing up or down the peaks that are there for the more

enduring belief landscape so it's like in the moment it could be that um my previous way of thinking is unavailable to me and i no longer believe those things at any level um or i i can uh support more novel inferences that i wouldn't otherwise i can kind of move into an area of mind space that would otherwise be difficult potentially because

of a greater energy into the system, greater throughput.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so as I think I understand the question, it's basically asking about trying to optimize for this free energy.

variable.

And in the context of deep canals, this is the loss function that's driving the optimization of the learning landscape, the synaptic weight landscape.

But the entire connectivity structure of the nervous system is trying to get to this point of low free energy.

And I think there's lots of, for any given individual in a given environment, assuming the environment is relatively fixed, there's an optimal.

There's a global optimal.

And it's very likely that the individual is in some local optima that is maybe close to it, maybe far from it.

But that's just inherently what we're within the context of the active entrance.

That's what we're assuming that the nervous system is doing, is doing this gradient descent in the space.

And openness then is going to correspond to this plasticity metatrade or be one of the components of it.

And it is in the deep canals model then going to correspond to an ability to move around this optimization landscape more easily, right?

It's going to be a flattening of the landscape or more precisely, I guess, a smoothing of the landscape.

um such that it's less likely that the individual the nervous system will get stuck in this local optimum so maybe it won't mean that the individual will arrive at the global optimum i think it's difficult to say what that even you know might be or however how individuals might get to such a place at all but i think it is likely that the individual will be will be more likely to find a more uh

a more global optimum, and more easily move from one optimum to another.

And I think that's kind of what this openness is corresponding to.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

So in Neural Kneeling, I mentioned the idea of psychedelic extrapolated volition.

kind of a play on a coherent extrapolated position from the AI safety crowd.

And it's this sort of sense that if temporarily you have more control over sort of low level shaping of your cognition, your emotion, and maybe sort of based on this attractor that we call the self,

or I guess based on what is a good question, then what are good signs that you should be trusted with that power, or you should trust yourself with that power, rather?

And what are telltale signs that you shouldn't trust yourself with that power?

And I don't have an answer, but I think it's an interesting question.


SPEAKER_05:
yes i am normal and can be trusted with the key to the doors of perception let me in um i have a short question where is action in this model so um


SPEAKER_00:
I imagine many places, Arthur, will get into that.

But for what I was thinking with Albus is that actually, the 5-HD 2A system, I talk about two regimes potentially.

One is more towards

overt inaction and modifying the world and strengthen beliefs potentially of that variety.

And the other might be more of adapting to the world.

So Robin has a really excellent paper called A Tale of Two Receptors.

where he talks about 5-HT1A receptors, the ones that antidepressants tend to act on because they tend to reduce this excitatory signaling, talking about them as a kind of passive coping.

And so this would correspond in, there's some machine learning models of this by Diane and colleagues of like, where they talk about a ponency between dopamine and serotonin.

And they're focusing on the 1A as a kind of like patients promoting parameter, keeping you from like confidently charging into your policy.

So that would tend to

uh inhibit i guess patterns of um either overt inaction or potentially even some kinds of um uh mental simulation too if it's like you could maybe even think of like even if you're not overtly inactive enacting something externally uh there might be more or less uh brave type styles of thoughts that you might be willing to entertain going um uh

going places you might not otherwise be willing to go and being able to handle the swings and expected free energy that might happen as you try to pursue a given path of policies.

But the idea would be that there might be something more like a microdosing-mesodosing regime, which might be more of what initially sculpted the 582a system, which evolved with the gene duplication event around the time of the Cambrian explosion with the advent of jawed fishes.

I'm personally interpreting this as having the significance of

um evolving in the context of predator prey arms races I suspect that could be wrong but that basically it's um locally trying to strengthen patterns of policy Pursuit to pursue particular goals in a given context and this to come back to what I was watching earlier with that work by Robin of like a kind of active coping but it seems with rebus um there's almost like um a

not that kind of story um and that uh it's more you're adjusting the world and actually if under a very altered state you are overtly enacting that's actually kind of a dangerous thing i don't know how much to make of this that the um 582 receptors are less expressed on like motor cortex i don't think we know enough to make too much of it but it's like some dreams you might not want to act out as they're happening but they still might powerfully impact you

So I'm currently actually wondering whether this other rebus-like regime might have been specifically sculpted in the context of bonding and actually opening the self to include others.

And that might have been some of the primary selective pressures.

I don't know how to think of that in terms of an action.

And one more detail that might kind of like, not sure what to make of it,

goes through both of those, excuse the phone, would be anthropologically, I believe, like psychedelics are oftentimes used in ways that would be both like creating a kind of group solidarity and might be used in the context of

um pursuing goals together in the world so for instance like a hunting party they might all do psychedelics together or something that looks a lot like breath work before uh going out maybe you know going to war so that's a very different type that kind of includes both a relaxation of the normal boundaries of the self

and a kind of gearing you up for pursuing goals in the world.

But there's got to be another story of like, so Arthur's expertise is machine learning.

And so it's like, you want these systems to act intelligently and not act in other times.

And so basically, now we're in the language of policies and when you deploy them and how.

So complicated.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I would say that action manifests itself at a few different places.

It's true, I didn't mention it here.

Yeah, I think it's very important, obviously.

I mean, I think what the kind of like most implicit place where it exists, right, is that these belief landscapes are being instantiated ultimately for the sake of adaptive behavior, adaptive behavior, adaptive action, right, in some sort of environmental context.

And that's the kind of like framework, deep learning framework that we're using, or like the

um artificial agent framework right is that like the assumption is that the system is supporting some sort of agent that's embodied in some sort of environment which is you know changing over time um such that it can either be adaptive or not adaptive

I think then the question of how action actually plays into the evolution of these belief landscapes during psychedelics or not.

Acting in the world is a very clear way to modify one's setting.

So acting is a way of modifying the function that's providing the sensory input into the system, which is going to change how

the activity patterns are evolving over time, right?

Which is going to affect the acute quality of the trip, affect how beliefs are either being strengthened or relaxed.

And I think, you know, it's already clear that there's a kind of whole set of like folk psychology, right?

That's been built around like what is or isn't a good way to cultivate the helpful settings

And that, of course, all is a function of action in the world.

I think then there's also this kind of more subtler form of action, which is how one thinks, how one deploys attention, essentially during this experience.

And I think this deployment of attention has a huge effect on whether there end up being rebus or CBUS-like effects.

So whether one allows oneself to go down certain thought rabbit holes, whether one allows oneself to get kind of stuck in certain kinds of thought patterns.

I think this form of mental action

yeah has a very big downstream effect um and i think a lot of i'd love to see much more work on this i think it's very important i think it's kind of essential um and i think this is kind of one of the most interesting things about these psychedelic experiences is that in some sense like the most extreme rebus model and the most extreme uh phoebus model

be true for two different individuals right someone could say you know i went to hell and i was there for eight hours straight or um or say you know i had a completely selfless experience i like let go of all beliefs and experience you know nothing for eight hours straight and it's great right and like um clearly those involve like two very different neural regimes

And I think the nature, obviously, given that they involve the same drug and they involve not such a different setting, it's obvious that they have something very important to do with how attention is deployed during this experience.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I do think that this frame of attention, I mean, attention is so important for everything.

And I do think that there's something interesting kind of digging into the

the attention and albus framework.

Yeah, I'm really curious to see how that'll develop.

I would also say that in terms of active inference and action, there is a cost to holding an attention.

And then once you discharge your intention, you can release that cost.

So I guess I would have to think about how to apply that to deep canals framework.


SPEAKER_00:
Fred Barrett, I don't know if he's published it yet.

but this is kind of like a follow-up to a a claustrally central model that arthur alluded to uh um is emphasizing basically um a lack of executive control and placing that as central to the psychedelic spirits like not controlling your mental action in directed ways as much and then

um trying to come from more of the um types of cognition and phenomenology sort of psychedelics based on just releasing of uh the normal uh more agentic modes of policy selection around attention as mental action although he uh not using active inference speak so yes yeah very interesting Adam your um your introduction there of of course attention as covert action


SPEAKER_05:
which was echoed by Arthur and Michael, both of you said,

it really introduces a case where we can use active inference to find continuity between what's happening inside the agent and outside the agent.

Because on one hand, we could kind of take a belief-oriented frame and we could say, well, what's happening inside the agent are beliefs about things, beliefs about hidden states, beliefs about observations, beliefs about policy.

So that's kind of a belief-oriented view where everything is framed basically cognitively.

or we could take a very action-oriented view and then we could think about the interface in a more an active way and then also even the realm of where where many active entities uh dare not tread in mental action with attention as covert action so then we have like a a total active account

that is mathematically isomorphic with the total belief-based account.

They're both just maps, they're not the territory.

The territory is the person in the room.

So all of this is just talking about the formalism and how we choose to interpret the formalism in terms of it being more inferential or it being more active.

um and so there's a lot of ways to go i guess in our closing minutes i would love to hear what are the next moves or what are some areas that you um would hope that people look into michael and then the authors okay so i know it's um


SPEAKER_03:
I think my favorite mental move is to try to drop down on my level of abstraction.

Okay, how is this implemented?

What's going on here?

And then I do think that details of implementation are really generative to look into.

And I like to buy markers and proxies for figuring out how to parameterize, okay, exactly how hot are we talking about with this temperature parameter and so on in different parts of the body.

I have kind of my niche that I'm working on in the vasomuscular system, which is a rabbit hole.

But yeah, I just think that like,

I do think that the deep canals framework specifically and the canalization paradigm in general, it's good enough that we should be able to dig into mechanisms.

So I'm looking forward to that.


SPEAKER_05:
Great.

Adam?


SPEAKER_00:
Or Arthur.

Or Arthur, you can go first, if you like.

It doesn't matter.


SPEAKER_01:
OK.

Yeah, I'll go.

Sure.

Yeah, I mean, first, I want to echo this idea.

I think vector distance is very important.

This is one of the people we've talked with about deep canals.

This idea of like, well, this is great.

We have these two axes.

It'd be wonderful if there were some biological correlates you could look for.

I think that's incredibly important.

My background is also in machine learning, in deep learning.

So I'm currently doing some work around simulating some of these things.

I think, especially for these Albus dynamics, being able to study under what circumstances you get these different kinds of effects, even in simpletory models, is important to see how they unfold.

And then I'm also, you know, we brought it up at the end.

I think it's really important.

It's very interesting to me is the role of the deployment of attention in this.

Um, and there's lines of work where people are trying, you know, various researchers are trying to connect, for example, meditation to psychedelic research and kind of certain people are trying to tell unified stories about, um,

what's going on in the brain when people meditate, what's going on with their psychedelics, some of them using these active inference models.

But I think in all of these cases, the deployment of attention and how the deployment of attention changes over time is kind of a key aspect of this.

And it's not as present in the deep canals model right now, but I think

Any really robust future model of these things is going to have to talk about attention quite a bit.


SPEAKER_00:
I guess next steps would be seeing how the review process goes, but also

I guess, helping Arthur to establish a field of psychedelic machine learning, psychedelic-inspired machine learning, where we try to make systems more flexible and capable better.

They can handle edge cases better, imagine better in terms of real-time policy selection, learn in ways that not too much, not too little.

And then maybe, so that's useful.

potentially earlier, like you have a driverless vehicle, do I change lanes or don't I?

You send it back to the Tesla dojo.

What do you want it to learn?

What do you not want it to learn?

But then down the line,

Well, before we even get there, as you're going into this, you could see the capacity for a rich bidirectional flow between machine learning and psychedelic inspired machine learning.

So it's like you get a bunch of machine learners together and a bunch of people who know a lot about the cognitive science and biology and maybe phenomenology of psychedelics.

And in addition to designing better machine learning systems, they could probably tell you more about how psychedelics act.

And so you can have this kind of virtuous cycle between the biology and the field.

But you keep going with that.

I guess before we get there, we'll keep going, but before we get there,

very interested in the implications for best practices so for instance like there might be like when so oftentimes you might want semantically neutral energy to kind of get them you're turning up the heat you're just maybe at first breaking up you know i call them defenses but the usual structure but then the question is at what point do you try to direct the canalization process do you wait till after or maybe when the when the metal is hot

is that a really good time to do it and so these are the kinds and maybe there's no one single question this might depend on the substance the set the setting the dose the person is so getting clarity on that could be uh fateful for many people in terms of um the outcomes they have and i specifically what i'm gunning for is i'm on a mission to make uh compassion meditation uh treatment as usual for uh all

psychedelic psychotherapy and preferably all therapy and so the question is is like if you're in a state of enhanced imaginative capacity maybe you're having more ability to tune into your interoceptive system whether you've just increased the channels or maybe you're better capable of because maybe your inflammation went down a bit and you can tune in better because it doesn't feel it feels better to do so some combination that might be a really good opportunity to do certain meditations that might update you in particular ways

like try to direct the reannealing process, maybe not just like afterwards integration, but during the session.

And so if we could get clarity on something like how to canalize and recanalize and like annealing schedules, it's going to be complicated.

That's, I think, where we need to head.

And then finally, for all this, I'm very...

That would be enough.

But recentering the conversation on psychedelics on basically meaning and connection would be enough.

But I'm wondering down the line, when we talk of alignment, we're talking about our alignment with our values and maybe the alignments of machines with our values.

does this actually end up going to some of the conversations that are happening now about increasingly advanced ai and our relationships to it could there be a story of canalization and recanalization you want some things to hold fast and you want some things to be more fluid this might be it's always been a timely conversation we've always been dealing with this with us the alignment problem of us which we often fail but the alignment problem with these technologies we're developing


SPEAKER_05:
Wow.

Well, so many great topics.

Thank you all.

All I have in closing, turn on, tune in, act and first serve.

Thank you.

See you all next time.