SPEAKER_13:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference live stream.

It is Active Inference live stream 14.1 on January 19th, 2021.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

I'm going to share my screen for a second.

participants.

You can find us at our website, on Twitter, Gmail, YouTube, or our public Keybase team or shared username.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

And whether in the live chat or the comments, just feel free to share whatever you're thinking.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And as far as video etiquette for live streams, we'll mute if there's noise in our background, raise our hands so that we can hear from everybody who wants to share and use respectful speech behavior.

So for the Active Inference live streams in 2021, we're gonna be having these regular Tuesday, 7 a.m.

Pacific times.

And then we're also gonna be having these special sessions like the model stream and several other kinds of events that we're really excited to be planning.

And go to this big red link

and you'll find a spreadsheet.

And in that spreadsheet, you'll find the details on past and present and upcoming Active Inference livestreams.

Here we are in 14.1, discussing The Math Is Not the Territory with author Mel Andrews.

Next week, we're going to be discussing the same paper for a follow-up paper, and then we're moving on to a different paper.

But for this week and for next week, we're going to be in this awesome paper and this awesome group of discussants.

today in actim stream 14 we're going to have introductions and warm-ups then in the sections of 14.1 we're going to be going through the paper the math is not the territory navigating the free energy principle by mel andrews in october 2020

And we have some slides with aims and claims, abstract, roadmap, etc.

But this is pretty much going to be whatever people want to discuss today and whatever questions we want to address in next week as well.

So if you have any questions, just save them and submit them however you can and get in touch if you want to join live.

Okay, awesome.

So let's start with the introductions and we'll just give a short introduction or check-in and then pass to somebody who hasn't spoken yet.

And especially if it's your first time, we would love to hear what your background or interest in active inference is.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a postdoctoral researcher in California, and I will pass first to Mel.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi there.

I'm Mel Andrews, and I think for better or for worse, my doctoral work is going to end up being largely about free energy principle and active inference.

So that's why I'm here.


SPEAKER_13:
Cool.

Pass it to somebody who can then introduce themselves.


SPEAKER_14:
Hi there.

Thank you, Mel.

Hi, my name is Marco.

I'm from Holland.

My background is in psychology and cognitive neuroscience, and during my master's I also worked a bit on energy principle.

And my interest in active inference is, well, in most of the things.

I just believe that it really has a potential, as alluded to and written about by Mel in the paper we're discussing today.

In general, just a lot of potential to understand a lot of aspects of the world and society that we still haven't been able to really grasp with alternative models.

So happy to be here.


SPEAKER_07:
And I'll pass it to Ivan.

Hi, my name is Ivan.

I'm from Moscow, Russia.

I'm a researcher in a system school.

I'm an engineer, a system engineer.

And I pass it to Shannon.


SPEAKER_10:
Hey, guys.


SPEAKER_07:
I'm Shannon.

Hi.


SPEAKER_10:
and working in cognition, brain stimulation, and I'm also interested in social cognition and how we interact, like in a musical ensemble, and how the free energy principle applies to both scales of those questions.

And I'll pass it to Alex.


SPEAKER_13:
Alex, we can't hear you.

Distance X, Alex.

But you don't appear muted.

Let's go to Alex.

Oh, yep, now we hear you.

Go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, hi, everybody.

I'm Alex, and I'm in Moscow, Russia, and I'm a researcher in systems management school and trying to find a way to find integration between active inference and system engineering approaches.

I'll pass it to Alex.


SPEAKER_09:
Okay, thanks.

Thanks, Alex.

I'm Alex.

I'm interested in... I'm a philosopher, I guess, interested in free energy principle and active inference and sort of fundamental questions about mental representation, and lately I've been more interested in applied work and sort of

Combining, eventually maybe combining these approaches with other approaches to machine learning and to active inference as like a technology.

But I will pass it on to, let's see, Dave.


SPEAKER_13:
Dave, you muted.

So we have Dave, and then we have also the last remaining people.

Tim, Stephen, and Phil.


SPEAKER_12:
I'm retired from information technology, live in the Philippines.

My background is in cybernetics and machine translation.

I'm teaching myself neuropsychoanalysis, and I was so pleased to come to Mel's paper because I've been trying to figure out what is this thing?

After all, it's like a metaphor among metaphors among metaphors, and maybe...

Maybe you can tell us toward the end of the presentation whether that has anything to do with what you're saying in your paper.

And I can't even see who else has not spoken.

Philippe, Philippe, there we go.


SPEAKER_11:
Hi, I'm Philippe.

I'm studying theoretical biology in Prague and I'm interested in computational neuroscience.

And I joined because I only read Mel's paper and I found it interesting, but I don't know anything about it.

Perfect.


SPEAKER_02:
Let's go to Tim.

Hi, I'm Tim.

I'm in Toronto, Canada.

It's my first time joining in the sessions.

I'm really eager to learn about this stuff.

It's really fascinating.

My background is in

science and engineering, specifically, I guess, electronic systems and software, and that kind of thing.

And I'll pass to Stephen.


SPEAKER_13:
Go for it, Stephen, or fellow Jitser.

Okay, and Sarah, have you gone?


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, I'm Sarah Davis.

I'm in Berlin.

And right now, I'm a master's student in philosophy of science.

But before that, I was an artist.

And the through line, I guess, that's interesting to me is the relationship between information and materials and media.

So I'm interested in reservoir computing and how and when you can separate those things and what is life, like all these funny things that are circling around that.

So active inference is just yet another

useful thing that I want to understand better because it seems to connect to a lot of other disciplines.


SPEAKER_05:
So I know each other through the Terrence Deacon circle.

We're big Terrence Deacon friends.


SPEAKER_13:
Cool.

It'll be interesting to hear about that soon.

And then I see Blue or yes.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, good morning.

I'm Blue Knight.

I'm an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico.


SPEAKER_13:
Nice, is there anyone who has not introduced himself?

Otherwise we're just gonna keep rolling.

All right, great.

So let's go to our warmup questions and I'll just put up the first two, which are, what is something you're excited about today?

And what is something that you liked or remembered about the paper?

And so people can just raise their hands and we'll go in order.

And until I see a hand, I think something I liked or remembered about the paper was that there was no figures.

So from the point of view of usually reading papers with figures, that was very notable, but then also that there was clarity and structure despite figures, which are often used as a, not quite an aid to structure a paper, but it's how we often think about in empirical research, like, oh, what is figure one going to show?

But there was clarity in this article without the usage of figures.

So Marco, and then anyone else who wants to continue.


SPEAKER_14:
Yeah, I fully agree that it is unique to clear.

So I've been kind of lagging behind on the literature, but for me, Mel's paper is the best paper so far when it comes to contextualizing free-entry principle and like the title implies, really mapping it out, right?

Contextualizing in the big, complicated epistemic landscapes that this all connects to.

So huge props to Mel for that.

I think the only other critical piece I've read is from Gio Colombo, which is more unwieldy.

And I think the importance of mapping really shows in this paper because it opens up a lot of directions to think about the FEP, which stands in stark contrast to a lot of other papers I've read, which take it as authoritative and then just move on instead of

actually trying to interpret it.

And so Mel does a great job of guiding the reader and understanding the nuances and the questions that would arise when you see those nuances.

So excited to hear about people's thoughts today.


SPEAKER_13:
Cool.

Very nice.

Tim, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_02:
I thought that I was, I noted to myself, just, you know, as I was reading how clear the writing was, I thought the writing was really clear and expressive.

and explication really well ordered.

And there was kind of like, I guess, a humility.

I remember somewhere in this content, I saw the idea of the list of epistemic values, I think it was, you call them.

And humility was one in the list.

And that kind of comes through in that paper, the way that there's no sort of diving for like a discovery or a conclusion.

It's really just laying it out and giving it to you, to leaving the questions open, which was really nice.


SPEAKER_13:
yep and also lots of nice philosophy type things like the idea of defending an idea and so it's not common to see in an empirical paper like we're gonna defend this it's it's a lot more like a battlefield of ideas in philosophy and in science it's a little bit of a different structure so sarah and then anyone else to like


SPEAKER_03:
lather on the praise to Mel's paper.

But yeah, the writing was really good.

And actually, when I first read it, I feel like I understand a lot more than when I first read it.

And so now I kind of feel like I'm happy to be here because I need to read a second time.

I've learned a lot more.

But yeah, the exploration of kind of the beginning of the exploration of all these different models, it saw a lot of potential.


SPEAKER_13:
Cool.

And that's kind of part of the idea with the dot one and the dot two is sometimes you read the paper and you don't talk to someone about it.

You have thoughts one, two, three, and then you have a first conversation about it, or you listen to one video and all of a sudden you have thoughts one through 10, and then you have the discussion and all of a sudden you're up to 20.

So that's part of the idea of taking the time to really read through these papers.

Does anyone else want to add anything?

I'll throw up the third warmup question, which is what is something you're wondering about or would like to have resolved by the end of today's discussion?

So Alex, Kiefer, then anyone else.


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, so I think having this resolved by the end of today is probably a tall order, but I'm interested in the question that's sort of explicitly raised toward the end of the paper about whether the FEP is a very abstract sort of model of, or in some sense, maybe representation of nature or a pure formalism.

And like, that's an interesting line.

So I think it's an interesting question.


SPEAKER_13:
Great question.

Sarah, then Marco.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, to me, it all just seems like, Mel, fix it by the end of the hour.

But yeah, I was curious to know if you have any insight into ways that the model could never be applied, like just trying to situate the model in all these worlds that it has potential for.


SPEAKER_13:
Cool.

Any other intro thoughts there, Marco, or anyone else?


SPEAKER_14:
Yeah, I have a lot of questions for Mel, I think, but I think what maybe, I hope so, possible to resolve by the end of this stream is, there's only a very brief note about it, but you also said that it's also compatible with processualism.

Something about processualism, I didn't see anything else about it.

So I'm not a philosopher, so natural kinds for me always was a bit weird, iffy concept for me.

But I was wondering if you could resolve maybe the problems of mapping into natural kinds and stuff, but for processualism.

Because it seems that Active Interest is much more a processualist kind of framework, not really compatible with the essentials, objects, properties framework of ontology.


SPEAKER_10:
um so yeah i'll leave it at that cool let's definitely return to that and define it and get clarity on it shannon then anyone else hey yeah so i'm really interested in what role the free energy principle or active inference plays in empirical hypothesis testing um and i think this paper did a really good job of explaining

that the mathematical models can be very useful to generate questions, to generate hypotheses, or just to further investigate some empirical phenomenon.

And I think it would be good this week and next week to just sort of talk about what it means when you say I have a free energy principle characterization of system.


SPEAKER_13:
Very nice, agreed.

And yes, we have several fun hours of discussion ahead.

So I'm just going to flip to this summary slide and ask Mel, when you're conveying this work to different audiences, how do you communicate it?

Or what would you like to start with?

Just how do you give your 30,000 foot overview, perhaps to different audiences or perspective, yourself in the past, yourself in the future, however you want to do it?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I guess I saw a lot of, um, confusion about what the FEP was and what it was doing.

Um, and it was my, before I could really, uh, play with it, I had to, um, I had to get clear on what it was and, and make everyone else clear on what it was.

Um, and, and so I, I tried to tackle.

kind of like the most fundamental questions in this paper about what it is that the FEP is and what it's doing.

And in some ways, in some ways, I think a lot of those remain kind of unanswered by this paper, but no longer unexplored.

Like I put it all out on paper so we can talk about it now.

Whereas before there are these things like, is the FEP,

like, is this a scientific model or scientific theory?

Or is it, you know, the demarcation, like, does it not belong to the domain of science?

That was a big one, and no one had asked that.

Then, well, Alex's question is,

That's what, you know, and I didn't come, I sort of, right, the first sentence, right, is saying, I think it's one of the main points.

But then I'm going to, I'm writing a paper with Inés Espolto where we're going to come down kind of differently on that, on the, I mean, it's not written, it's not 100% written yet, so we're not sure yet, but we come down a little differently on the demon oppression problem.

And then, yeah.

in terms of Alex's question, that was one of my main driving questions, the notion of, is the FEP, like, a really abstract representation of natural systems, natural processes, or is it not a representation of anything in nature at all?

And that, to me, is, like, totally not answered yet.

And there's almost, like, a Quinean positive, like, that's almost, to me, it's, like, getting to the heart of, like,

naturalism as an approach in philosophy like Carl Friston's line this whole time has been well there's a dissolving line between just math and physics proper and that drives me crazy but I'm coming around to it a little bit


SPEAKER_13:
wasn't a good summary of my paper that was a good summary of of what i'm excited about exploring further fun yep well just a few things in there that might fly above or below those who have different um you know listening regimes of attention you said before i could play with it i had to be clear on it and also help other people be clear so that just captured this learn by doing learn by playing and also learn by serving and teaching

because those are some of the key pieces and without being playful and understanding that it's a deep well to dive into.

And then also that there's a community that is also curious.

Those are some of the key aspects.

And then also it almost goes without saying that this is a really exciting philosophy paper and it's an ongoing philosophical question.

So people are maybe familiar with a measurement is made on a protein or a new species is found in some forest and it gets nature science and people are really excited about a measurement that's made about nature.

And then the philosophical questions, potentially because they're fundamental or there's no simple soundbite answer or there's no figure, there's no graphical abstract, you got to read the prose or got to think through it.

The philosophical questions are often seen as not contemporary or not exciting or not cutting edge, but we're seeing

in real time with free energy principle and active inference, the way that maybe we could even call them top-down philosophical priors on what the FEP is are shaping the realization of what emerges from the bottom up.

For example, if it's really from on high and FEP is part of science and it's part of a scientific program, that's gonna be very different several years down the line than if people said this should be thrown over there with the fiction books and with the biography of somebody else.

So it's pretty interesting just how these top down and bottom up ideas are playing out in the discussion about what this framework is.

So pretty interesting.

And anyone can raise their hand or give a thought or a question.

The other piece I just wrote down until anyone raises their hand was this.

unanswered but not unexplored which is taking us back to the map metaphor and it's the math is not the territory of course a little bit of a pun on the map is not the territory and what is the map what is the territory and where are their dragons where do we have just the coastline but not know what's on the interior or

where are the underlying features of the world stable or changing and then where's our map stable or changing in an attempt to understand and just like the navigation there's probably pure navigators out there but also there's those who want to move cargo so how are we going to get it done with this map and this territory so we'll go to alex keifer sarah then mel


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, so I guess I'm just following up from some of what Mel just said.

So I don't want to take this too far in the direction I'm thinking about because it's pretty general.

So to me, this paper raises questions that are fundamental, like whether or not you're interested in the FEP and that it's partly a matter of seeing how these two things fit together.

But like, so Mel mentioned Quine.

So one problem that I've always had with the line that the FEP is not falsifiable or that it's like,

distinct in kind from active inference as a process theory is just like, I guess, confirmation holism.

So I just assume that if this FEP thing is informing our empirical theories at all, then there must be some semantic logical connections of some kind between the empirical theories and the FEP.

And if you're a confirmation holist, you think that, you know,

sensory evidence uh what we observe kind of back propagates if you will to like all of the beliefs in our network then i think the fep should be vulnerable to that but again that's not really about the fep so i just want to sort of raise that issue more explicitly and um


SPEAKER_13:
Cool.

Well, just before we go to Sarah, could you just define a little bit better what is the confirmation holism?

Who would think differently on this issue and what would be the implications for active inference?


SPEAKER_09:
Well, so I don't know what people think about this issue these days, actually.

I'm just, this is sort of like a, I guess it's attributed to Quine and Duhem, I'm sorry if I'm mispronouncing his name.

But the idea is just that you, that sort of scientific theory

It meets sensory evidence as a corporate body, so the idea is that if you observe something that's in conflict with your total theory, there's no way a priori of telling which of the claims in your theory you need to revise.

Right, so like if there's, I mean, you could, for example, you could say, well, there must've been an error, there must've been a malfunction in the measuring device.

And so you could revise that part of your theory.

Or you could say, no, this really does falsify my more fundamental assumptions.

And so,

That's kind of what I'm getting at.

And I'm not sure if people hold the alternative view these days that, like, no, there are certain statements that are meaningful but immune to falsification.

But that's the kind of question I'm raising.

Excellent.

Sarah, Mel, Marco.


SPEAKER_03:
I think, actually, just to not overwhelm Mel, my question could fit in anywhere.

I'd rather just give Mel a chance to address that.


SPEAKER_13:
Let's go back to Mel, then Sarah.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, the web of belief thing, yeah, the Duhem-Quine hypothesis is this idea that we've got an integrated web of beliefs and you can't test any atomic proposition in isolation.

You can't protect anything in your web of beliefs from revision by new evidence, which I think it's almost very compatible with this kind of Bayesian frame view, right?

You get this, you get this.

spreading its propagation of evidence through the network all the way up and down.

I like that idea.

But what did I want to respond to?

Oh, yeah.

Someone said active interest is a process theory.

And I just want to set the record straight on that.

The reviewer one on my manuscript, I just got reviews back on this.

It's not published yet.

I just got reviews back.

And they pointed out that it's probably misleading to refer to active inference as a process theory.

There have been process theories on the basis of active inference and variational message passing developed.

So when you see, like, there's a paper, Frist and Schwabnick, Rivoli...

Joe Pizzulo is on there, 2017.

It's called Active Inference of Process Theory.

That is a process theory that is made from active inference that's set in variational message passing.

But active inference itself is not a process theory so much as a corollary of the FEP applied to activity in an environment.

And then process theories of that have been made.

So I should probably

I'm going to go back in and be more careful with the words I use.


SPEAKER_13:
Cool.

Marco, then I'll go ahead.


SPEAKER_14:
Yeah, I'm not sure if you met me with process theory, but I intentionally also avoided the phrase process theory because I think it's what I was trying to say with that comment earlier is a lot of treatments of natural kinds and mapping to real states or affairs of the world seems to me more grounded in a more object property oriented way.

philosophy of pathology, right?

But for me, it sounds more that the ontological assumptions or commitments in processualism are far more compatible with active inference, which I wanted to address it later.

I'm not sure if now is the right time, but

But there's this issue of not demarcation for is FAP AI scientific, but also demarcation of market blankets, right?

So as you pointed out, rightly, there's this dilemma of where do you put the threshold for where the boundary of the market blanket is.

But for me, that fuzziness is not an issue if you would be more processualist, because then the claim with the necessity would be more, there is a boundary, but that we cannot affirm or confirm where it exactly is, what the perfect absolute threshold is, is not an issue itself.

Simply that there is heterogeneity, there is certain boundarying of states would be sufficient, I think.

because the processional or dynamic nature of these systems would mean that you can't say there's a static bond, simply that there are boundaries between subsystems.

But that was not my question.

My comments for now was basically, one thing I think is also interesting is seeing FAP AI as simply a language.

So there's the canonical kind of typical notion of math is a language, and physics is a discipline in which

that's written in math.

And I kind of feel that this is the same here.

So Daniel gives very beautiful metaphors of navigation and mapping.

And to me, it seems that this whole project, not just theory, but the whole project of PNN and active inference is more of a vehicle of toolkits, of languages, and allows you to translate back and forth in disciplines, translate into mathematical abstraction.

And as you explore in the mathematical abstract world, you can translate back

so it's like if you can't see the patterns in empirical data translate back to abstraction find patterns there um see if you can translate them back and then you can test them and so it's like uh scientific narrative with a detour but um yeah i don't know if you find it interesting we'd love to discuss that more later but yeah yeah it is interesting and uh also the navigation brings us back to cybernetics and the the word cybernetics comes from navigation


SPEAKER_13:
And so it's almost like if you can't navigate on the water surface and then you go, you abstract beyond some sort of limitation.

And so it's kind of funny because the mapping metaphor, again, it is a physical one.

It's related to cybernetics, but then also there's this idea of a map in mathematics and a mapping is a function.

And so there's this abstraction to abstraction mapping.

And then there's also that as a map onto the physical world because we're embodied agents.

So if Mel or anyone else wants to comment

raise their hand.

Otherwise, I think there's a few other threads to highlight there.

Go ahead, Mel.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I just want to flag something Marco said quickly.

The Markov blanket isn't actually all that, it's not actually, as a boundary, the Markov blanket is not actually all that diffuse and dynamical.

It's actually, it's actually harnessed to like particular particles in a sim.

So we think, when we think about, you know, the boundaries of an organism,

or the boundaries of a cell wall or something, right?

You're constantly, you are dispersing.

The cell is dispersing, right?

The material of which the cell, the organ, the tissue, the human being, the society is made up, right?

These are diffuse and they are dissipating.

There's a constant turnover in the material composition of these things, right?

And the Markov blanket doesn't handle that right now, right?

The Markov blanket is wrote to particular particles, so to speak, in your system.

So it's, there's a kind of a desire in the original like Burkhoff stuff on dynamical systems, you get 1927, Burkhoff 1927, you get,

he kind of proposes a notion of wandering sets.

And there's kind of a desire, Carl has a desire to extend the Markov blanket so as to be able to accommodate wandering sets, where there is a turn, right?

That where the material makeup goes away and yet the boundary persists, right?

You get turnover, but it doesn't do that yet.

So it's actually,

it's not nearly as like dynamical as you'd want it to be, I think.


SPEAKER_13:
The wandering sets and the attracting sets, it kind of reminds me again with a navigation metaphor.

The attracting set could be like, there's like a whirlpool and all the boats around it are kind of being drawn into this attracting set.

If they move away, then they're drawn back in.

And then the wandering set is like a flotilla of ships.

Maybe some are joining and some are leaving, but they're maintaining a coherence as they dynamically are moving through the ocean or...

as their subunits are changing because there's this dissipation that was brought up.

And then the living systems that are far from equilibrium are the ones that are apparently successfully resisting that dissolution.

And so what is it that those living systems are doing?

And that's the what is life question.

That's Schrodinger 1944 to Maxwell 2018, that pipeline.

So it's really interesting questions.

Marco, then any other raised hands?


SPEAKER_14:
Thanks for the clarification.

Maybe I'm misunderstanding something.

So I guess for me, maybe it's my personal interpretation of it all.

But for me, the primacy is actually less about the formalism

for example, Julia Perl originally formulated as.

But what for me is interesting is more the conceptual interpretation of this intermediating kind of interface, right?

There's a unidirectional flow that's in its dynamics allow for this protection of states that shouldn't go beyond certain boundary, for example.

And in that sense, oh wait, and one more thing is that maybe that which is to be bounded or protected doesn't have to be a particular state as such.

Maybe it's like a relation.

For example, you're protecting the property of certain nodes, of certain states, of certain densities, that they are adaptively valuable for other systems that they might be a relationship.

um but but i think in general i think what this all shows is that there's a lot of freedom at least in my opinion to interpret the picture that follows from fp ai i'm still kind of unclear why it's not uh dynamic because the mathematical nodes can be variably mapped to physical notes in my opinion because i'm not sure what you mean with particles right so it's something like we we do the boundaries of particles but more in terms of

sensory states or that through which the Bayesian inference is mediated.

But yeah, that's my, but I would love to hear more about this from you or others.


SPEAKER_13:
Cool.

If anyone else raises their hand, I would just kind of almost take stock.

There's a few threads happening here.

There's some philosophy of science questions.

What is a principle?

What is a theory?

What is falsification?

All these types of questions were brought up from the more philosophical side of the literature.

And then there's this

little bit related discussion about markov blankets dynamical systems the definition of empirical measurements and how cleanly we sort them into these different types of natural kinds if we want to use the philosophical word or maybe just a functional whole to be less essentialist about it there's a few different threads happening here so it's just

good to keep track of these pieces.

Steven, I saw your hand raised, or anyone else?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, hi, thanks.

I suppose one thing that I've been quite interested in is dimensionality, in the sense that entropy is a dimensionless sort of property.

So you get this interesting question that the free energy principle

in a way is mostly dimensionless or it's like some sort of trend.

And then when that comes into active influence, it doesn't get fully dimensionalized.

It's like lots of different active influence processes.

Each one can contribute

to dimensionality is like multi sort of threads but the actual signal unlike when you mentioned like say in cybernetics where you have something that is guiding you the signal itself doesn't have you know as we say the signal doesn't contain per se the data particularly the entropic noise it's through inference of the dynamics

within the noise, that the generative model can sort of then process that.

And so it sort of raises this question about, you know, when things go from one level to another in an active in these states, is that transference between states also dimensionless in that sense?

Where do dimensions start to come in as we go up the blankets or maybe as things get aggregated?


SPEAKER_13:
interesting question and that reminds me of some other questions that have been raised about the dimensionality of active inference like is each sensory modality enshrouded in its own blanket or is it sort of a tuple that gets passed across a single organismal blanket that represents multiple sensory uh possibilities um so interesting questions anyone else want to raise their hand or we can just start to slowly walk through the paper

and just any thoughts that people have we'll raise them so we checked out the abstract in the dot zero video here's the road map so this is a pretty thorough road map because we can see a lot of the sections and a lot of the terms that come into play so mel

I have a question.

What was your intention with writing it?

You said that you wanted to clarify it and learn as well.

How did that translate into this structure?

And then maybe where are you headed off this roadmap?

This was one journey.

What is your next journey?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so a friend brought my attention to the free energy principle.

And I think fall of 26,

17, which would have been like my penultimate semester in undergrad.

And I was taking a course on like mathematical psychology.

So if you, one of my references is right.

So the reference to this normative model, this normative versus descriptive process versus right.

That's that, that reference is our Duncan Luce, which is he's, he's one of the primary figures in math.

Like,

So a lot of cognitive science, you know, has, has subsumed math psych, but, but the idea of, of like having these formal mathematical models of, um, of cognition.

So that's, that's what I was enmeshed in.

So, so I, I was, uh, that's what I was thinking about most at that time.

So I was like, Oh, a new, you know, a new mathematical model of psychology.

Perfect.

Um, and I, I, I was very skeptical at first and I dove in and I, um, it,

It brought me under.

There's a lot there.

And I really struggled.

So at first, I really wanted to do that too.

It was immediately apparent to me that there's this big, complicated thing that very few people understand.

And there's a lot of widespread misunderstanding of what it is and what it's doing.

So I tried to do that at first.

And I came up with a little dossier on the basics of the SEP in some of the early formulations as an undergrad.

Um, and I put that up and, but it, it, it didn't solve kind of a lot of the bigger, uh, I guess like philosophy of science questions about what it is and what it's doing.

Um, so I, this is like a second stab at that.

And, and from here, um, I, I, so I was thinking of the APP one, one way it helped me to think about it is, is as a model.

And I don't, I guess I don't view models as strict natural kinds or like strict scientific kinds.

I don't think that there's like a list of necessary and sufficient conditions for being a model or like an essence to being a model.

And the FEP is either, you know, definitively a model or not.

I think it's helped me quite a lot

to think of the FEP as a model.

It's reduced my prediction error, if you will, to think of it as a very abstract, formal, generic, targetless model.

But I think in a lot of ways, thinking of it as a modeling language or a modeling framework is also really fruitful.

I think that's important.

There's not a philosophy of science literature on modeling frameworks or modeling languages, but I think that's

it's probably more of a modeling framework or modeling language than it is a model per se.

Um, and, and next, so I'm, I'm next, I'm going to try to work on a paper with, um, with it in a, um, um, kind of exploring what it is to be a principle, right?

Like what's the principle.

Cause there, there isn't a philosophical run on principles really.

Right.

What is the principle?

Um, that's next.

I also, um,

there's been a lot of comparison of the FEP to natural selection, to Darwin's theory of natural selection.

And when you ask people about that, and this is sort of the core like pro FEP camp, the core like we're working on the FEP camp, often draws that comparison.

And I think that this, so what they mean to be doing there is saying, well, it's not directly falsifiable.

To Alex's point, I think everything is sort of falsifiable.

Everything in science is falsifiable in so much as if it doesn't get traction, it falls out of use.

If it's not useful, then we don't use it, right?

And then it ceases to be kind of part of our collective consciousness as researchers.

And I think that if the FET fails to be useful, you know, it falls by the wayside.

It's confined to dustbins of history.

So there is that in that sense, I think there definitely is that kind of like confirmation holism there, right?

If it fails to produce useful lower order theories, then it falls out of use.

So I think that in trying to draw a comparison between natural selection and the free energy principle, people want to say, well, the FEP like natural selection is not directly falsifiable.

in the way that natural selection isn't directly falsifiable.

And it's also supremely useful.

It has this widespread kind of both empirical use and grand explanatory power.

And I think that this is sort of ultimately conflating multiple notions of natural selection.

So multiple kind of discrete formulations of natural selection.

one of these due to Popper and one of these, one of them sort of due to, to Darwin.

And then it gets formulated in like Lewinson and Guthrie Smith and stuff like that.

And one of them that's basically due to Popper, which Popper later kind of recants as a, as a mistake.

So I want to do that.

And I, I also think there's kind of a meta narrative there.

To me, cause I've been working on models and, um,

reification in models.

So when we, what's happening with the FTP, we can think of as reification, conceptual reification or pernicious reification where you get confusing the map for the territory, basically.


SPEAKER_13:
Perfect.

Thanks for that response and also welcome Scott.

We will go to Alex Kiefer, then Marco, then Tim.


SPEAKER_09:
Okay.

So I guess there are a number of things that I want to say.

So as far as, okay, right.

So I think what Mel just brought up reminded me that there's a,

There's one way of... I guess I've discussed this with Mel and others, so apologies if this isn't in the paper.

I'm not quite sure.

I need to look at it again.

But basically, one way in which this thing could fail to be falsifiable is if it's not so much a claim as like an approach or like a...

a sort of stance that leads you to make certain claims.

So like, so to put that in a, if you wanted to put a negative light on that, you could say it's a moving target, but I don't mean to disparage the FEP at all.

I think, I think, you know, one thing that's going on here is that Carl Friston is a fairly creative scientist, obviously sort of trying to do something new.

And so he's, you know, this, this is a framework.

Mel mentioned thinking of this as a modeling language.

It's a framework that's still under construction to some extent.

And,

So you could say, well, it's not falsifiable because it's not a particular mathematical description.

It's a generator of descriptions like that.

So I'll stop there for now.


SPEAKER_13:
Yep.

And just to draw out one quick thought there, it's the principle has been metaphor.

The metaphor is between the principle and the language.

So could anyone falsify English?

Could anyone falsify the idea of English grammar?

Or is English a moving target?

Is it something that can't be falsified?

But you can make claims under the umbrella or using the English grammar approach that the claim could be useful or not, or it could be useful for one person or not for another person.

So once you get into the specific process theories, the specific claims, then you're talking empirical data, or you're talking about the perspective of individual researchers.

But then when you pull back to the principle level, and Mel, it sounds really interesting about the work on fleshing out what a principle is, it's a little bit more like you can't falsify Python, but there's programs that don't work.

Okay, so Marco, Tim, and then Dave.


SPEAKER_14:
Thanks.

So first of all, I apologize in advance to the philosophers, because I'm going to consciously tread into pragmatism.

So again, I'm not a philosopher, but I'm kind of interested in the angle of pragmatism on these matters.

So reiterating, again, the theme of seeing the fringe principle and active inference as more of a language and a framework,

we also, I think, obtain an interesting maybe mode of falsification that actually Mel just gave us, which is if a certain approach or framework or system of doing science is selected by the niche that is a scientific enterprise, then that is maybe an interesting form, well, the opposite of falsification, right?

So if it doesn't get adopted, then that maybe is a kind of falsification.

But then an interesting implication here is

following the popularity and the strange popularity, I must add, of FEP in so many different circles is, I think, a sign that the scientists or the researchers who have utilized it have experienced an embodied signal of usefulness.

And then following that comes a question of, OK, then where does it come from?

And then for me, what's really, really interesting is then the FEP is the perfect kind of approach to answering or approaching that question.

So upon adopting or upon being exposed, internalizing the FEP and active inference, what changes within?

So now we get also two kinds of approaches to language, not just you can communicate with other people, but also how do the different models you embody communicate with each other?

So the unifying capacity of friendship principle is not just in the abstraction, in the papers, but also for people themselves, at least for me and anecdotally also others.

That is, I think, one of the more unique aspects of active influence.

It really evokes the sense of unification.

It allows you to use a single framework and lens for a variety of phenomena and theories.

And to me, that is maybe the biggest argument for it being scientific, for the merits it evokes our genders in scientific enterprises, including their constituents, such as people and researchers.

So yeah, so we would love to hear more from you, especially philosophers on pragmatist perspectives with this.

Sorry, I've been binging a bit of Hassock Chang recently, so maybe that's why I'm asking this.


SPEAKER_13:
Thank you, Marco.

Tim, then Dave, then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_02:
uh that did you say pragmatist just now yes that was pragmatism yeah good segue to what i wanted to mention i guess because i was when you mentioned reification that resonated with thoughts as i read the paper about um whitehead's fallacy of misplaced concreteness you know the idea that this this this knot in the process is that exists that's being revealed

um is actually a process and the things that we see in the objects of the world are really just um uh sort of a reification of the processes and you mentioned natural selection that was another thing that came up but not in the way i don't think you were mentioning it now the way i thought of it in the reading the paper was basically the objects as we call them are simply uh processes that we can take a perspective on that survived

know they're there because they survived they stayed they became they sustained themselves as you like to call it you know self-organized and all that right um yeah so anyway interesting thanks yeah thanks for tying that dave and then alex keifer yeah mel uh you don't seem to give the exact title of the 1995 loose paper


SPEAKER_12:
Which was that?

I've got his 95 book, but he doesn't seem to have, is it just the introduction to that, the Tarot Indo collection?


SPEAKER_13:
Mel, you're muted, but look it up and then post it in the YouTube chat or comments, not the Jitsi chat because it will make a noise.

So post it on the YouTube and then anybody who wants to post any of these papers they're mentioning, really the place to do it is the YouTube comments or send it to me and I'll put it in the YouTube video description so that everybody can access it.

Alex Kiefer, then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, I guess I was just going to create some more problems for a simple discussion here.

Okay, so privatisms on the table and ratification.

So I guess for similar Kuan Yin type reasons, I'm not sure how to think about these things.

I think what Tim brought up about perception

forgive me if I get it wrong, but perception being something like a reification of an ongoing process, I think is a really good point.

So like, I mean, there's a sense in which I'm a fan of reification because it's like, yeah, maybe that's just what we're doing when we, you know, we take some, we have a language, maybe it's an internal neural language or something, or maybe it's an external one and we take it to be about the world and that's our lens on the world.

So without reification in some sense, I don't know how we,

we would have any kind of perception of things, but I'm sure that there's a way to distinguish bad kinds of ratification from good kinds.

And I was going to say something else, but I completely forget.


SPEAKER_13:
Yeah, good point.

It's kind of like stability and plasticity.

Remember those two top-level descriptors of the cybernetic paper that we heard from in the last couple of weeks?

And it's kind of like they're not intrinsically good or bad because you could be too plastic or too stable and succeed or not.

And then...

Beyond whether something exists or not, humans have this kind of second layer where it's like, oh yeah, that exists, but I don't like it.

So it's perpetuating itself, but then we just don't prefer it.

And so that's just our agents level perspective.

And so it's not just enough to be reified.

There's something else happening there.

So Marco, then Sarah.


SPEAKER_14:
Yeah, I would build on Alex's great point.

So one of my favorite notions is Wittgensteinian ladders.

Or in Buddhism, they also talk about the simile of the rat.

And I think this is really what it's about, right?

So we're kind of, like Alex said, we're kind of stuck with reification.

That's just part and parcel of how we engage with the world.

Because the alternative was believing in nothing, and then if you literally believe nothing, then how the hell are you going to engage with the world, right?

So all you can do is have as good as possible reification or the least worst reifications.

And again, for me, this is this processualist kind of approach, or at least perspective, that we are just engaging in finding better reifications.

such that that particular verification or such that that particular embodiment or incorporation of a model leads to better generative dynamics and then to better active inference, to use active inference as the framework here.

Yeah, so yeah, that's it.

Cool.

Sarah, then Mel.


SPEAKER_03:
I don't know.

This is possibly going to be an embarrassing moment for me, but I feel like that's my job.

I don't really understand, like, as I was kind of stepping through FEP, the math of it, there's a point where I'm like, eh, it seems like Bayesianism has got some, like, it doesn't seem like even it, the foundations of what FEP is, or a lot of things, are based on, I mean...

this idea of belief and criers and that something, you know something is absolutely true.

I guess I just wonder, Mel, if you ran up against that or like if there's a deeper background that I'm probably not aware of in philosophy about the limits of Bayesianism or these kinds of models.

So that's, I don't know, it's really a vague question, but it's the best I could do.


SPEAKER_05:
No, that's an excellent question.

Oh, sorry.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, it is a great question.


SPEAKER_13:
Go ahead.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, it's an excellent question.

So there's a, yeah, I think when I was first grappling with Bayesianism, there's a way in which, there's sort of like a Laplacian demon smuggled in.

Like there's a view from nowhere smuggled in.

There's a perfect knower smuggled in.

And that would be the case

for the FEP, but we've worked out a way for it to be just a cognizer that's like self-supervising, right?

Its knowledge is limited.

Its access to the true world out there is intrinsically limited.

And yet it's able to self-correct and self-supervise.

And if you want, I think sort of the best recent explanation of why this is the case and how it's able to do that is Jakob Hooy's paper, and I want to say it's in PESA, and I want to say it's something self-supervision.

I guess I have to drop this link as well.

Let me go do that.


SPEAKER_13:
Cool.

Yeah, that's what's so fun is the discussion.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I would love it.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_13:
Yeah, the discussion.

We raise so many fun links and so many connections, and then we just make sure to post them so that everybody can asynchronously or synchronously be in the game.

So Marco, then anyone else?

No raised hand.


SPEAKER_14:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_13:
Oh, go ahead.


SPEAKER_14:
Oh, yeah, sorry.

I was going to say, oh, yeah, no, I really love that.

But I want to propose saying instead of a perfect knower, because Laplacianism knows everything.

But for me, Bayesianism is really more about if you would have to make an analogy, it's a perfect pragmatic learner.

So in essence, the Norfolk principle kind of by design says this is the perfect way of knowing if you also add on a lot of assumptions for a particular agent.

But, yeah, I guess a bit half-jokingly, you could say it's a Fristian's demon.

You know, the perfect chromatic learner.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I just ran up against this.

Just in my everyday life, I contradict myself in so many ways I can't even keep track.

You know, like one part of me thinks this, the other part thinks that, and they're literally... And so, yeah, I just started realizing my own limitations with respect to knowledge and how knowledge would even be modeled.


SPEAKER_14:
but that's part of the design.

I think that's something I often like to point out is it's not about having no conflicts.

It's more about given that conflicts will arise, how to best cope with them.

So the adaptive engagements with the world is also reflexive.

So your own struggles, your own challenges, your own seeming contradictions are also opportunities to grow.

And that's again, only possible with this, uh, demon that, that, that, uh,

is pragmatically learning all the time.


SPEAKER_13:
So hopefully that's a bit more optimistic.

Yeah, I'm curious about this perfect demon because I would say that a Bayesian updating agent could make an update that helps it survive in its niche or not.

It could overlearn or underlearn and just simply fail to exist in the future.

And so natural selection, again, is the hand that just sweeps off the table the Bayesian learners that aren't existing.

And I would challenge, you know, there's many thoughts on Bayesianism and a lot of debates, but alternative being what?

frequentism or some other vaguely unspecified mathematical framework that somebody doesn't want to put a name on to.

And so I think it's an interesting question.

How does mathematics and how do formalisms come into play with philosophy at all?

What would any equation have to say about philosophy?

But then once you're in that world of trying to make models that have some element of formalism,

whether it's natural language or whether it's another language, then I think you start wandering over towards the idea of a learning or updating agent and not needing to take the baggage that it's a perfect learning agent, just that it is an adaptive agent of some kind.

Sarah, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, this gets, for me though, this gets into a kind of a, I don't know the clever philosophy word, but this is also why I asked the question in a prior week about the Markov blanket, because it's like,

I picture like a monster truck rally where two FEP models are battling it out basically in my own brain or whatever.

And so it's like, where is the, so in that paradigm where you have these kinds of objectifications, you know, of one FEP with another FEP, like where are the, then you have questions around like the boundary between the two.

And there's this kind of a, there's a thingness about all of this that kind of gets me in like an infinite regress

So that's, yeah.


SPEAKER_13:
Fun.

Alex Kiefer, then anyone else.


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, so, I mean, I think this issue we're talking about now is really interesting.

Yeah, I was wondering recently whether Bayesianism is a prior and what that does when you start thinking about it.

I think this is totally relevant to the overall theme of the paper because, well, of course it is, but I mean, it's directly relevant because we're talking about things that get to be so general, theories or frameworks or whatever that are so general that

they start to raise these really weird questions.

But one thing I was going to say is just that, like, I think maybe this is implicit or explicit in what people said already, but, like, the fact that we're dealing with variational inference, well, okay, first of all, Bayesianism, even if it's Bayes' theorem itself is supposed to, like, descend from God or whatever, it's, like, actually building subjectivity into science more explicitly than the alternatives.

I think people mentioned contrasting it to frequentism.

But then we're taking a further step

away from objectivity and saying, yeah, and each creature sort of learns its own approximation to that.

So I don't think you can eliminate claims to objectivity entirely.

And so maybe this is the best we can do, or at least a step in the right direction.


SPEAKER_13:
Very interesting point.

Marco, then anyone else.

Marco, then Mel.


SPEAKER_14:
I fully agree.

So objectivity can be eradicated.

And I think that's kind of the beauty of how, like Alex said, this act of inference stuff is taking the rejection of pure objectivity even further.

It's really approaching or making at least the building the foundations for an objective science of subjectivity.

Right.

And to add to touch back on the

half-jokey idea of the Pistonian demon.

Like Alex said, they create their own particular approximations.

They have to have first instantiated particular priors.

But more importantly, you also noted on, Sarah, you also noted on infinite regress.

So that's another beauty for me.

there's no problem of infinite regress because traditionally with homunculi and stuff and controllers or agents or will there's this yeah but what is controlling that and there's this movement towards smaller and smaller but that's not the case with this scenario because the dependency is not like a vehicle dependent on the driver but it's more system dependent on each other and i think that's kind of the beauty uh where the agents in the perfect dina scenario

It would be more like minimal dependence on the agent's faultiness and more about how well the niche of the context prepares that agent for the niches to be encountered in their life.

And for those with a penchant for Buddhism, it's also very beautiful how it relates to this idea of the mutually arising or co-origination.

It's just, in essence, like Alex said,

It's about subjectivity, the codependency of how densities or how states or, yeah, I like densities, how densities kind of adapt to each other.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_13:
Awesome.

Mel, then Tim, then anyone else.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so I sort of want to, I guess I want to push Marco maybe to bring up a question he raised when you were giving us the sort of like

written down in this paper, which I thought, when he raised that, I was like, wow, that's a really difficult question that I can't answer.

So I think that would push a very interesting discussion, if only because it's a question that I don't know how to answer.

And it's a question of, it was something about, well, aren't physical descriptions

just kind of formal descriptions at some level anyway.

So, Marco, you raised the question, do you remember, do you know what I'm talking about?

No?

Well, you raised a question about this line that I drew between a mere, you know, mathematical, formal, statistical description

of something at a physical description proper.

And you sort of challenged that such a line exists, which is Fristin's line.

But somehow, I love Carl, but somehow the way he has always raised that, it feels to me like a cop-out.

It feels to me like some sort of evasion.

But when you pushed me on that, I was like, you know,

Yeah, you're right.

Maybe there isn't a hard line between... And this sees into Alex's question as well.

It's all continuous, this question of like, well, you know, is math natural?

Like, is math an arbitrary, formal system?

where we've invented all the rules and it, it, it just has nothing to do with, you know, contingent nature or, or is it continuous?

You know, is it, is it just descriptions of nature at a very abstract level?

Um, is there a, is there a hard line between information theory?

Well, you know, going full James, is, is there a, is there a disappearing line between, um, between inference,

techniques between techniques for Bayesian inference as a, you know, just as a statistical technique and thermodynamics, right?

You know, statistical mechanics.

Those are the questions that I'm like, oh man, I can't, I can't,

That seems to me to be the most pressing question behind all of this to me.


SPEAKER_13:
Yes.

Math, invented or discovered.

Thermodynamics, invented or discovered.

FEP, invented or discovered.

Inference overall.

Statistics.

All these kinds of awesome interrelated questions.

Philosophy, invented or discovered.

Tim, Alex Kiefer, then anyone else.


SPEAKER_02:
I was just kind of

the homunculus infinite regress thing versus the dependent arising sort of co-emergence of the agent.

I think that contrast is really something neat that I don't know how to

explore it but they seem like opposite ends of you know two poles of the same kinds of consideration and i feel uh like i'm repping whitehead here today but it also touches on what he talks about when he talks about the bifurcation of nature that he decries right so i mean um uh so

when we talk about taking a perspective and saying that object emerges to my perception, first of all, because it survived as a self-recreating thing over time, you know, that it, you know, and I did too.

We're both in the same, we're both the same thing.

You know what I mean?

Like, it's not like,

I'm apart from the world.

The reason it's in my world is because I'm in its world.

And nature is not bifurcated into the mind and the physical.


SPEAKER_13:
Awesome point, Tim, because we often say in active inference that the organism comes to embody the statistical regularities of its ecological niche.

And so people look out there at the ecology around them and they can say, okay, that's natural.

But then the organism is also natural.

And wouldn't the generative model of its niche be just like its hand, be just another phenotype that's generative and therefore natural as well?

So Alex Kiefer, then Blue, then Marco.


SPEAKER_09:
I might just, I might actually pass for now.

I just wanted to drill down more on this idea of like mathematics, what, you know, pure mathematical formalisms and how they might represent.

But I think there's a lot of interesting stuff on the table right now.

I'd rather hear about it at the moment.

Perfect.

Blue, then Marco.


SPEAKER_04:
So maybe it'll, I'll wrap it back for Alex, because I kind of want to just touch on this dependent arising, right?

Or like the mutual arising, you know, the world exists because it exists in my mind.

And also the idea of whether or not mathematics is natural, right?

Like, is this like something that we invented or something that we discovered?

But I would like to make the argument that really like,

as humans we are also natural right so so if it can be discovered in more than one place at more than one time by more than one human as many strong theories and science are they bubble up together i think that there is some kind of natural arising or naturalness to these kinds of studies thanks blue marco then anyone else


SPEAKER_14:
Thanks.

So I think I know what you meant with my comment, Mel, I think.

But let me allow to push back on myself.

So I think, a priori, we only have just descriptions.

And the only kind of extra qualifiers or properties of these descriptions as such that's relevant and grounded is their etiology or their genealogy.

Where do they come from?

right?

So if we're already talking about descriptions, we already have to be talking about systems that can generate descriptions.

And so I don't think there's a hard line in terms of an essence, right?

That's intrinsic property.

But I think the hard line is more about their path, their genealogy.

How did that description come to be?

And then I think we go back to language again.

And I think

This is thanks to Liam Bright, shout out to him, who introduced me to Carnap.

And Carnap talked about valid physical languages.

And I think that's kind of the beauty, that the FEP is maybe not perfect for every state of affairs or space of affairs.

But I do think it's true that you can transfer a lot of what we now at least see as valid physical descriptions to the language FEP.

But more importantly, to me, the beauty is the generative aspect.

So if you translate something into language of active inference, then you also transfer the generative aspects to it.

So if you transfer them to active inference and then you explore in the space that's generated there and you see a pattern or something, then that hypothesis obtained or derived in that abstract space can be also translated back.

And so it's the validity of that back and forth translational path that I think is more important to the question of is it a physical description.

Is it physically rootable if you have these valid languages?

I don't know if it makes sense.

Small point, very small point.

I've always also taken issue with Carl saying that we embody statistical regularities about the world.

Not that it's not true, but I think it's only a partial view.

For me, what's more relevant is that there are statistical regularities due to the fact that the world is systematic.

And these regularities allow this kind of tethering, right?

So for me, it's more about embodying a bridge with the world.

And what you then get, at least my motivation, is then that leaves a more openness to also give room for the unique aspects of humanity.

As in, humans are weird.

We're like really weird.

I don't know why we're so weird exactly, but we're really weird.

And that weirdness has less to do with statistical regularities and more about what is evoked or generated or cultivated upon embodying these statistical regularities and upon being faced with the challenges of dealing with the world.


SPEAKER_13:
um and so i guess we have statistical regularities of the world and kind of weird irregularities of ourselves uh if that's yes yeah we we swim in those regularities of the niche you know if the fish were just the statistical regularities of water there wouldn't be a fish there so it has to be something

a little bit bigger.

Now, another cool thing is we've been talking about this similarity between the physical ecology and then our social ecology, which is also natural.

So we can think of a physical example of stigmergy, like the ants that are digging out their nest and they're modifying their physical environment, which then changes how their physical behavior is implemented.

But with this conversation and in the literature especially, there's a stigmergy at the level of information, the informational niche, which has different perspectives within it, different agents that have different access to different kinds of information.

And those kinds of communications in the informational niche are natural.

And the generative models that we have are natural as well.

So there's just so many fun ways that we can think about, all right, well, now that we're niche constructing in this info niche,

What kinds of things do we want to put in this construction that we're working on together?

So just like the ant engineer might say, well, we could kind of have a corollary to this tunnel that branches off this way.

Maybe there's something useful over here.

Oh, we falsified that corollary tunnel.

It's not useful.

It retracts.

So in this social world, in this informational world, how do we take that natural perspective and also make it useful for the colony?

Scott, and then anyone else who raised their hand.


SPEAKER_01:
I just wanted to say with regard to the fish, I think some of you heard the example I read research a number of years ago where they took a semi-rigid piece of plastic and put it in a stream.

And then they varied and increased the speed of the stream.

And ultimately, the piece of plastic started undulating with the periodicity that resembled the fish.

And so what they realized is the fish doesn't swim through water.

It actually passes through the water.

So it was really over a deep time, fish are formed by the water.

Now, again, not the entirety of the fish.

It also formed by other relationships with other organisms and media.

But it's similar to the way that insects, bats, and birds independently developed wings because they were flying in the medium of air.

But I think Mel has a point.

Yep, let's go.


SPEAKER_13:
Yeah, we'll go.

Mel, then Shannon, then Marco.


SPEAKER_05:
There's a lovely little video of a dead salmon in a stream, and it's behaving in this way that really seems very lifelike, but dead.

And I think I once posted this with the caption like, is this morphological computation?

And

That made a lot of people, there was, like, people were very up in arms over whether or not that was morphological computation.

The dead fish.


SPEAKER_13:
Interesting question.

And synapses and neurons being physical, what isn't morphological computation under certain perspectives?

Shannon, then Marco, then anyone else.


SPEAKER_10:
That was a brilliant picture of what I'm thinking in my head right now.

To piggyback on what both Mel and Scott just said, the dead salmon or the piece of plastic is passing through the water and you can very clearly see how the environment or the medium that it's in is forming its behavior.

even though it's dead or it's plastic.

And as you get into more weird creatures, creatures with culture, like humans, even fish that interact in groups and communicate with other fish in a cultural way,

then you end up adding different layers of medium.

So you don't just have water, you have now the other fish are in your medium.

They're part of this social organism.

And then with humans, now the other humans are making another social medium that you're interacting in.

So you have more and more in the terminology, like nested levels of environments that you're embodying.


SPEAKER_13:
Thanks for that point, Shannon, Marco, then Scott, then anyone else.


SPEAKER_14:
I'm not sure if it's appreciated, but I'll continue a theme of linking active inference to some spirituality slash Eastern traditions.

So the notion of the Tao, right, which stands for the way, I think it's also, for me, it always evokes this resonance with active inference because there's this emphasis on this, the way the Tao of how the universe works implicitly that is unnameable.

And I think that is also related to this issue of reification earlier, that there is modes, there's systematicity, there's rules to how the world works, but fundamentally it's unnameable.

The moment you name it, it's not the real way.

And this kind of finding the intermediate part, the one of least effort, or as often is described, no effort or way.

um this this too is is exactly uh resonant with that picture of the life the dead fish in the stream um so yeah i think that's just in general there's this theme that i find also very exciting how much activism actually helped me appreciate a lot of philosophies and tradition not just eastern but a lot of

let's say, forgotten wisdoms and forgotten insights from not just religion, and not just spirituality, but also arts, right?

We often see this false dichotomy of arts as something frivolous in science and truth.

But a lot of insights, scientific insights, were actually prefigured by a lot of artists into conceptual form.

And so,

In my experience, active inference, or this general lens or perspective, allows us to really appreciate that which has become too decoupled from our modern, postmodern, over-rational, over-analytic way of engaging with the world.


SPEAKER_13:
Thank you, Marco.

It's almost like, dare I say it, the math is not the territory.

So we'll go to Scott, Blue, Sarah, and then Alex Kiefer.


SPEAKER_01:
So a couple other observations along the lines of what Shannon was alluding to, I think.

Foucault, philosopher Foucault, not the pendulum, he talked about pastoral control, which was the idea that the persona of a person is formed by their external norms and rules and laws and culture that they're exposed to.

So the same kind of thing, like a plastic toy in a metal mold being formed.

So it's that same kind of notion.

And one of the things I think is interesting about active inference for me is that those differentials, what is the motivation for closing differentials?

And the motivation is de-risking and leverage grossly stated, I think.

So the idea is if you have a differential between you and the environment,

You want to protect yourself from the harm from that differential or exploit the opportunities of that differential.

That differential is either temperature differential in the case of a heat engine or an information differential in the case of a von Neumann or Shannon extension of the second law of thermodynamics.

So the same differentials you have in Carnot's equation.

for heat and cold, you need the differentials and information to have market exchange, and I think to have Beijing exchange.

So what's the status of a Beijing process if you have no differentials between the

input in the expectation.

So along those lines, what it seems like is we have these identity stacks.

This is what I think Shannon was alluding to, not Claude Shannon, but our Shannon here.

And both, perhaps.

But that you take these combinations of things in the environment that make you who you are.

We're like bowerbirds.

We collect up these externalities and internalize them for our expectations.

And there's a whole set of them.

And then we go out and identify those that are anomalous for our expectations.

So on another call earlier, there's someone who talked about the difference narrative and story and how your internal narrative and your story is being told.

You have to line up.

Well, to the extent this is a differential that motivates activity of interaction.

And markets have been described as places where you find price discovery and solution discovery at large scales.

So the Bayesian process seems like a way of incrementally identifying the externalities that are anomalous for your expectations and then being able to internalize them is kind of that Bayesian process, I think.

Part of the reason that is so appealing to me is that I've been arguing for a number of years that markets and countries and companies are biological because they're iterations and artifacts of structures of biological beings, which is us.

They happen to take on an abstraction and an informational embodiment.

but they represent those same processes as biological systems in terms of those differentials and trying to render externalities innocuous or exploit externality differences.

Anyway, this is feeling very like there's a strange attractor here, it feels like, that's pulling the conversation in the direction of that generative systems that I define, the last point, I define life as being autocatalytic

entries entropy secreting systems so these autocatalytic they keep going and entropy secreting they get rid of disorder but the problem is that the neighboring system has to absorb that disorder and so how do you manage disorder among systems is again when shannon r shannon not claude shannon was talking about

The different things, the different characteristics, that's the neighbors, good neighbors, when they bang into each other in terms of their creating anomalies for each other's expectations, manage the anomalies instead of just winning over each other.

Anyway, just a couple of things there.


SPEAKER_13:
Thank you, Scott.

Blue, Sarah, Alex, Marco.


SPEAKER_04:
So I'm going to skip over what Scott just said and go back to what Marco had previously said about the connections between active inference and Eastern religion.

So I'm a student of Buddhism for many years, and I've been wondering, do we in fact have free will?

If we're considering karma and also considering active inference, so this is something that I find this parallel.

Like, karmically, we're connected, we've got collective karma with groups, with systems, with, you know, the universe, right, in this philosophy.

So, and then we have our own karma, like our previous actions and, you know, have collectively formed us, right?

And so when we're faced with a choice, like I wonder, do we in fact have free will?

Because all we can really do is like, if we're just the product of our karma, we only have one choice.

Like it's the choice that we're going to make, but obviously that's the only choice that we could have made because of all of our previous karma, right?

So, and in the same way, in active inference, in thinking about active inference as like a computational, from a computational aspect, if this is really representative of,

you know, the brain and how we think and how, you know, we operate and how we make decisions.

So thinking about active inference, there's really only one decision that we could make, right?

Like given the inputs, the sensory inputs, like we have this generative model, like given our model and given the inputs of the system and our selected policy, there's really only one choice that can be made, like as a result of all of this, like collective computation going forward.

Anyway, it's just something I've been thinking about for a while.


SPEAKER_13:
Blue, it's awesome, and I just checked on search engine, Karma as Multiscale Bayesian Prior.

The title is not taken yet, so anybody who wants to write that one, go for it.

Sarah, Alex Keeper, then Marco.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just more random into the mix, I guess.

But, you know, I was reading about, like,

early Babylonian, I don't even know if it was philosophers, but somebody said, oh, those guys weren't scientists because X, Y, Z. And of course, I disagreed.

But I was just thinking about just generally the evolution of science and math.

And there just seems to be this constant bifurcation, bifurcation.

And kind of contrasting this ever more complex ecosystem to the fact that we're

really diminishing our, like we're going through species extinction in the actual material world, but in the model world, we're going through this proliferation.

And that just like totally trips me out.

Like what does it all mean in terms of connecting those two things?

I often think about the informational versus material and mourn the loss of, I mourn the loss of analog, actually.

Like this is a big thing for me and I don't quite know where to go with it, but...

At some point when things became digitized, we really did decouple behavior from material in a way that I think is really significant, but I can't quite get my head around where it matters and where to cut at the joint.

I love that phrase and how to explore that.

So if anybody has advice about that also, but yeah.


SPEAKER_13:
Thanks, Sarah.

It's like Marshall McLuhan's work and other media theorists on the innovation of the written word as one kind of uncoupling.

And you're hinting at even beyond the written word, there's a digital uncoupling and how that influences us.

And especially just you captured it so well, there's a diminishing biological diversity in some ways as we

modify our environments but at the same time at least over historical time periods we're proliferating there's more songs there's more scientific theories there's all these types of things but what happens if we reduce our uncertainty about the biological world till it's just something that can't support that kind of theoretical proliferation alex keeper then marco then scott


SPEAKER_09:
Oh, man.

Really interesting stuff going on here.

So, I mean, I originally raised my hand just because I wanted to explicitly say that I do appreciate Marco's way of connecting this stuff to Buddhism and things like that.

That's something that, like, I hope to write about once I've established myself as a serious philosopher of science type person enough that then I can say things about that and no one will

react badly um because i think it's awesome um but and and this issue you're bringing up now with like we're kind of enriching the model space at the expense of the physical world is really deep and important i don't know what to say about it but it's there um and uh

Yeah.

The thing that I wanted to bring up, I figured since we're all talking nicely and getting along about these big, interesting, large-scale themes, that maybe what we should do is instead argue about some detailed, annoying thing.

So I just wanted to push this idea that... So the reason that I don't see the FEP as innocent of representation is just...

This might be sort of because of my provincial view of what representation is, but I figure if you think of a mathematical model as like a structure, right?

And then we can, sure, you have different windows in that structure depending on like the actual mathematical language you use to write symbols down.

But maybe this presupposes mathematical realism in some sense, but like you've got a structure if you've got any system of equations.

And then on my view, that just represents whatever is isomorphic to that structure.

And it could be like a,

Idealized physical system.

I don't know you could argue about applications and where applications come in But I guess I don't see like how you can escape representation So see what what that does if I say that yep and the Infamous representation wars earlier on active streams Marco then Scott then anyone else who wants to raise their hand Thanks


SPEAKER_14:
I tried to address a lot of points and hopefully it's meaningful.

So I didn't catch everything which you said, Scott, but I fully agree that there's this hugely important issue of dealing with externalities, right?

So I have some issue with saying that we simply throw disorder out in the world.

I think that's maybe a consequence of taking the notion of exuding entropy a bit too oversimplified.

Entropy isn't strictly disordered.

Um, because as it's been noted, it's all about actually almost pretty much yet every information theoretic measure is subjective.

It needs to be relative to something, something often forgotten, but reemphasize invasionism and now also machine learning because they're discovering that it's a huge issue anyways.

So the point is that, that, that, um,

First of all, I want to also let you know that amongst research and active influence is indeed something that's being addressed.

For me, one of the most exciting applications of active influence is kind of a philosophy of society or a philosophy of how we engage with each other in the world and how I like to say it, and Bryce Huber also took that word, I think, of co-regulation.

We regulate each other.

So I wouldn't say that we intrinsically exude disorder in the colloquial sense.

It's more about

the basic notion of active influence.

You know, you perceive something, you do something.

The question is, to what extent is that problematic?

Do the changes that you enact in the world lead to undesirable consequences?

That's the only question, really.

But indeed, we can't really address the question systematically, in my opinion, without a framework such as active influence.

And until then, we will be myopic.

Until then, we will take these externalities for granted and have to wait.

We're at the mercy of our discovery when it becomes too pragmatic, such as what we saw with Industrial Revolution.

Great, great progress in the terms that you care about.

Then way later, you find out the consequences, the catastrophic consequences of externalities at the point then Industrial Revolution ignored.

But, you know, we're working on it.

And a small side point to add to that is having said that our exuding of entropy is not problematic in itself.

It comes also with a re-emphasis on how the entropy we exude are actually really great.

Think of children.

You know, those children are still learning.

They've taken all this stuff they don't understand and they just express so much chaos.

But we love it.

It stimulates us.

It apparently nurtures us.

People get happy when they see children playing.

Partly because, I think, when people are doing this chaotic, weird, messy behavior in the real world, we're able to kind of understand what's behind that.

And I think that's quite a beautiful way to look at it because then you can also see that what may be messy, random behavior for some person might be perceived as something stimulating, nurturing, nourishing.

So there's a nice kind of ecology going on there.

And as for blue, about free will, I hate the notion of free will mostly used in philosophy because it almost always seems like free from determinism.

And I think that's already a trap that you cannot fall into.

Instead, it's more about autonomy.

The behavior that you engage in, the actions that you make, to what extent are they driven by factors that are your own?

Factors that are more internal rather than external.

And then, of course, you would get the problem of, oh, well, we don't have a self, nothing is true internal.

Sure, but, okay, then that is simply because that which is internal is also cultivated as an external.

But that doesn't take away the fact, I think, that we can say when there's a generative process, to what extent is that due to idiosyncratic factors, which I think is beautiful, because a lot of these idiosyncratic factors are cultivated in part through our engagement with other people.

with other cultural artifacts.

And so our cultivation of culture, of narratives, of interactions with each other, our practices, our rituals, these are all participating to cultivate this collective kind of autonomy.

To what extent can we as a collective shape the world, construct the world in a way that's more adaptive to us as an agent on multiple skills?

um so so also i actually don't really like the notion of discrete choices but more a fluid navigation imagine you have a conscious you have a conscious being space that which is conscious you're more fluidly navigating um the density and it expresses itself maybe as a choice but i think that too is the real kind of verification we talked about earlier um

so yeah not to go too long on that um yeah and also really like the notion of uh this uncoupling so for me with the danger is kind of uh to use a word used earlier um there's this body catalytic power to some uh narrative to some practices which shifts uh the the fitness of these practices to a more overly pragmatic mode of behavior

One other way I want to describe this is basically a lot of our digital technologies create a training set that is too decoupled from the actual test set that we will encounter in the world.

What you're seeing in the kind of rise of, some people might know the notion of meat space and service space.

When you live in a service space, you're being attuned to a world that isn't conforming to the meat space.

And I think exactly that is a danger.

And I fully agree with that, even though I'm very much an intern denizen.

I do think that this is a problem that hasn't been fully addressed, is dangerous.

And the fact that we can't, with all the smart people here, that we can't formulate it properly or characterize it properly is another indication that this deserves more attention.

Yeah, so thanks for all the stimulating thoughts.


SPEAKER_13:
Scott, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_01:
So a small fun point and then a big fun point.

So the small fun point is, Marco, you're talking about children throwing off wildness and entropy, and that's recreational disorder, right?

Because you know that there's a thing there.

There's two points on that one.

One, hot sauce is another one of those, right?

Because it's uncomfortable, but people like it, right?

And so on that, there's actually a physical, there was an article in Nature, this is a small fun point, an article in Nature magazine that in your senses of taste, there are five senses, right?

There's actually two channels, good and bad.

The good channel is sweet, which is carbohydrates, and umami, which is proteins.

The bad channel is bitter and sour, which are poisons, typically, and unripe fruit.

And so salt doesn't have its own channel.

Salt goes from the good channel until a level of blood salinity and then switches to the bad channel.

So the reason for mentioning that is in food, you use bitter and sour as highlights, as recreational disorder.

Right.

And so they're in there because they're not indicative usually of consumables in nature.

So that was just an interesting sidelight on that.

It's similar to this notion in the dentist.

There's this research now that if you have a very painful dental procedure, you should actually finish up the procedure with a little extra pain, but not but a soreness type pain, not a difficult pain, because the mind remembers the last pain experienced.

So the article said, do you want a little pain with that?

And the idea was extra irritant.

And the ADA said they can't, because of the do no harm, they can't administer extra pain as a matter of policy.

But the idea was to hijack the sensation, the memory of the bad experience with the lesser pain, which is kind of interesting.

So those are the small fun points.

Let me get to the bigger point, which I think goes back to what Sarah was alluding to.

So this is that idea of symbolic and physical beings.

And this is something I've been playing with for a little while.

It takes a short period to describe.

And so let me try that.

So what if?

Put aside all your notions of causation for a minute.

I'm going to go back to something that Seth Lloyd raised for me, a guy at MIT who wrote Programming the Universe.

And he asserted in his book that all interactions since the Big Bang have increased exponentially, all interactions in the universe.

Okay.

So two, two particles hit each other.

Then they hit four particles at 16 particles, whatever.

And then that iterates out to us.

Okay.

So Moore's law, you have this exponential increase in transistor density on chips that has led the fifth order effect of that to an exponential increase in human interactions.

OK, because the chips are more ubiquitous, they can digitize more interactions.

We're having this discussion now was not possible before.

OK, so the more interactions are happening exponentially.

Let's go with that for a second.

Suspend disbelief and just imagine that all interactions are increasing exponentially.

What happened with humans is physical space did not offer enough vectors of engagement to contain interactions increasing exponentially, and so we had to go to symbolic space.

So there were a couple of other, I'll get back to that in a second.

So think of clonal reproduction versus sexual reproduction.

Clonal reproduction, you resemble your parents.

And for niche space, and again, this is not intelligent design, but stay with me.

For niche space, clones are not sufficiently varied so that if the niche space is changing rapidly, the clones won't have as much survivability.

Mutation, random mutations can introduce that noise that can allow the accommodation of

change in physical space.

I think what's happening with humans is that we are becoming information beings increasingly.

And I say that to people and they're like, yeah, yeah, yeah.

And then I say, hey, you know that 401k that you have?

If anybody has any retirement savings, the

I say to them, do you think that's a pile of groceries or or a house waiting for you to retire?

That is data.

That is nothing.

The system goes.

You've got nothing.

It's totally symbolic.

So one of the if and to the extent that interactions have and their artifacts are increasing exponentially throughout time, throughout deep time.

It was inevitable that we move to information space because the phase space available for solutions to our problems was insufficient in physical space.

We needed more dimensionality in order to address things.

And that's what language does for us.

It opens up dimensions.

It opens up abstractions.

It opens up things called war.

It opens up things called stock markets.

It opens up things called insurance, law, governance.

all these things that allow for us to be human, and the thing that separates us from other organisms to some extent is that language is where the mind exists, because that's the symbolic element of who we've become as information beings.

There's a lot there, but I think one of the things I've been playing with, just trying to understand what this might be, is what does it mean to be converted increasingly to information beings,

And not when I still have a physical presence, but this came up first, and last point here, this came up first in the identity work I did years ago, when people were saying, oh, you can't control me on the internet.

I said, sure you can.

A government, a sovereign, can put you to death.

They have the monopoly of legitimized violence, or they can silence you, which we've seen happen now.

And so the physical body, if I die right now while I'm talking, which some people might like with this long thing I'm saying here,

If I died right now, immediately my legal agency to do things on the internet would change.

And it's an entanglement.

It's almost like a quantum entanglement because it would happen instantaneously.

I cannot have agency if I'm dead.

So anything pre-programmed in my...

this is in my symbolic self could keep running but the physical world then doesn't respect you as having the uh... it will anymore so there is an entanglement so as long as governments continue to control the physical body and have them adopt not believe legitimated violence they can control the digital body because putting you to death


SPEAKER_13:
de-animates the it in um in the uh digital body thank you scott and we have uh dave then sarah then steven and we'll steer it back to the paper and also get towards the last thoughts that each person wants to share so again dave sarah steven and then anyone else okay the um


SPEAKER_12:
When the kids make a lot of chaos, you look at especially one-on-one games that kids do, they are largely dominance games.

One kid is going to tend to monopolize being the dominant figure, the cowboy, the sheriff, for a while, and then switch back.

Now, if they hang with that role for more than about 60% of the time, eventually it gets actually almost sadistic.

And it becomes too aggressive.

The little things get out of hand.

The dominated kid cries, runs off.

The smart mommy just kind of gives a little pat and lets the kids go on their way.

The overprotective mom, though, almost takes over the bullying and makes it a terrible thing, which means the kids can't go back and achieve restoration.

So when the child who has been paranoid doesn't have the reassurance that, oh, well, okay, the world does eventually become okay, and the kid who's been in the sadistic infantile mode doesn't get the reassurance, well, even if I was evil mommy for a while, I'm not evil mommy anymore.

Now I'm good mommy.

So another reason to let your kids whack on each other and get dirty.


SPEAKER_13:
Okay, thank you.

Sarah, Stephen, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, Scott's comment kind of reminded me of what I...

what I unconsciously was bridging with respect to information.

Scott said something verbatim, I don't remember, but basically something about language.

And for me, languages, as with ecosystems, as with species extinction, like languages are going extinct.

And so languages are a really interesting bridge to this information space.

And it seems that that fact of languages going extinct seems to contradict something you said, Scott.

But again, because this is, I feel like, Mel's show, I want Mel to hook this into whatever she's working on, if that makes sense for her.


SPEAKER_13:
Stephen, Tim, then Mel, or anyone else?

Stephen, muted?


SPEAKER_08:
All right.

Sorry, sorry.

I was just trying to...

I was looking for a paper that I was trying to find on something, but it's OK.

So what I was going to say is that there's a lot of stuff coming up here.

And one thing I like about this paper is it sort of starts from the free energy principle and sort of really

pays attention to that and the active inference.

And I think that there is something important because we get into these conversations about information and stuff.

It's like the free energy principle is a colliery for active inference at these stages and different scales.

And then once that scaling is happening, there's also a free energy principle

that sort of scales up anyway, the natural nature of how these societies try to work with these models.

And there's a paper that was, I think, in the Physics Review of Life, and I'm trying to find it, but it sort of talks about how we naturally try and reduce

free energy over time and I think this is particularly what's happened since capitalism in the last 500 years or 200 years particularly we want to reduce or there's a tendency in different ways to try and reduce the amount of free energy out there and we can do it more and more because we can construct

And our focus is constructing these larger-scale societies, social networks, ecosystems, as super-organismal, as Mel talks about it.

And we're sort of constructing this niche to such an extent that we just take that for granted.

And these perspectives on things and the rarefication is almost...

de facto but there's also probably more tradition in history and it's probably also true if you think like what do you do when you're out in the middle of the ocean you can't control the ocean so now you have to try and adapt whatever the winds are doing based on what you've got so this

So that sort of comes back to that idea of the organism like as an active influence process to try and minimize free energy and just to stay attuned and alive in a niche.

is something that the sort of very foundational understanding from physics and chemistry sort of still alludes to.

And then we have this higher, this ability to construct through action, and this is where we can start to feel that these actions that we do, like we're talking about that we are information,

This is the danger of the verification of information because we, at some extent, because we've built on top of things, yeah, we kind of construct things in our niche, which makes it, and it is kind of an informational hole in our niche, but we're still a being that has to dynamically engage with that niche and that information doesn't travel

Unlike in traditional inactivism, that information doesn't come in as like, that's a tree.

It comes in again in amongst all this noisy statistical variations, and we infer from that.

So there's this question about that danger that information starts to get rarefied and becomes seen as something being transmitted down the channel.

But that's only something that effectively emerges

once some processing is done so i think i think you know that's that's what came up for me


SPEAKER_13:
Thank you, Stephen.

So in our last couple of minutes, we will go to Tim, Marco, and then anyone else.

So let's just keep it brief and summary.

And remember that next week in 14.2, we're going to be on the same paper.

So no need to cram it in in the last minute, maybe raise some questions or ask somebody about their perspective so that we can mull on it in the next week and then come back next week with the links ready and with the ideas ready, with the questions ready and read the paper another time.

So Tim, Marco, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, just briefly, the child's play, maybe it's obvious and it's like what everybody already knows about things, but it struck me when you were talking about it, that that's kind of like active inference on hyperdrive, right?

Because the child's play is this

generating these fanciful hypotheses, like imagination is just going.

And then that puts them in a position to interact with the world and maximize surprise as they run all over the place and trip over things.

So it's like it's learning on hyperdrive.

And then the only other thing I want to say is wrapping up was, as I was going through and reading the paper and all those attempts to answer the question, what is the free energy principle in terms of the category?

There was one kind of startling reductive idea that came to mind.

It seemed really silly, but I'll throw it out there.

Could it just be like an idealization, like frictionless?

You know, because it's compared to the...

principle of least action right but but if you look at the actual free energy principle through the layers of statistical mechanics like all those layers going into that kind of translation the free energy principle almost just seems like since we can't really see all that through all that cloudiness of statistical and probability and such and it seems like just an idealization

a way to say, we can do something with this, even though it's this distant thing that's gone through this probability machine, but we can do things with it because we have this idealization that we call the free energy principle.

So it's just another option for what it is thing.

Maybe it's silly, I don't know.


SPEAKER_13:
Yep, Mel, then Marco.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so interestingly, we've had, in philosophy of science, we've had theories of how science works for a long time, and we've gone through

many kinds of popular accounts, kind of mainstream accounts of how science works.

And these can traditionally emphasize theories and accuracy, right?

You want an accurate, true representation of what's going on in nature, right?

But, and falsification, this sort of thing.

The kind of en vogue view right now, the idea du jour is really in a lot of ways focusing on models, focusing on idealization, focusing on pluralism.

There are a lot of great books on this.

Michael Weisberg's Simulation and Similarity, fantastic book.

Great introduction to models.

some of the debates and models.

Steven Downs has new like tiny little just introduction that just gives you a breakdown of all the literature and models.

And Angela Potocznik in my department has a fantastic book called Idealization and the Aims of Science.

And then I, so what was funny to me is like, I wrote this paper, I wrote this paper and then the math is not the territory.

And then a few weeks later, someone,

a professor in my department, in fact, in my department, announced that they were running a course for the spring term on this new book by Ralph Winter called When Maps Become the World, which is actually a fantastic book.

I'm really enjoying this book.

And it's touching on all of these things that you guys have been talking about, like, kind of different modes of representing and do these things represent or not, and how...

the kind of feedback between our maps of the world and like cultural differences and how we represent things and where the world is going.

These kinds of kind of big picture questions.

And it's a really lovely read.

The idea with models, right, is that what they do is chiefly idealized, right?

If you look at like the WMFAT,

the one side account of what's going on in modeling, right?

The idea is that it's not meant to be a maximally accurate depiction of some natural system or some natural process.

It's not its fidelity to the world that makes the model useful.

But in fact, it's the idealization.

It's what gets coarse-grained, black box away.

you know, it's about finding, it's about latching on to some kind of key feature of the system of interest.

And that's always mediated by kind of what our questions are as researchers, what our interests are in these natural systems of research.

So it's kind of value-laden in a way.

And it's discarding the rest.

It's discarding the information that is inessential to the question at hand.

So idealization is

at the core of what a model is.


SPEAKER_13:
Awesome response.

So any very rapid final words?

This is the true lightning round.

Marco, Scott, Alex Kiefer.


SPEAKER_14:
Oh dear, I'm not good at lightning rounds.

Okay, very brief.

So I agree about the importance of a notion of friction, but I do think it's already, you get it for free, like colleagues say.

You get it for free with active infants, I think, because you have two situations where I think you will get friction.

One is pathologically stuck when you're overly rigid because there's no alternatives of sufficient credence.

The base factor is too high, so you can't move out of it.

So instead of saying there's a presence of friction, it's more like there's an absence of lubricants or something or an absence of a passive.

And the other side, if you have too many possibilities, your base factor can't get too high because everything's kind of similar.

So you get stuck in that.

And I think for me, those are two forms of friction slash inertia.

I just very briefly want to wrap up that big theme of how we scaffold all these things upon society, with these abstractions, and the many, many dangers that lie there, where indeed you would have, I think, an autocatalytic pitfall of trying to cope with the complexity of the world, but falling into heuristics.

And when these heuristics are used to minimize your experience consequences of excessive free energy and then adopt that heuristic, then it will spread in this kind of self-selecting manner, as in the people exposed to these notions, such as, for example, QAnon conspiracies, they heuristically connect everything together.

And so you seemingly experience coherence as long as you don't stick too far or commit to proper aesthetic virtues.

um and and indeed this will become worse and worse unless we have an alternative a better ground at least in my opinion um and i do want to push back a little bit on this uh

mostly true claim that models are just idealization.

But I think what's really, really interesting is not just models as presented in papers, models as defined in maths, but take into account the human enterprise that is science.

Because everyone has to adopt this model, not just program it in some code.

Way more interesting is what happens when you adopt or incorporate or internalize an idealized model.

And for me, that's the expressiveness factor.

Upon incorporating it, you will de-idealize it.

You will fill it up.

You will make it your own particular.

And that expressiveness, in my opinion, is what makes it interesting and what Mel has really laid the groundwork for, in my opinion.

I wish we could have talked more about the paper.


SPEAKER_13:
Thanks, Marco.

Again, it's dot two.

It's not about answering every question in the dot one or even the dot two.

It's about staying excited, about including as many people in the conversation, hearing from everybody's perspective.

If you're curious and listening, joining the Keybase, actinflab.public is a great way to get engaged with action, not just inference.

So again, single kind of closing thoughts, but less

personal review paper, my Ted talk, but more, what are we going to move forward to into 14.2?

Not that anyone did that.

Scott, Alex Kiefer, Steven Sleip.


SPEAKER_01:
The painter Kandinsky said that violent societies yield abstract art.

And one of the things I always wondered is, is the reverse also true?

Is abstraction a form of violence?

and so that's something i i posit to you that 2008 financial break was abstraction of mortgage instruments that caused a violence of people who were kicked out of their homes the math so the math of the mortgage was not the territory of the lived experience and the need for housing and so that is where the disconnect happened so something to be aware of in terms of abstraction and the possibility of it being a form of violence and the monopoly of legitimated violence being a definition of the sovereign from

mills, you might think about the monopoly of legitimated abstraction being a form of sovereignty.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_13:
Thank you, Scott.


SPEAKER_09:
Alex Kiefer, Stephen, and then Sarah.

So one thing I'm still interested in talking about potentially next week is, I guess, this probably is like a microcosm of some of the stuff we've talked about, but sort of the Jaynesian perspective in thermodynamics and physics and how this relates to all this, because

I think there's potentially something interesting.

So one thing I like about this paper, I will be brief here.

One thing I like is that it goes through sort of the history of the formalism of the FEP and where it came from.

And I think in part, that's meant to cast doubt on any direct connection between the FEP and physics.

But at the same time,

the Jaynesian perspective in physics is something the FVP inherits from, and it sort of already maybe gets epistemic stuff into physics at a lower level.

So I want to talk about the relationship between entropy in the thermodynamic sense and entropy in the Shannon sense, if we have a chance.


SPEAKER_13:
Thank you.

We're going to go to Mel with first author privilege, and then again, anyone can drop off if they need to go, but let's bring it to a close together.

Otherwise, Mel, Stephen, Sarah.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, actually...

I would really love to talk about that point that you raised.

And my other reviewer, I know who it is.

They find it.

My other reviewer, Andrew Corcoran, actually, great guy, raised that there's this new paper by Gottwald and Brown, published December 3rd, 2020, that is in

plus computational biology.

And it's really getting into free energy.

It's really getting into the Jaynesian perspective.

It's like the first time anyone has really delved into Jaynes and the FEP.

So I'd love to discuss that.

I haven't read it yet.

And I'd love to discuss that.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Now, Julian James, which James is that?


SPEAKER_05:
No, it James.

So thank you.

Maximum entropy principle.

I can I can drop this link in the in the console.

And I'd also love to talk about representation, like different different approaches to representation and how models represent if they do necessarily.


SPEAKER_13:
Excellent, Stephen, and I'll go back to just my regular camera, Stephen, go ahead.

And then anyone else?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, I think that I would like to hear more on that, James, the entropy, the maximum entropy approach.

I think the whole entropy aquatic thing is really interesting.

I think that's what this paper, like I say, is really tapping into that.

And I suppose one thing I'd like to say is we talk about models is we're using models to get the dynamics.

And there's this slight trap because, well, that makes sense.

But you have to take a perspective and verify it.

And it's like this modern world, we just do it.

But the key thing that's also present with the whole flows of information is that your models can reveal other ways of knowing which are not perspectival and are not themselves modern.

So the interesting thing about...

dropping something out of an active inference model isn't the model it's the dynamic shifts that the graphs show when the model's running so that and that can tap into indigenous ways of knowing because the thing with indigenous people saying early is that they're trying to attune to the world

not say what the world is and model it.

And that maybe is what we need to do more to actually survive on this planet as it's an ecological collapse, because we might need to sense what is it that we need to dynamically embody that isn't entirely modelable.

So anyway, we could talk about that.

That's enough for me.

Yes.


SPEAKER_13:
Sarah, did you have something?

Okay.

Marco, any last thought?


SPEAKER_14:
I just want to echo what's been said by Mel and Alex.

I also think that one of the most interesting things, especially for the next session, to talk more about the relation between thermodynamic and information-theoretic entropy, especially because there's one sentence in Mel's that I just want to point out.

So it says, the elements of the framework do not map onto any known features of real-world systems, at least not with any more granularity or specificity than the causal dynamics of such systems.

But I find it a very straight sentence because it seems that the granularity or specificity of their causal dynamics would be sufficient to act as a model, right?

And I think the really, really interesting thing that hasn't been explored enough, but now gives a good starting ground for, is asking more about the relation between thermodynamic and information theoretic entropy, where I think we should

maybe move more or emphasize the perspective of interpreting entropy as distribution.

How flat, how homogenous, how distributed is it?

There's a tendency to kind of flat out, to spread out in the thermodynamic sense.

And then I think with that conceptual metaphor, it's not really a metaphor, it's just true, but with that concept in mind, I think it's much easier to have a conversation about the relationship between information theoretic and thermodynamic entropy.

That being said, looking forward to 2021.


SPEAKER_13:
Thanks so much.

Mel, any last thoughts as the first and last author?

Otherwise, I'll close it out.


SPEAKER_05:
Phenomenal.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_13:
This was great.


SPEAKER_05:
Yep.


SPEAKER_13:
Mel, thanks so much for not just the paper, but for engaging with us, you know, asynchronously on Twitter and synchronously on video chat.

All of the participants.

There was so much we brought up today and it was just awesome to hear what everyone had to share.

So if you're listening live or in replay, you're part of the community of practice and we wanna just have you participate however.

So if you're curious about something, post a question, if you wanna know how you can participate, just reach out to us through any number of these mechanisms

Other than that, on January 26th, we will be right back here for 14.2.

And we'll deal with some of these questions.

Everybody will come with a few new digested thoughts, a couple of polished questions, and we will go from there.

So thanks again, everybody.

And we'll see you next week.