## Fc7bUNNdTfY

All right, hello and welcome. It's May 30th, 2024, and we're in ActInf Guest Stream 84.1.
This will be a presentation and a discussion with Jesse G. So Jesse, thank you for joining
and for your participation. Looking forward to a great presentation, and then we'll check
the live chat and see where it goes from there. Go for it.
All right. Thank you so much for letting me do this showcase.
Largely, what I'm going to go over is basically an overview, debut publication of a series
of papers that have to do with habits and adaptive learning in regards to agentual systems,
and basically looking at agentual systems largely from the point of view of biological organisms,
largely trying to understand, better understand, connecting that with human behavior.
Largely, the motivation here for this series of publications started with looking at a
sort of literature review that was data-focused on looking at the, not necessarily addiction
addiction from a more broad point of view, but from a drug dependency point of view.
When I reached out to a colleague of mine a number of years ago, well, a little over three
years ago now in 2021, when I first started this journey. So this whole series of work has been
undergone for about slightly over three years now. So I started this work in 2021. Originally,
I was connected indirectly with a group of graduate students associated with a state university,
and they were looking at data on addiction, not, not really broadly speaking, but dealing with looking
at a more so drug dependency based addiction. And that was a bit, I was quite disappointed with the effort put into
the paper. I mean, I understand that the students involved were, were students in data science and informatics. So but at the same time,
I was a bit dismayed by the approach in the paper, and I provided a critique of their work. And I thought to myself, well, wow, like,
addiction has some root, there's some root to addiction, we need to better understand. And on and what's also, what was also
came off quite
odd to me for a number of years now is just the narrative, looking at the lens of like, what is the root
of addictive behavior? And that kind of goes back fun, you know, thinking about fundamentals. And
fundamentally, we think about habits. And when people think about habits, mostly stereotypically, again,
people think about habits and sort of a bad point of like, you know, habits are bad, or, you know,
people think about habits, you know, point of view, and, you know, point of view, and again,
re approaching fundamentals and breaking the stereotypes.
I think it's important to understand, okay, well, are habits good or bad? What can we say about them? And
how do we adapt to circumstances that we face as humans, you know, as human beings?
And so I think it's important to understand, you know, what are the things, more specifically,
thinking about sort of this idea of not necessarily coping, but reinforcing our fitness,
in the sense of like, how can we better engage with the world around us and with each other,
and ourselves, most importantly, over time, over the course of a lifetime.
And so that's been the general focus of this series of works is trying to look into, in terms of
adaptive learning, what interventionary approaches, like what primary interventionary approaches,
which I'll get into a little later, can be leveraged to be reinforcing towards our behavior and
complement how we engage with the world around us, each other and ourselves, rather than be
counterintuitive. And looking at habits as sort of like, kind of like an ebb and flow of what,
where, like how we drive, how we, how we motivate and direct our behaviors. So habits can be good or bad,
but more so thinking about habits on a spectrum of being reinforcement based, in a sense that it
complements our, our fitness and how we engage with each other in a constructive way in the world around
us, of course, as well as ourselves, rather than counterintuitive or maladaptive.
So anyway, I didn't really give a former, a more formal introduction of who I am, I wanted to kind of
give, start with a bit of an overview of motivation and drive of the work I'm doing. So I call myself
an independent researcher, I'm working on a portfolio of works where I spend quite a bit of time
investigating academic literature. I've had for this series of publications I'm working on, I have,
I have roughly about close to 1000, maybe a little close to 1000 papers that to work with.
I have hundreds of papers that I've, I've found that I've read abstracts for that I haven't given a
good read yet, but I've read quite, I've gone through quite a bit of papers and
00. It gets to a point where you have so you find so much work to work with that you kind of have to
figure you kind of have to prioritize, okay, do I have enough content? And anyway, so basically,
what I'm trying to do with the portfolio of work I'm doing is I look for data. I also find law literature.
So I think it's important to find not just data, but information criteria that tells a story about
the data that's out there. And I could go on a tangent about my, you know, the limitations of
data science oriented, the oriented communities not really telling much of a narrative rather than
looking at the data. So what what I try to do with the work I'm doing is I try to find a lot enough
criteria, which I consider to be information or literature. So I find a whole lot of criteria
that emphasizes on on model building and construction, not just looking at data, but data is
important. And but more importantly, like connecting, you know, building models, not just about the data,
but being able to tell a story about the direction in which if we collect data in a sufficient manner,
where that would go, where, you know, where, you know, the models would tell us, like, you know,
what does the information tell us in terms of that evaluates the criteria of data and the models that
we that we build to have an understanding narrative of, you know, what, what we're working with in terms of
of, in this case, what I'm working on this series of papers, you know, what habits and adaptive learning,
really getting to the root of the problem domain that we're working with here. And so basically,
what I'm trying to do, again, is, you know, build models, mainly complex systems based models and
work with whatever data I can to provide a narrative and provide a means to justify, okay,
this is the problem domain we're looking at, this is how we should evaluate based on the criteria or
the literature that has that is elaborated on on on the problem domain, take the converging aspects of
the literature. So in this case, looking at habits and adaptive learning. And, you know, provide an
emphasis of like, okay, this is where we can go, based on the problem domain. So that's essentially,
what I'm trying to do, whether or not, you know, I end up working in academia or industry in some way or
another. What I feel like I'm doing is more analytical, like analytics based, not necessarily
engineering focus, although I am working on systems based approaches in terms of interventionary
means to deal with adaptive learning and habits, which is not the current paper I'm elaborating on,
although that's, that's going to be the next paper, but I might get into that a little bit,
a little later. But in a nutshell, even though that might be a bit of an elongated explanation about
who, you know, who I am, what I'm trying to do, I'm also trying to be agnostic about explaining what
I'm trying to do. I'm not like, even though I feel like I have an interest leaning into the cognitive
sciences, given that's largely the arena that this, this paper is, is leaning is geared towards is the cognitive
sciences domain, and agential systems. I don't want to limit myself in a corner per se, I like to be open
about my capacities of building models, looking at criteria, looking at data, and providing, you know, an
evaluation of problem domains we are investigating anyway. So the whole purpose of this talk now
is to go over my debut publication work, which is an over, more of an overview of understanding habits
and adaptive learning with regard to agential systems. There are four primary paradigms of
interventionary approaches to leverage adaptive learning with respect to human behavior. I'll go
over that a little bit, maybe towards the end of the points I'm making. But what I plan on doing,
I'll present a base model that I put together and momentarily, but I'm going to step through
the paper a bit, because there's, there's a lot of context. But I'm going to try and summarize the,
the points that I make. And for those of you who have looked at my work, I will say that it is quite a
long paper. So there is this meta analysis approach to, to the work in terms of, you know, looking at a lot
of literature that talks about habits and talks about agential systems and different models of, of
understanding perception, action, perception based dynamics, and how we engage with the world around
us, and how we anticipate, you know, how we anticipate how to leverage engagement over time, based on our
history of engagement. So anyway, let's, let's, let's start with the abstract and we'll, we'll, we'll build up
even further. So like I mentioned, this paper presents itself as an overview of looking at understanding the
nature of the nature of habits and adaptive learning with respect to agential systems. So we can, the best way
to understand what a habit is, is a persisting composition of behaviors that, that are, that are, that
couple our, our engagement to, to, to leverage how we reinforce interaction with our environment, with our
surrounding environment, and with other agents, as well as ourselves, right. So on, on the one hand,
agents can engage with their environment in a way that's constructive, as well as each other and
themselves. So we call that reinforcement learning, right, where agents are, are, are engaging in, in a way
that's constructive to optimize fitness, probably buffer, in the best case, buffer their fitness.
But on the other hand, agents also can engage with their environment in the, in the means that
could be deceptive or counterintuitive that, that could not only deceive themselves, but other agents
in, in, in the environment, right. So that has to do with maladaptive learning. So we can think of
maladaptive reinforcement learning being on one side of a spectrum, and maladaptive learning being on the
other side of a spectrum, right. And, and we can say, realistically, that there's no truly completely,
you know, there's no certain behavior, you know, there's, there's not no, there's no most optimal
behavior that's going to completely optimize the fitness of an organism, or as, as a multi agent systems.
Given the problems with cellular, cellular senescence and aging that over time, we engage with the world
around us more sub optimally, but the challenge there being that to optimize fitness in the face of
thinking of, of, of aging and cellular senescence, being a problem that we don't, you know, we're
mortal beings, agents don't last forever, we break down, we decompose, right. So,
in the face of, of that issue of, like, becoming more suboptimal over time, reinforcement learning
leverages optimizing it in the moment, and as time goes on, while maladaptive learning is really working
against, um, the, the, the optimal means in which we leverage fitness. Um, so,
the paper is pretty comprehensive and, and the reason why is, is, is a bit long is one, like I mentioned,
it's more, it's looking at a whole bunch of literature connecting ideas. Uh, and, uh, and, uh, so
I've tried to approach the, the content, the, the contextualization of, uh, of, of the paper in a way
that, um, is both comp, you know, comprehensive in terms of, uh, the audience that I expect to be a
more general general audience to, to be, to be reading it. Um, I'm, I'm not too confident in terms
of like how many actual cognitive scientists or neuroscientists or physicists or whatever are going
to be looking at the paper as opposed to the more layman type. So I try to be mindful about who's looking
at, uh, or who is, who's going to be reading the paper. And I try to be comprehensive as much as I can.
So there, there is some redundancy here and there in terms of my elaborations on, on specific points,
especially talking about perceiving, acting, and anticipating, uh, the world around us. Like this
idea of what I call the PAP cycle, which I constantly bring up, uh, in, in my work, uh, well, in this
particular paper. So we can think of the PAP cycle as perceiving, acting, uh, perception, action,
priors. So perception has to do with, um, so before elaborating on what I call the PAP cycle, um,
so as agents, we're constantly like engaging with stimulus. So any, any, anything that, uh,
anything that provoke anything that provokes engagement for agents. So agents we can think
of as, um, single, so we can think of the scaling of a gentle systems to be on the one hand, units of
agents or single agents. Uh, so like single celled organisms, you know, your bacteria and your, and
different types of cells and all that stuff, like simple cells that don't have much degrees of three
to make them known to make them known to make them known to make them known to make them known to
make them known to make them known to make them known to make them known to make them known to make them


in the environment that they're embedded in which we'll get more into this idea of how agents are
existentially bound to an embedded environment in which they co-inhabit. So now on the one hand
you we have these single agent systems that have simple functions and they serve a certain role
within the environment they're embedded in and on the other hand we have compositions of single agents
that make up what make up a multi-cellular system. So in terms of speaking about agency I'm largely
going to talk about and agential systems in general I'm largely going to focus on biological systems
and to be frank and I do kind of emphasize this maybe somewhat bluntly in my work
realistically our most comprehensive and intuitive understanding of agents really is reflective in
biology in terms of you know they're really you know you could say that there are very simple
synthetic agential systems being researched by groups like Neil Gershon Feld's lab at MIT for instance
uh Michael Levin uh Michael Levin's lab uh also investigates uh uh xenobots and and and what have
you but but but Michael Levin's work is of course more is focused on biological organisms as agents so um
so I guess the one crutch of understanding agential systems really is that we're kind of limited to the
scope of understanding agential systems in the scope of biology um so that's kind of the framework that
uh that I'm focused on here even though I do pay a little mind of like comparing okay well computer
systems that we built using techno our understanding of technology uh well very briefly I I do touch on that
as opposed to what we consider to be agential systems um now
uh okay so what separates a computer you know the idea a computer system from an agential system um is that
uh compute uh we are constantly engaging with stimulus as I as I mentioned uh now stimulus is is really uh
uh you know anything that uh you know anything that immediate that that that is directly you know anything
that directly provokes engagement of the agent right so like whether it's something visual whether um
that deals with any of the capacity any capacity any modality for the agent to to to to have a capacity to
develop some kind of develop some kind of sensation as a result of being uh being provoked by the stimulus
where like you could think of the stimulus as like like constantly bombarding um uh the the agent in
question right like the stimulus kind of is like this continuous input uh that um where the agent has
multiple modalities of trying to process that input as sensations and we're going to talk about what I call
generalizations uh generalizations of sensations so there's kind of multiple layers here in which sensations
are are processed by the agent uh so in in line with what I call the pap cycle uh perceptions
actions and priors so perceptions deals with this uh capacity of of enveloping a pers of perceiving the
stimulus so uh so so so there's this uh initial there's this layer of perceiving stimuli um where the agent
again you know is you know is constantly um uh yeah so so so the agent within this embedded environment
that it's existentially bound to is constantly being bombarded by stimulus right there there's constant
uh uh constant uh exposure to to stimulus stimulus is inevitably uh uh uh directed towards the towards
the agent and then there's multiple modalities in which the agent then tries to process the stimulus as
the stimulus is directed towards the agent and and and the agent has a various number of ways to try to
process that stimulus and what and we can think about those modalities in the human sense as like our
different senses so vision touch uh auditory taste right um we can think of like like the combination
of sensory modalities as a means to try to generalize uh uh how to process these sensations in a visceral in
so in so the generalization of sensations aspect is this visceral uh initially this visceral processing of sensations um so so you can think of like this visceral processing to be the the initial layer
of which uh of which that um the agent tries to process uh these sensations try to like this is kind of where the agent filters uh what would what it would try to on try to um
try to uh to distinguish between what is noise in the environment like what what the agent should should or should not prioritize
attention to uh as opposed to uh as opposed to what what could be significant to the agent like what what what what what are what
what site what sorts of stimulus that are being fed into the agent's um modalities of processing um you know what stimulus matters and what stimulus doesn't um so this so so through the through through the generalization of sensations there's this filtering of
okay what what what matters and what does it matter based on my circumstances of of leveraging fitness as an agent moment by moment um you know how do i handle that as an agent um so and um
um going from there once the agent is able to prioritize once the agent recognizes certain patterns of stimulus that matter then there's this there's this means to categorize
that stimulus as information so so so now then uh from there the agent might additionally
uh try to prioritize that information okay what information matters uh you know there might be redundant information
uh you know there might be redundant information or there might be information that matters to to my fitness right so we we can think about how that the information now that we have that is that went through that general that layer of being generalized as a sensation
um and differentiating and differentiating and differentiating trying to trying to understand understand whether that sensation is just like noise that can't really be pattern you know we can't be categorized as as something
that might be redundantly meaningful in some some sense or it's something recognizable to the agent it's not meaningful
um or uh
okay right so so from this generalization of sensations we get to the point where um the agent is trying to figure out
uh trying to figure out uh if there's a pattern to distinguish you know between okay well is this just
just noise that i can't really comprehend or and it is therefore not meaningful or is there some pattern here that
uh provides some information about my environment and my circumstances and then by providing some okay now i have information now i have this generalization of information
uh now i speak of the term generalization because that kind of leads to the problem of uh what i like to call their vertical perception that um
um and a lot of a lot of uh a lot of uh researchers and what have you talk about illusionism that in the sense that um we can have a more general a more we can develop a general we can always have a generalization that
it either is more and becomes more intuitive or or becomes counterintuitive to how we leverage circumstance but
We never have an absolute understanding of the information and as well as our experiences, which is sort of a problem in the philosophy of science with, okay, well, how do we evaluate something to be a theory as opposed to a conjecture, which really has to do with the rigor involved and what have you.
But the problem with vertical perception is we are always constricted to a relative understanding of reality in which an average, you know, if enough agents agree with a generalization, then that generalization guides, you know, a sufficiently large group of agents.
And so we can think about the direction of how we develop technologies and how modern civilization got to where it is today.
And we're going to talk more about interagent dynamics momentarily.
But the idea is that we're constantly generalizing the world around us.
And even though we can come up with generalizations, which many, which most of us could largely agree with, those generalizations could be challenged by looking through a different lens of generalizing that criteria.
So it's sort of a paradox of like, okay, well, how do we evaluate the criteria that we have as knowledge when, you know, we have sort of these best guesstimates, so to speak, of understanding what's happening with the world around us and how we understand reality and how we engage with each other, how we develop technologies.
But anyway, okay, so going back to understanding habits and what they have to do with, with behavior.
So, again, I talk about habits being these persistent compositions of behavior.
And on the one hand, we have dynamics pertaining to nature and of the agent and the nurturing of the agent, right?
So we think about nature versus nurture now.
So nature pertains to physiological limitations, while nurture pertains to the exposure over time.
So we can think of like, you know, the course of a lifetime, an agent is exposed to environmental circumstances.
And there's this idea of intrinsic and extrinsic variability of circumstances of environment.
So we can think on the one hand that as multi-agent systems being human beings, we are a whole ecosystem, right?
We are composed of multiple cells.
And we have these different anatomical layers that allow us to have this integrated functionality in which we leverage metabolic and cognitive load.
Now, the key thing to understand here about metabolic and cognitive load is the top down as opposed to bottom up dynamics in which agents facilitate their own integrity.
And we're speaking largely about multi-agent systems because there's this complexification of behavior that enables the capacity of, for instance, our ability to make decisions because we have a central nervous system.
Not all organisms have a central nervous system, right?
So we, especially when we think about the single agent systems, they're much more simple in function.
They have much lesser degree of agency.
So, since we're composed of multiple cells and all these different subsystems that regulate functioning that deals with metabolic cost, that gives us a bit more degrees of freedom because there's all these different subsystems engaging with each other that facilitate the capacities we have to engage with the world around us.
So, on the one hand, thinking from bottom up dynamics, we have the composition of cells that compose of different organ systems, right?
That regulate metabolic load that enables the possibility from the top down for when we think of cognitive load from the top down, we're thinking about executive function.
So, so from top down dynamics, we're thinking about how cognitive load is facilitated, where decision making happens.
And this, we'll talk more about what is fundamental to this decision making momentarily.
But thinking about nature dynamics, we're thinking about the physiological limitations of the integrity of bodily functions from the bottom up that influence the top down dynamics that facilitate cognitive load leverage, right?
So, so, so, so, so problems with physiology has, has to do like maybe, maybe with, with problems with, with, with, with, with, you know, from, from the beginning of the agent's life cycle, or at some point, there's some hindrance that, that sticks, that kind of sticks out as, as like a barrier for the agent to leverage.

So, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we
agent leverages how it interacts with its surrounding environment, other agents, and
intrinsically and extrinsically, of course, thinking about how the agent deals with its own
internalizations and externalizations as well as considering how it engages with other agents and
surrounding environment. And the nurture dynamics generally would have the most impact because
it deals with the full life cycle of the agent. So until the agent ceases to exist, it's going to be
constantly engaging with an environment in which it's bound to and it's constantly going to engage
with other agents and the exposure dynamics are what is central to this engagement and
both intrinsically and extrinsically. Right. And now I was talking about metabolic load.
And now like every function of the agent, like every process that happens, like every interaction,
you know, when we think about this, you know, from the single cell level to the multicellular level
of the integrity of different functions of the agent from the bottom up, sorry, from the top down to the
bottom up. All that involves metabolic load. And I even argue that the process of having thoughts that
like even generating thoughts in our head, even in a way that's compulsive or, you know, thoughts that
that just kind of go in and out or, you know, other processes like that involve perception,
action and priors, all that comes down to metabolic load processing. And those metabolic dynamics are
facilitated through, you know, are largely facilitated from the bottom, from, you know, from the bottom up,
you know, in terms of the integrity at scale. Okay, so let's move on to routines being fundamental. So
routines, we can think of routines, like, you know, for those of you who are programmers or have a
programming or engineering background, we can think of a routine as like some kind of instruction or
some kind of a simple instruction among other instructions that enable behavior to happen,
right? And we can also think of routines as compositions of, you know, this continual
we can also think of routines as the enabling of persistence to happen, right? So on the one hand,
you know, we can think of a routine as, you know, part some aspect of the behavior. On the other hand,
we can also think of a, more, more so, I contextualize routines to be the means in which the persistence
of a beat of some compositions that make up a habit, right, to be able to be orchestrated because
the, because a habit, you can think of a habit to be some routine, some routine characteristic of which the agent is at,
is leveraging in some procedural orchestrated fashion, right? That some, that either constructively
optimizes its fitness or maintains its, its, its current state of fitness in a way that,
right, when we think about optimizing on the reinforcement aspect, in terms of reinforcement
learning or being counter, you know, routines and like this routine ization of behavior of habits,
you know, could, could be counterintuitive to the agent too, right? Like this persistence of,
of behavior could be counterintuitive to, to the behavior, behavior of agents as well. And, and, and,
and we, this regulation of, of, not, now this regulation of, of behavior, we, we, we can think of is not
static, right? You know, like it, you know, we're not consistently in the same state when we're engaging
with our environment because the environment that we are embedded in is not in a fixed state either.
So the environment as well as ourselves as agents are not in a static state. So we're like these,
we're, we're, we're these complex, adaptive dynamical systems, complex in the sense that
we have, you know, we're composed of, you know, like I mentioned, like we're, we're composed of multiple,
we're these multicellular systems, we're, we're a whole environment, ecosystem have you, but we're,
we're, we're, we're composed of all these integral, integral functions that regulate an entire system.
So that's on the complex, complex side. And then adaptive being that the system is trying to compensate
a way to regulate behavior based on circumstances, right? Whether or not the circumstances
optimize or, or deceive the organ or deceive the agent.
So that, that, that's, that's what, what I mean in terms of thinking about, you know,
agents as complex adaptive systems that, you know, where we are, these, these compositional systems that
have certain exhibit certain behaviors in a means that try to regulate our capacity to engage with,
with our environment and in the sense of, you know, thinking intrinsically regulating our own,
our own bodily functioning and cognitive functioning, as well as, you know, extrinsically as well,
how we engage with our surrounding environment, as well as other agents, because those other agents are
part of the surrounding environment, and we're part of the environment as well. Hence, we're, we are embedded
in this environment, right? So, obviously, we can think of this, you know, the reinforcement learning,
as opposed to maladaptive learning capacity of agents to be like, sort of a tug of war,
you know, tussle in terms of like, optimizing, as opposed to deceiving fitness, right? Because,
on the one hand, there are, there are moments in which we can optimize leverage, in which we can
strategize certain means, certain, you know, ways to reinforce our behaviors. And those ways could
themselves become counterintuitive over time, based on how circumstances might change,
change. Because the environment is not in a static state, it's in this, you know, we're in this,
we exist within a complex system, as complex systems, right? That are, are, are, are, are changing state
over time due to, due to, you know, the, you know, the state of which the entire environment, you know,
like, what, you know, the resources in the environment available to agents to, to utilize,
you know, whether or not how those resources remain available, how those, you know, those resources
might change, and how other agents might change their behavior, or conduct themselves, as well as
ourselves. And so, you know, we're, we're always trying, you know, as agents, we're always trying,
you know, we're, we're, you know, I don't want to use the word exploit as a bad word, but we, we are
trying to figure out a way to leverage resources, and, you know, you know, what can we use as resources
in our environment, optimize metabolism, you know, to, to optimize our bodily functioning capacities from
the bottom up to the top down, as well as this idea of utilizing certain aspects of the environment as
tools and developing technologies and communicating with, with other agents, as well. All right, so,
as agents, we, we have this goal directedness and orientation, and this, this routine behavior,
like this, like the persistent dynamics of habits, and just kind of like thinking of, of, of, of habits
as like, like these reoccurring behave ways, or these ways that we repetitively engage with, with,
with our environment and other agents, and even ourselves, the way we kind of engage with ourselves,
and like how we start our day, and how we end our day, and how we, you know, we work on tasks, and all
that, thinking about human behavior. So, and that is like, you know, there, that's aligned with,
you know, this engagement is, is in line with, you know, this, you know, when we think of goal orientation,
we're thinking about, you know, how an agent kind of facilitates, you know, thinking about, okay,
I'm going to do this to achieve this, or, or, or get this resource, you know, like, I want to have this
resource, I have to do a certain number of things. So goal directedness could be, you know, composed of
a subset of goals, or there's change in, in, you know, there are dynamics, and, you know, the goals
themselves are not necessarily static. But in terms of like, instinctual goals, like we have to
maintain metabolic load, sufficiently for, for our integrity, right? So, so we can think of like,
there's certain, certain goals that are primary that facilitate, how we optimize fitness, like, you
know, eating, you know, dieting, exercise, you know, thinking about human behavior, we think about like,
stuff like dieting, exercise, sleep, drinking water, hydration, like, what, what, you know,
what are what are fundamental, fundamental goals that are going to regulate, enter, you know, this
integral, integrated functioning from bottom, facilitating bottom up and, and top down facilitation,
in which an agent leverages, optimizing fitness, right? So, so when we think about goal directing,
this, we're really thinking, we're really talking about, okay, how, how is the agent, optimizing its
integrity, you know, keeping itself alive really is, is, is like most fundamental to instinctual goal
directedness. And there's, there, there can be other goals that complicate the agent's integrity,
like obsessions, and like, and how obsessions manifest. And so, you know, like, we can think about,
oh, right, okay, well, as humans, like, some of us are into sports, some of us are into video games,
or, or what have you, or, you know, I like to, you know, I'm, I, I like to draw art, art sketches.
So there's certain things that are, you know, there's certain other goals that might not necessarily
be directly, or, or, or, or maybe they're tertiary, to, to, to the agent, right? There's certain goals
that might not necessarily, be, be necessarily, like, I don't, I don't necessarily have to work on
artwork, you know, I could do, I could both do other things, but, like, goal alignment, especially
in terms of, like, goals that are not necessarily, uh, uh, uh, uh, vital to, to, to the agent's
integrity. Like, when we think about, like, food, water, sleep, and what have you, right? Those,
those are fundamental goals. Like, there, there's, there's also the complication of other goals that,
uh, kind of, align with the interests of the agent over time, based on exposure dynamic.
When we think of nurture dynamics, like, you know, like, what, what stimuli ends up directing the agent
to develop these interests and obsessions and what have you. And now they, they have these goals that
are, that are aligned with, like, those obsessions, or there are, or those interests, or, or what have
you. Not to say that interests are obsessions, but, um, just trying to come up with some examples there.
Okay. Um, so I, I kind of go, uh, I, I, I, uh, in this section over here talking about,
uh, routine behavior, being integral to, to environment and agent-based dynamics, I kind of
start off with, like, talking a little bit about, uh, you know, from, from the perspective of, of, of
thinking about physics and particle interactions, um, and then getting to, uh, of agent-based behavior.
Um, so we can think about how systems might, um, how, how do, how do, how do, how do systems,
how, how do agents as, as systems, uh, maintain stability or acknowledging, of course, the problem
with cellular senescence and aging of systems, like, that system degrade over time, um, due to,
uh, you know, uh, systems degrade over time after prolonged exposure to, uh, to their environment and,
and what have you and, and those dynamics, which, um, see,
which, you know, I don't think it's necessarily necessary for me to talk about entropy and what
have you, but most systems, you know, uh, degrade from, uh, a, a, a structured, uh, more organized
state to a more, uh, decomposed chaotic state, um, which, which is, um, which, which that, that kind of
connects in a sense to, to, to problems with cellular senescence. Like how, as we get older,
our fitness is more suboptimal, but even though our fitness is more suboptimal, as we get older,
we still try to, you know, optimize, uh, optimize the integrity of, of, of, of our agency by,
by, by engaging with, with our environment in ways that are, are, are reinforcing, reinforcement
based even in light of that suboptimality as opposed to being counterintuitive, uh, to fitness.
Let's see. Um, and now, um, now resources, I mentioned resources, uh, re resources provide
a very, uh, variation in which we can leverage our fitness, right? So, uh, resources could be like
food that allow us to manage metabolic load. They could be, uh, certain aspects of
the, uh, of the environment that we can use as like, as tools to manipulate, uh, the landscape
of the environment. Um, so variational constraints in terms of optimizing fitness, uh, in line, uh,
of, of our agency have to do with not how we, uh, maintain ourselves, but how we engage with each
other, especially as a means to, to maintain, uh, our fitness.
And there, and, and the environment can not all, not only presents resources that agents can utilize,
but there might be barriers in the environment. There might be optimal there, there in, in a sense
that there's obstacles within the environment that provide constraints in which the agent has,
has, has, has certain agency to engage, uh, to engage with the environment, uh, more, more intuitively,
or, or, you know, to, to have better circumstances as opposed to circumstances being, being worse,
uh, based on certain resources not being available to the agent. So that could, that could be an obstacle,
whether, like, whether it's certain resources that, that an agent was utilizing, whether it has to do
with metabolic, uh, metabolic, uh, integrity more directly, uh, in terms of food or whether
there are, there are certain aspects of the environment that can be utilized as, as, as, like,
as tool construction or means to communicate, uh, with other agents. Right. Um, so, so the environment,
um, you know, can pose as a barrier if it can make it, if it, if the environment, uh, makes it that it's
more difficult rather than more intuitive, uh, for agents to, uh, facilitate, uh, integrity, uh,
their fitness in terms of how they, uh, how agents engage with each other and, and how they leverage
their own fitness, uh, uh, um, intrinsically. Um,
Speaker 2. So we talked to where I think I provided a good overview of goal directed behavior. Now
what I'm going to talk about, um, so, um, that kind of, so I'm going to talk a bit about, um, this,
this aspect of regulation, like try and provide more, uh, clarity on like, okay, well, the, the, uh,
as agents were trying to regulate, uh, we're trying to, to regulate an optimal means of sustaining an
optimal level of fitness and, and how does that work out? Right. And so, um, maybe a number of you
aren't familiar with David Wolpert, but, uh, David Wolpert, um, talks about, uh, this, this term known as
this, this, um, this idea of guided random search optimization. So I'm going to say, say that again,
it's, uh, uh, uh, an entendre of words, guided, uh, guided random search behavior, which has to do,
um, so if we think of randomness, we're thinking about like this, this act, this, uh, this, uh, um,
that, um, uniformity in which, uh, uniformity in which certain outcomes occur, or certain things
can happen, right? Like that there's no, uh, there's no, uh, there's no, uh, prioritized,
there's no, there's no prioritizing of, of, of, of certain, um, ways things might occur,
but there's uniformity in, in which occurrences happen. And we can, and so this uniformity,
um, especially understood in, in, in, in literature regarding probability theory, uh, and, uh,
denotes to what randomness means. And now it's not necessarily like a lot, like some people might
think randomness has to do with spontaneity and what have you, and that might have to deal with
probably extremities of, of, of, of randomness per se, that that's not necessarily random.
Um, but, uh, randomness more so has to do with, with uniformity, that there's no, there's no like
selective favoritism about how outcomes happen, but that, you know, there's, there's, there's,
there's kind of like this evening out of like how outcomes and circumstances, uh, happen in, in terms
of thinking about what randomness, um, implies here. And, um, David Wolpert approached this aspect of,
of thinking about, um, how we, um, develop axiomatic systems.
David Wolpert approached this aspect of the, um, and, um, how we can think about, um, you know,
when we think about axioms, we think about really, uh, you know, how we, how, how we, how, um, how behaviors,
you know, how can, how things are reduced, um, you know, how far can we reduce a, a certain behavior
or phenomenon. And, and when there are certain components that can't be furthermore reduced,
but can, can, you can use those components as building blocks to represent, uh, complications
or complexities of how behavior, uh, how behavior can, can happen with a system. Now, now we're thinking
about axioms, right? So, um, uh, a good example of, of, of thinking about axioms is thinking about
how arithmetic happens, right? Like how, how we can add or multiply numbers to get more numbers and we get
a rate we have, we have inputs of numbers and we, then we have an output of numbers. We have a range of
numbers. So now we can think about when we're, when we're talking about agential systems and we're
thinking about axiomatic properties of systems, we're really thinking about, um, you know, how do we
reduce stimuli and sensations and generalizations in the way, the way, uh, agential systems generalize
how to engage with stimuli. And, um, um, now, um, I, I just realized that I probably didn't give a,
give the, give, give, give, give, uh, give, uh, uh, an elaboration on actions and friars as opposed to
perceptions regarding the path cycle. So let me do that real quick before I go more into what is guided
random search behavior, um, which then leads to this aspect of guided random search optimization,
because ultimately, uh, we, as a general systems want to optimize fitness right. Um, now, okay. So
perception has to do with, uh, perceiving, uh, you know, we're, we, you know, as we're engaging with
stimulus and processing sensations, we are, you know, we're, we're perceiving, uh, we're, we are
trying to figure out, okay. Um, how do I engage with this? And, you know, what, what, you know, in
terms of top down, we, you know, we're talking about top down here when, when we're talking about
perception actions and friars, um, although, uh, more simple agents, uh, it could be argued that,
you know, even simpler agents have a means in which they perceive, act and anticipate, even though,
you know, that their capacity, the capacity, more simple agents to engage with the environment is,
is less complex because, uh, you know, if we're thinking about, especially single cell systems,
as compared to, you know, humans, where these multi agent systems, because we're, we're composed of
multiple cells. And, um, we have these, uh, networks of neurons and glial cells that are facilitating
engagement and communication with different regions of other neural neural and glial cellular networks
that are facilitating our capacity to perceive, act, and anticipate. So action has to do with how we're
responding to the stimulus, right? So we're trying to facilitate a response, uh, to, to, to the stimulus,
to, to, to how we're engaging with our environment. We're talking about action and then friars or
anticipation has to do with, uh, like a history, you know, we keep track of a, of a history of our
perceptions and our actions. And we, then we try to optimize based on that history. We were trying to
anticipate, uh, what, what, what, what perceptions and actions ought to be optimized going forward.
So on the one hand with perceptions, uh, uh, you know, we're, we're, we're, you know, we're,
we're engaging with our environment. We're engaging with stimulus where we're trying to figure out,
okay, how do I react to this? How do I respond to this? And then next in line, once we, once we,
once we have a calculation in mind of like, okay, this is going to be my action, this is going to be
my response to the stimulation. And now when we're thinking about perceptions, actions, and friars,
um, again, we, we can think about compositions thereof, of, of perceptions, actions, and friars,
right. You know, we, we think about not only, uh, you know, even, even different modes of perceiving and
acting and, and at times, uh, they're, you know, perception and actions are, are sort of coupled,
you know, based on like how different regions of the brain are, are processing sensations and
information. And, you know, once you process sensations, you, you have information to work
with, and then you're prioritizing what information matters after you prioritize what sensations matter.
Um, now, okay, this guided random search. Now we're going back to, to axiomatic systems.
Um, right. We have this, we have, we have, we, we, we get to this point where we try to reduce, uh, sensations,
right. We try to, to decompose, you know, like, especially when we're processing sensations and, and we're
trying to, um, conduct this capacity to perceive, act, and anticipate. Ultimately, we're, we're trying to,
uh, uh, you know, we're trying to, uh, you know, we're trying to, you know, we're trying to, you know,
thinking about like that example of arithmetic, we're trying to, to, you know, reduce what the
sensation to what we tried to reduce to, uh, uh, you know, like sensations only reduce so much yet,
uh, compositions of those sensations could start to build a picture, right? Like the bare reductions
of those sensations might not make much sense themselves, but if we take the compositions of
those sensations over time and how they build up, uh, into something that makes sense for us to,
you know, in terms of interpreting the stimuli, in terms of perceiving the stimuli, and then acting on the stimuli
after, uh, you know, facilitating, uh, okay, how, you know, in the, in, in the perceiving of the stimuli,
what's the best, what's the most optimal manner I can act on the stimuli, and then having a history of,
okay, well, I, in, I perceived the stimuli this way, and I acted on it this way, this is what happened.
Okay, well, the outcome might have been good, or might have not been good. So now I'm going to
anticipate how to perceive and act based on the, the outcome that may or may have not been good.
And, um, in terms of, of, of how my capacity to evaluate as, you know, uh, you know, when we talk
about, uh, um, let's see, um, my capacity to evaluate the, the stimuli is reflective of, of like, okay, well,
uh, I don't want to call it trial and error here, but this is kind of how we're getting to the guided
random search aspect, right? That there are, there are, there is a combination of ways that we take the,
the, the, um, that we take the reductions of the sensations that build into information, right? And
then we, uh, that become information, the, like, this, this reduction of generalizations of sensations
that become information, uh, based on how we're prioritizing that due to how we, um, select out
perceptions and actions and priors that optimize, uh, our fitness based on how we're engaging with our
environment. Um, so like, um, the guided aspect is, uh, prioritizing what's working as opposed to
what's not working. And the random aspect has to do with, okay, well, the sensations, as we, you know,
we reduce the, when we reduce the amalgamation of sensations that ultimately, like I mentioned,
our stimuli that we're being bombarded with, um, though, the, the aspects of those sensations really
are uniform, um, uh, in, in the sense that, um, those, you know, when we don't really prioritize those,
since, you know, once like, uh, before those sensations become develop any relevancy as information,
uh, there's no, you know, the environment doesn't really necessarily dictate what sensation, what
stimuli have priority. The stimuli just present themselves as stimuli, um, to, to, to our system.
And then it's up to us based on how we perceive and act and anticipate the stimuli on how to,
so how to, it's up to us to prioritize, um, that, that stimuli, which, uh, which in, uh, in the bare bones
aspects of that stimuli outside of our judgment, you know, outside of our own judgment, which involves
perceiving, acting, and anticipating is random because nature doesn't really care.
You know, um, nature doesn't really care about, you know, reg, you know, necessarily
selectively regulating the stimulus outside of the agents, uh, like, like the environment,
the bare environment doesn't care, but the agents among that environment, you know, are going to
engage with the environment in a way that prioritizes stimulus and, and, and guides the agents
to engage with each other in the environment. Right. And, and in that sense, the guided, the guided
aspect is the prioritization. The random aspect is this uniformity that, that the bare bones stimulus
is presented in the environment among agents. There's no, there's, you know, until the agents
start to prioritize the sensations as information, um, there's really, there's really, um, beyond,
there's really nothing more than this uniformity of this, you know, there's nothing, there's nothing
really, uh, that, that stands out about the stimuli until the agent, uh, starts to, uh, make selective,
uh, uh, generalizations once, once they're, once the agent can notice patterns of stimulus
and those patterns would be information. And then the agent's going to try to prioritize, prioritize those
patterns. So the search behavior, now the search behavior is recognizing the patterns and then
built the filtering aspect of the patterns. Right. So like I mentioned, the, the guided aspect has to
do with the prioritization. The random aspect has to do with, okay, well, there's this uniformity in which
the stimulus is, is, is provoking the agent to engage with the stimulus. And then it's up to the agent to
kind of categorize and, and, and, and prioritize the stimulus and, and reduce it to information
and then prioritize that information based on like what the agent think it thinks is necessary to pay
attention to. And so the, the search aspect is like this paying attention, like the attentional dynamics
involved with this prioritization. Um,
So, um, now there's, like I mentioned, there's constraints within the environment that enable
agents to, to facilitate, uh, perception action and prior, uh, dynamics, um, in a way that would optimize
fitness as opposed to, um, deceive fitness or, or be counterintuitive to fitness. And now, okay,
well, when we talk about homeostasis, uh, again, the environment's not in a fixed, uh, static state
dynamic, uh, agents aren't in a fixed, uh, fixed state, right? Everything, you know, we have this
complex adaptive system that is the environment. And we also have this complex, you know, the nature of
agents is, uh, of agents, uh, invoking agency in the environment or, or trying to compensate for what the
environment presents to agents as resources or obstacles. Um, homeostasis has to do with then, um, how do
agents sustain a minimum viable, um, functional integrity that is, that is, that is crucial to
fitness, to allow the agent to continue, to, to continue to exist rather than, than cease to exist.
Right. So the, so homeo, so homeostatic regulation, um, is going to have to do with, um, and maybe some
of you are thinking of the free energy principle, um, in this respect that, um, agents, um, want to
minimize costs, but maximize on opportunity to, uh, leverage optimizing fitness. Um,
um, well, at least most agents want to do that. Um, very, it's, um, I mean, there's, there are some
aspects where, where I think where agents that have the capacity to annihilate themselves, um, which, um,
I, I don't think, uh, I think agents need a certain level of complexity to make that decision from the top
down. So, so, so in that respect, the top down dynamics, as opposed to the bottom up dynamics,
uh, you know, are, are, are much more crucial to facilitating the integrity of an agent because,
you know, agents with enough sophisticated agency, like human beings can decide to annihilate
themselves, which is unfortunate, but, uh, in most cases, uh, it, well, I would say it's generally
unusual for, for, and we're seeing this in the literature too, that it's unusual, but it's interesting,
um, to, uh, you know, where circumstances arise where an agent makes the evaluation that they
can't really optimize fitness any more than they have. So they, so the most optimal, the most optimal
decision for the agent is decide is to decide for them to not exist anymore. Um, which is unfortunate,
um, but, um, this is not, this also isn't uniquely human either. Um, you know, other, other, other,
there are other types of agents, other animals out there, you know, when we think, again, we're thinking
about agents as biological organisms here, um, you know, where an agent makes a decision that, that they can't really optimize
fitness anymore. And the, the, uh, the, the circumstances in which the environment provides
any leverage of integrity is not really there. So the most optimal decision an agent can make is,
is to annihilate itself, but that that's, I'm not going to get really into that. Um, but I think that
that's sort of an unfortunate circumstance for an agent to find themselves in. And, and this pertains to
probably, um, I, you know, more sophisticated agents, um, as, as I found in, in, in the literature. Um,
okay. See, dragging.
So we, we went over that, we went, went over what stimulus is
and regarding again, homeostasis that has to, you know, this builds on guided random search
and the guidedness being the prioritization, the randomness being the uniformity in which stimulus
provokes the agent and presents itself within the environment. And we acknowledge that stimulus is,
is really, um, anything that, um, anything that, in that, that is provoking the agent to perceive, act,
or anticipate anything that, anything that, that innate, that, that provokes an agent to perceive,
act, or anticipate would be considered a stimulus. Um, and prioritizing, where was I here?
Um, being able to, to prioritize stimulus and for agents to minimize cost to engage with their
environment, uh, and maintain, um, um, uh, like a minimal, minimum viable, minimally viable functional
integrity that, that is crucial to fitness. This has to deal with homeostatic regulation or, or homeostasis.
Uh, this is what I call homeostasis. And the environment presents means in which,
uh, on the one hand can be resourceful for agents to, to regulate their fitness. While on the other hand,
the, the environment might also present obstacles that could be problematic to regulating fitness.
So we can, so, okay. We're going to talk more about the mechan, like the mechanistic, sort of a mechanistic
interpret, interpretability, um, explanation of, of the perception, action, and, and prior cycle, or what I call the
path cycle. So, uh, a lot, so a lot of new programmer types and engineering types are probably familiar, or hopefully are familiar, with the terms
of ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
and signaling, you know, when we think about how neurons, neural and glial's cellular networks
work together, the sensor capacities have to do with interpreting a signal and passing that signal
along to the right networks that then deal with that signal. And then you have this coupled
capacity of sensory motor actions involved that deal with the stimulus. So actuators have to do with
acting. So like having an action towards the stimulus. So actuators having this actuation-based
mechanism has to do with responding to the stimulus while the sensors or the sensory capacities
signaling, you know, the signaling and communication faculties that enable perceptions and actions
and anticipation dynamics to be optimized. You know, certain networks of neural, there are
certain there are neural and glial cellular networks that that interpret sensations and communicate
what those those sensations are, you know, and they signal to the networks that deal with the
with acting and responding to the stimulus, right. And, and more so there's more, there's this
coupled capacity of, you have these coupled sensor actuator based networks that and compositions
thereof. That deal with handling stimulus and sensations and prioritizing the sensations into information
and so on and so forth.
And, and the sensor and actuator based mechanistic capacities, you know, you know, that that we
reduce this, you know, we, you know, basically, this is this is this is a reduction of like,
okay, we have these neural and glial networks, uh, networks, that facilitate perception and action
anticipation. And we're trying to optimize, uh, for metabolic costs, and facilitate cognitive load.
Uh, that, uh, that leverages fitness wire rather than compromise compromises fitness, um,
um, over time. Um, and, and, and, and, um, in the most realist, I guess, in the most, uh, pragmatic
sense, we think about this minimum viable means in which, uh, we facility in which an agent optimizes,
how it calibrates cost of metabolic load for homeo for in with regard to facilitating, um,
functional integrity or homeostatic regulation.
So hopefully that makes sense.
So we can think of like, when I mentioned goal directed behavior, there's this coordination of
micro and macro levels of how we as multi agent systems facilitate that, right? So like we think
from the bottom up, we have metabolic, uh, load handling or, or facilitation. And from the top down,
we have cognitive load, uh, handling, right? We're, we're thinking about how cognitive load is mitigated
due to how metabolic load plays out as cognitive load. It really is a subset of metabolic load,
because you need, you need, you need metabolic costs to facilitate everything that an agent does like
without being able to, uh, metabolize the, the agent just wouldn't exist. It wouldn't be able to
continuously engage with, with its environment because it needs resources. Like the agent needs,
uh, fundamentally one of, one of the fundamental goal, goals of the agent is to consume resources,
whether that that's food, water, you know, think about human behavior, we think about food, water,
water, you know, water, you know, water, you know, water, you know, water, you know, water, you know,
other means like using tools that, um, extensively enable us to better leverage fitness and how we
engage within our environment and other agents is, is also important, but that's more, more secondary,
uh, in terms like, um, you know, like tool use and, and, and augmentation and development or of, um,
is not as crucial as, as maintaining like, uh, metabolic load is in terms of, of, of, of food,
you know, consumption of, of food and water and being humans like to, to regulate that fundamentally.
Yeah.
So we can think of like on the macro level, um, cells represent, you know, as multi-agent systems
on the macro level, you know, cells can represent or whole organ systems and subsystems that regulate
from the bottom up as well as the top down. And then from the micro level, we think about how the
individual cells as individual unit agents engage with each other, because we ourselves,
even though we are agents, we are a whole environment and ecosystem thereof, of, of agents
communicating with each other that enables our own agency and our own capacity to communicate the
environment in which we're embedded. And so we have agents embedded within us, and then we are also
embedded within an environment in which we have agency. And that is constrained due to, um,
the resources and obstacles that the, the environment presents, uh, or the, that, that,
that ex, the, the resources and obstacles that are existent within the environment that, that we have
constrained access to. And then the, um, there's also the, um, this is not talked about that much in the
literature, but there's also the mezzo level. So we talked about the micro level where we have the
individual unit agents within our organism as a multi-agent system, how, how those agents communicate
with each other, but on the macro level, we have the different subsystems communicating with each
other. And even on the macro level, we're thinking about the top down dynamics of regulating executive
function, which also considers the macro level about how networks of, of, of neural and glial cells are
communicating with each other. But we also have this mezzo level and, um, this mezzo level, we can
think about how selective, uh, more so when we're thinking about the top down regulation of agency,
we're thinking about how different sub, sub regions of, uh, of our nervous system or our executive
functioning are regulating agency, our, our capacity to continuously, uh, engage with our environment in
optimal fashion. So, um, so, so thinking from the mezzo level, do you think we can think about how
different regions, regions of the brain are, are working together to evaluate perceptions, actions,
and priors, like, you know, like the prefrontal cortex, uh, the reticular formation, the, the hippocampus,
the amygdala, like how are all these subsystems, uh, of neural and glial cellular networks facilitating
engagement? Um, like we're going from the more macro level of the, of the central nervous system
to not necessarily the micro level of the individual neurons and glial cells, but we're also talking
about how different, how, uh, different coupled networks, uh, of these neural glial cells of these
different regions are facilitating lateral engagement with each other. So I think it's important also
for those of you who don't necessarily have a neuroscience background, um, or psychology background.
Um, uh, so no, no one region of the, like one, like all the regions of the brain, first of all, are, are
communicating laterally in the sense that they're communicating, they're, they're engaging in
parallel processing stimuli and sensations and what have you and information, right? No one region is
responsible. Like, you know, the hippocampus, uh, doesn't, doesn't store and, and, you know, even though
like the hippocampus is largely recognized as the memory storage system, the way it stores and, and
references information, it, it, it needs to work with the amygdala, the thalamus, it has to work with
the reticular formation. Um, it has to work with the prefrontal cortex. Um, so, so no one region is
processing these sensations at one point or momentarily in time, like they're, you know, and we're in, in an
interesting way we're going to get, get to like, um, what is necessarily interesting about, um, how our
brains are structured and that's not necessarily, uh, uh, header, it's not necessarily hierarchical,
although it's, it's mostly hierarchical in the sense of prioritizing stimulus and sensory information, but,
um, how, uh, how, how that processing and prioritizing builds out over time in terms of how we as organ,
as these biological organisms, as multi, as, uh, agential multi-agent systems evolved, um, is not
just hierarchical, but, um, is, uh, there's this other term that is less familiar. Um, so on, on the,
on the one hand we have this prioritization or, or what can be deemed as hierarchy of like, of, of,
of prioritizing, uh, uh, of sensations and, and, and what have you. On the other hand, there's the
tuning aspect, right? Like sort of like as we're prioritizing and selecting out, uh, uh, uh, stimuli
silos and, and sense, and says, as sensations and information, uh, there's also, uh, this aspect
of sort of like tuning, you know, like, you know, kind of like, you know, if you think about like, uh,
uh, like an audio mixer or, or a soundboard, right? You, you want to get the right, you, you kind of want
to, you, you want to kind of select out the right, uh, channels of how stimuli and sensations are being
prioritized and this is known as heterarchical processing. H-e-t, uh, heterarchical. H-e-t-e-r
archical. So I'm not going to spell the whole thing out, but, uh, this is heterarchical processing and,
and this term is actually brought out in, um, uh, uh, uh, Huebner and Schultz's biological cognition
paper, which I highly recommend. Uh, and we're going to talk a little bit about, um, this, uh, this,
this, uh, means of preserving viability, which, um, which is pretty important to how agents engage
with each other to optimize and leverage fitness. We're, we're going to talk about that momentarily.
Um, but so there's this, there's this hierarchical capacity in which the regions of our brain are
prioritizing stimulus, right? And, and, and, um, in that prioritization and selecting out the stimulus,
there's sort, there's this tuning coming, there's this kind of like this channel tuning, uh, mechanism,
right? Like trying to just get the, you know, trying to, trying to prioritize the stimulus just
the right way involves like, sort of like a selective pressuring that's not necessarily hierarchical,
but it's, it's sort, it's, uh, um, it, it, it's also like, um, a little bit more, it's sort of like,
there's degrees of freedom in which we, we, we try to calibrate the channels in which those sensations
uh, are, are being prioritized as information and then, then that information is being selectively
prioritized. Uh, so this is known as heterarchical processing. Um, but largely speaking, what's
happening is hierarchical because the, the actual prioritization of sensory modalities, that's
hierarchical, but that can't happen without calibrating, uh, the sensations and information
to be processed. And this calibrating aspect is, is heterarchical. Um, or like, kind of like,
you know, think about a mixing board or a soundboard, like, like, I don't know how many people are, are,
are into DJing or, or, or producing music or what have you. But if you play with like,
a soundboard and you're trying to get the right sound to come out and you're, and you're trying to
get the channel properties, you're trying to tune the channels and all that stuff, uh, this is, this is,
this is, this is hyper, hyper parameter, hyper parameter, blah, it's a tongue twister, hyper parameterized
tuning processing of the top down. Right? Like the idea of parameterizing the sensations, right? Like,
when we're trying to facilitate the parameterization of, okay, the stimuli coming in and are perceiving and
acting on that stimuli, um, the, the parameter, per, param, param, param, parametric tuning that, that has to
facilitate the prioritization, that is the heterarchical processing that's happening.
Okay. So, so there's, there's, um, on the one hand, there's, what, what, what's happening with
perception actions and prior, and priors is this introspective capacity of, of trying to interpret,
uh, stimuli, and, and then this reactive capacity, uh, this proprioceptive capacity of aligning our
perceptions and actions, uh, with, with how we anticipate, right? So, so our, so, so in terms of not
only our, our, our, um, well, this is in due part to, to the top down functioning, but this, and this,
this really calibrates, uh, our capacity to, to not only, uh, interpret, but react and, and, and, and,
and react in a sense, uh, react to stimuli, uh, in a sense of like, uh, uh, of predicting what's going to
happen, what, what's going to happen going forward, uh, that would be pro, more, more in the proprioceptive
sense of, of dealing with the stimulus over time to optimize fitness. So on the one hand, there, there's
this capacity in which, uh, um, especially with decision making, where, uh, we try and make sense
of what we ought to do, how we, how we, and how we perceive and act on the stimulus, and then
our continued actions going forward in time has to do with proprioceptive capacities.
Um, so, so this capacity to, to, uh, the means in which to, to, to, to, to, to regulate perception
and actions based on anticipations, um, going into the future and, and how, how, how, in terms of bodily
functioning, like just, just how I engage with the stimulus in, in a way that becomes more, that
feels more intuitive, um, this is a proprioceptive capacity as opposed to more introspective capacity
of, uh, uh, of, of, in trying to interpret and understand the stimulus and, and, and, and, and
making a decision that might be, and making decisions that might reflect, um, uh, what could happen in the
future, then there is the happening of the future, right? And, and the alignment of that happening
in the future that, that, that, that, that, um, that is in, that is in line with anticipation
as to do with proprioception. Okay. Let's see. Um,
I don't want to speak too confident, confidently about, about the main regions of the brain
coordinating, uh, coordinating our capacity of perception, actions, and priors, but I'll, I'll,
I'll, I'll, I'll bring some, some key, some regions that have caught my eye. Um, there's a bit of
contention in terms of what are the key regions that are, are responsible for our capacity to perceive,
act and anticipate. Uh, the most evolved capacity, uh, that really sets humans apart, uh, has to do
with the prefrontal cortex. So that, that deals a lot with planning and, and, and perception that
there, there, uh, a lot of the modalities in which planning in terms of perception and goal
directedness has to do with the prefrontal cortex. Um, the anterior cortex has more to do with the
sensory motor functioning. Um, now, um, less, what's less talked about in the literature,
um, is the role of the reticular formation. So that's your brainstem. So the reticular formation
has to do with autonomic arousal. So, so this, like the capacity to even, uh, uh,
uh, engage with sensations at all, uh, has to do with the reticular formation. And in particular,
what I, uh, my favorite, uh, part of the brain, uh, is the locus cooleus or also known as the,
the LCNE system or the, the, the, what regulates norepinephrine. Um, so, so, so autonomic arousal is
pretty important because without it, like we're, we're, we're not really engaging, you know, um,
I mean, there's no means for stimulus to, to, to be interpreted and, and facilitated throughout
the, uh, the brain. So, so, so the norepinephrine system, uh, is, is allowing us to interpret this,
the stimulus and guide that interpretation in terms of signaling, uh, all these, all the different
primary primary regions of the brain, uh, that are responsible for perception, action, and anticipation.
And now what I like to call the neuromorphic interchange is the limbic system. Now the limbic
system is basically, uh, basically the region that encompasses like basically, uh, the, the key
regions of executive functioning. So thinking about memory retrieval, emotions, um, land angle directedness,
um, sensory motor processing. So the prefrontal cortex, uh, at least most of, most of the prefrontal cortex,
uh, or the neocortex layer, uh, the hippocampus, the amygdala, the, you know, all, all, all those,
all those really important regions that are, are, are important for, are, for executive functioning
are guided by the limbic system, right? Uh, well, they're connected together by the limbic system.
Like they, they facilitate each other's capacity due to, um, being housed into this interchange that
facilitates their engagement, which I call the limbic system. And, uh, let's see.
All right, going to the next section. Sensations are fundamental to perception, action, and anticipation.
I think I covered most of this.
So this idea of generalizations of sensations, um, is this feeding of stimulus, uh, as inputs into,
into multiple, our multimodal way of, of engaging with the stimulus, uh, has to do with this generalization
of sensations in, in which that the stimulus is fed into the system initially. And this is, this is a,
this is the visceral, uh, this is, this is the visceralness of the stimulus, uh, the, the viscerality,
I guess viscerality is the right word. Uh, so the means of internalizing the stimulus is this
generalization of the stimulus itself, right? Which is visceral and natural, right? Like think about,
like, like, when we think about visceral, like think about how blood flow is just naturally happening,
like throughout your body or, or certain, like, even metabolic, uh, metabolic processing. Um,
when we think about, uh, the, uh, uh, the, um, uh, glycolysis and, and all these different behaviors
that happen that, that regulate metabolic processing, uh, cellular respiration, right?
All like stuff that's just constantly happening that, that, that regulates metabolic load.
Uh, this, like that's generally pretty, you know, that, that, that, um, like the, like these behaviors
that, that aren't really particularly that interesting that, that correlate, uh, directly to,
to our executive top down functioning, this can be recognized as visceral processing, like, uh, you know,
uh, uh, uh, like stimulus that, that isn't, that, that's just constantly happening or, or this processing,
uh, this, this load processing that's constantly happening, that that's not that interesting, but
it, it, it's, it's, it's kind of fundamental to like our, our continuous engagement with the environment
as, as, as, as agential systems is regulated. That's what we can denote as, um, a visceral processing.
And this internalization of, of, of stimulus, uh, with respect to environmental constraints, of course,
um, has to do with, um, you know, we're, we're, we're filtering the noise in this generalization
of, of sensations, like this, this capacity of general, uh, of filtering the noise into becoming,
um, a means in which we can make sense of it. Um, so we prioritize that noise as information.
And that eventually allows us to anticipate, you know, how should we perceive and act accordingly
to the stimulus being presented to us. And then we have these recollection of experiences because
we're able to anticipate based off our, of our history of perceiving and acting to stimuli.
Now, now here's where things get interesting because I'm about to talk about
system one and system two, uh, coupled with the rider and the elephant. Uh, so, uh, system one and
system two, uh, uh, refers to Daniel Kahneman, uh, and, uh, where system one has to do with, uh, uh,
uh, uh, decisions and the, and ways of act engaging with our environment, uh, from a top down level or
executive functioning level, which, which is more automatic and less involved while system two
has to do with, um, non-trivial or problem solving circumstances, which take more effort. So,
now, uh, that has to do with, with, with, with reasoning, uh, and, and how we optimize engagement
with our environment. Uh, now, um, we couple this capacity with Jonathan hates the rider and the
elephant. And the reason why, uh, this is, this is, this is, this is of interest is, um, especially with
system two processing, we use emotional valence processing, um, or emotions, these, these feelings,
the feelings we get from, from the general generalization of the sensations that we, we have as
these embodied, um, uh, as these embodied beings, but like as a general systems, our engagement is
embodied, right? This, this, this capacity to generalize sensations, um, as agents is, is embodied,
which this is what really separates us from, from classical machines, or just, just, you know, these
closed loop circuits. Um, and I would argue additionally that, um, the way that we perceive acting
and anticipate is not necessarily a, a, a closed loop. Um, uh, it, uh, it, it, it's sort, it's sort of like
an open system, but it's not, uh, it's like a bounded open system. Um, we'll, we'll, we'll get into
that a little bit soon. Um, now, um,
what's interesting about, uh, so talking about the rider and the elephant, I need to elaborate on that.
So system one, system two, system one is like kind of automatic, doesn't take too much effort to make
a decision and, and, and, and, and system two, it takes a little bit of effort. It's non-trivial.
Uh, now the rider and the elephant, the rider is like the voice of reason while the elephant is like
the experiencing, like, uh, uh, uh, of the, uh, the, the, the feeling states, right? So one can only
imagine an elephant going rampant in the village, right? Like the rider doesn't have a good grip of
the, uh, of the elephant and the elephant just go crazy. Um, so I, so I coupled this idea of the
rider and the elephant with system one and system two because, um, especially with system two, it takes
some, it takes some, uh, uh, you need a way, you need a, a, a, a non-classical logical, uh, system reduction
way to, uh, take, uh, uh, uh, feeling states, emotion states in, in, in, where, uh, decisions are not, are not trivial, or, or, or they're not, like, there are these non, there's these non-linear, non-trivial circumstances in which
we have to make decisions or make predictions or, or, you know, like how we engage with stimulus and how we try to
make, make anticipations of how should we perceive and act going forward into, especially the distant future, right? That
it could be a big deal in terms of leveraging fitness.
So, um, so, um, so, so, so this, uh, so, so we, so what we, so what happens here where decision making is not so intuitive is we can try and figure out a way to have decision weights as criteria to evaluate decisions where there, there is some uncertainty involved, where there is some uncertainty involved, where there is some uncertainty
where we are not certain where we are not certain how things are going to pan out, and we have to anticipate as agents, like, how, how should we engage optimally with our environment. So, emotions, uh, play a role, uh, in this capacity where, where decision making is non-trivial, non-linear, um, and, um, there's this generalization of feeling states, right? When we, when we're talking about generalization of sensations,
uh, so, first we have to consider that raw sensations have to be processed by specialized regions, which, uh, of, of, of, of our executive functioning, uh, that deal with memory consolidation, uh, regarding optimizing priors as well as, um, emotional valence processing. So affective processing, uh, is involved here. Um, so since, so what happens is sensations become these streams of information
that are comprehensible for modes of reasoning and emotion valence weighting that can opt more optimally guide perceptions and actions on priors. Um, now, um, what can be understood as emotions, uh, then would be generalized, this, this valence weight, this emotional valence weighting on generalized feeling states, uh,
that, um, is, is, is, is separate, but necessarily, uh, is separate, but necessary for optimizing rationale and according, according to decision making. So we have this interwovenness of reasoning and emotions or feelings, right? And, and emotions kind of, um, uh, provide, um, a means to weigh decisions that are especially more difficult,
um, um, where it's not obvious, um, what we, how we should anticipate, um, what's going to happen in the future, um, and, and just how to guide, uh, our, our behavior, uh, especially in moments of uncertainty, um,
And it could be argued that consolidation of memories would be largely compromised if emotions did not provide emphasis on how memories are referenced in the first place.
Because you need a reference pointer and that's what these emotions themselves, like these emotion weights themselves function as like a reference, a point of reference in how we rationalize our perceptions and actions based on how we anticipate.
So in accordance to that, if we can't, if memories cannot be properly referenced on weighing decisions, then how can we optimize perception and action according to minimizing compromising fitness, right?
That's quite an existential question.
We weren't capable of emotions on some level, like how we carry baseline decisions that allow us to effectively anticipate what do we do next based on our environmental circumstances, right?
Maybe that's not super intuitive, but to me that kind of is.
So we talked a bit, we talked about system one, system two, and the rider and the elephant.
We talked a bit about hierarchical and process, hierarchical and heterarchical processing.
So again, hierarchy has to do with prioritizing stimulus and information.
And hierarchy has to do with the, like how we parameterize it, how we select it out in the, in association with the, with the prioritization.
So they're kind of coupled together, but of course, priority is what the priority is, what matters, even though we select out certain perceptions and actions in accordance to how we're optimizing our engagement.
And hopefully I elaborated that clearly, but I could always go back to that a little bit later if there's questions about that.
Let's see.
Relativistic.
I'm going to skip this section.
Core regions.
All right.
All right.
So this is, this is probably one of my favorite parts of the paper right here is talking about reality as an interface or reality is an interface.
And this is kind of, this, this gained a lot of popularity in Don Hoffman's collaborative paper with, with Chris Fields and Chetan Prakash, especially elaborating on like the boundary, you know, we're talking about perceiving and acting and how agents are, you know, agents have a boundary within the environment they're engaging with.
Right.

But even more interesting that I make the case for is that agents themselves are existentially embedded within the environment that they're engaged in.
And this can argue, I would say, arguably, this could extend to artificial, artificial agents that they rely on some resource leverage within the environment that they're engaging in for them to continue to exist or function.
Right.
And now reality as an interface, we think about this, this, you know, this phenomenal capacity for us to engage with stimuli and react to it.
Right.
Right.
And, and, and this can, this can like very deeply you can really argue reality as an interface, like deep down pat, you know, past the fact of, of organisms and talking about physics and, and, and, and just how space time that the, the, the, the, the, the fabrication of space time maintains itself.
Is that particles are interacting with each other in some capacity, even though they don't necessarily have any agency.
But most importantly, we, as agents are constantly engaging with each other, we're constantly interacting with each other, so to speak in, in the phenomenal sense.
So that really has to deal with reality as an interface and extensive and building on that, we talk, I mentioned axiomatic systems, sort of as the reduction.
You know, we, we, we, we, we're, we're, we're, we're, we decompose sensations, reductively axiomatically.
And we can relate that to David Wolpert's argument of talking about, okay, well, we, we base a lot of our, we base our reasoning on mathematics.
Mathematics is based on axiomatic constructions of systems.
Mathematics is based on axiomatic constructions of systems.
Mathematics is based on axiomatic constructions of systems.
And we have base components that allow us to construct pro, to elaborate on properties of, of systems or construct systems compositionally in a number of ways based on, like, like base base, like baseline rules.
Like for instance, considering the rules of arithmetic, right.
Mathematics is based on the, let's see, is there something that I should.
We talked a bit about guiding random search.
So this idea of abstract reasoning is rooted axiomatically because making decisions involves, involves again, trying to make sense of the sensations that we're trying to generalize.
And we're trying to prioritize those sensations as information.
And then we try and prioritize that information.
To make sense of the world around us in which we're constantly interfacing and engaging with.
So, um, now we, uh, come to an interesting dilemma of, uh, when we deal with this understanding of, of, okay, well, we're constantly engaging with the world around us and we can decompose.
Uh, we can actually embrace our engagement, um, axiomatically so to speak.
Uh, actually when we, uh, try to reduce sensations and, um.
Uh, we, we try and figure, figure out how to filter those, uh, sensations into information and prioritize that information based on how we prioritize sensations as information.
as information then we're prioritizing the information um okay well in mathematics there's
uh this this this this hole um that is brought about uh due to current girls incompleteness
uh theorems um not really going to get in that into that but uh what really should be um
what what should be uh the the moral of the story is uh that uh the lack of consistency um
in how we construct you know in the sense of how how girdle uses uh uh uh uses uh the action
uses the axioms of arithmetic as an example and trying to uh map those axioms to how we construct
the natural numbers um there's uh there's inconsistencies uh that he presents um in that um
and i guess this this more so uh and you know this sort of preside provides an insight into
uh the inconsistency in how we generalize sensations as information and then we try and generalize
information and try and have a consistent interpretation of reality which um in the
illusionists which in the illusionist sense uh you could argue that we never have a true representation
of reality but um enough of us can come to an agreement on some representation on of reality based on on how
we formally rep uh uh how we formally rep uh represent uh how we formally present models of the world around
us so in terms of making predictions about how certain aspects of reality works how certain aspects of the
of the environment uh like how how how do we generalize uh ways in which we can engage with the environment
not for ourselves but to facilitate cooperation with other agents right like if there is there are means in which
we can collectively come to some agreement that makes sense in the moment and then there's a better way
to make sense of in the future uh more so the illusionist aspect is that we're not gonna you know we would
be deluding ourselves if we truly thought like understood reality for what it is rather than really uh generalizing
uh certain features of it uh certain features of it that uh pertain to optimizing fitness and our survivability
and our engagement so ultimately we're we're exploring our environment and we're and we're just trying to uh
uh optimize our fitness with respect to how we engage with each other and ourselves within the environment um
and uh the uh the inconsistence the inconsistency is is the general the generalizations that we make
that um become replaced with better models in the future so that's not necessarily uh that's not
necessarily uh the same exact reasoning that girdle that kurt girdle makes saying well we have this inconsistency of
mapping the uh properties of uh of arithmetic in which we can we can compose certain uh systems with
arithmetic uh and map that to natural numbers in which we for which we assign each composition that we come
up with using arithmetic uh as uh some um iteration within the natural numbers and then we come to some
property that says that uh this property this proves that this prop uh this property shows that um this isn't true
uh well uh
yeah you you come to you come to a property uh that that that shows inconsistency
um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um um
that it's escaping me right now.
But essentially, you bump into a formalization of a contradiction
within trying to compose conditions that are consistent with the axioms of arithmetic.
But anyway, that's kind of outside of the scope of this presentation.
The whole point about inconsistency is that we're constantly generalizing
how we're engaging with the world around us as agents.
Okay, you're right.
So basically, a girl came up with a condition that said,
like this card proves that this condition proves that it's false.
Otherwise, it's true.
Right?
So you have a condition that proves that something is not untrue.
But it's also true that it's not true.
And that's the contradiction in a nutshell.
That's not exactly how he phrased it.
But I'm like talking off the top of my head.
But you basically arrive at a contradiction.
And it kind of sort of relating that back to how we generalize sensations and information is
we never have a completely consistent picture of reality,
especially how we engage with it.
And we're constantly reforming reformulating how we interpret our reality for what it is.
And that itself is the illusion, not that reality isn't an illusion,
but our understanding of reality is elusive because we're constantly generalizing
what reality really means.
I think we're ready to talk about preservation of viability.
Okay.
So this is where, and I'd spend a lot of time in this paper talking about interagent dynamics
in terms of like how cooperation is essential for how we even got to modern civilization as humans.
Like if we didn't cooperate well enough together, we just wouldn't have gotten, you know,
we wouldn't have Zoom calls.
We wouldn't have gotten to where we are if there was not some sufficient means in which we did.
We cooperated with each other effectively as sufficiently large groups of humans.
And this goes back to this preservation of viability, which really has to do with how we consider trade-offs
and engaging with our environment while also we consider how we engage with each other and recognize
and have this awareness of our own degrees of autonomy with respect to other humans as agents.
But we aren't the only agents that exist within the environment.
There are other agents that aren't humans that don't have the degrees of autonomy that humans have,
and we ought to acknowledge their existence as well and try to acknowledge the trade-offs
and optimizing how we engage with the environment and other agents that aren't humans that I kind of call lesser agents.
That they don't necessarily have the same degree of autonomy to engage with the environment around them.
And I'm going to get into that in a moment.
But really, there's this idea of this optimal ebb and flow of guiding our priors,
which is not limited to individual fitness of us individually, but also how we engage with each other.
So there's this idea of interagent coordination that ought to be facilitated.
And we can think about this in a diplomatic sense of like how we engage with each other.
And ultimately, this increases the well-being of each other and ourselves and our overall odds of survival.
And acknowledging that the dynamics of modern society itself,
where we fluidly communicate with each other through evolution of language, technology and bartering would not be possible
if we did not rely so much on how we coordinate and cooperate with each other.
Because that's critical to just how we got to where we are as human civilization.
And engagement with each other not only increases our chances to optimize fitness,
but it enables our capacity to further develop our awareness and means of engaging with our environment
in a way that can become more optimized over time at scale.
Right? Because more and more of us exist.
We have to think about scaling problems with scaling and how we collectively engage with each other.
And consider perception and actions of others, not just our own perception and actions and how we anticipate,
but as collectively how we all coordinate and cooperate in such a fashion to facilitate that.
So there's this idea of co-inhabitants and it's not just humans that exist on this planet,
but there's other organisms that do not have the degree of autonomy that we of agency we have,
but they serve functional role within the ecosystem for us to exist.
So I'm talking about all kinds of life, like plant life, you know, not just animals, but plants, fungi, molds, like insects.
If it wasn't for, you know, the existence of pollinators and all of these different species of organisms,
if they didn't exist, we wouldn't exist.
So we have to take, we have to acknowledge that, you know, it, you know, this, that we co-inhabit.
And actually some literature that came out recently comes up with this term co-evolution that we co-evolved with the,
with, I don't use the term biosphere in my work other than the abstract,
but we co-evolved with all these species that we co-inhabit the environment with.
And we're all embedded.
We're all essentially embedded within this, this ecosystem that we co-inhabit.
And so I think there should be more awareness brought to that front in terms with how, you know, there, there's so much,
there's such an issue with human conflict and just, you know, what I see as like this, this, this bias of not really recognizing at scale that we ought to do more to, to, to work together and symbiotically co-exist with our environment.
We, we, we, we ought to hold ourselves more accountable as a species because we have this, we have this level, we have such degrees of agency and awareness that,
that gives us the, that allows us, enables the potential for how we can cooperate and where that can lead us.
I mean, it got modern, it got humans to modern civilization, which I think is absolutely phenomenal.
And we're, we're going to get a little bit into that.
But before I get into that, I want to talk a little bit about uncertainty.
Um, so this kind of goes back to, uh, leveraging guided random search, um, where, um, there are moments with regarding to calibrating our perceptions with regard to next actions that we take in accordance to the past and present moment.
Uh, what could unravel in the future regarding optimizing our priors, especially when we're facing moments of uncertainty, right?
So, um, this hap, this, this has to do with complications that happen with regulating, uh, system two dynamics.
Um, and, uh, this, uh, when regards to non-triviality, non-linear evaluations of decisions, um, and, uh, this can complicate how we reason about the world around us and regulate our emotions and, um, uh, and how we can persistently act effectively in a re in a way that's reinforcing our emotions.
In a re in a way that's reinforcing our fitness.
So, uh, uh, persistent uncertainty, uh, uh, uh, persistent uncertainty with respect to conducting the capacity to perceive and act effectively can hinder the efficiency.
Um, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in, in
and figure out ways to how we can calibrate our perceptions
and our actions with respect to optimizing our priors.
And that has to do with how we recall, like how we were engaging
with our environment in the past, right?
We talk a lot about like anticipation with perspective, perceiving and acting.
And novelty really, you know, it's not just the improvisation,
it's kind of being clever and trying to experiment with ways to optimize fitness
in the face of uncertainty.
And this can be leveraged in the short term as well as the long term,
where novelty can be leveraged by considering how we recall experiences
in dealing with circumstances that are either out of the ordinary
or just by happenstance making a recollection from some point in the distant
or not so distant past relative to perception that may aid in improvising
against optimizing priors.
And we can consider this an aha moment, like, oh, I figured out what to do.
So in terms of novelty exploration and, you know, finding yourself dealing with uncertainty,
that's one aspect of handling uncertainty.
Another aspect of uncertainty is just be as unfamiliarity, like an agent being unfamiliar
with circumstances, they're just going to be have this sense of unfamiliarity of what to do.
And maybe other agents could help facilitate that, that have experience in dealing with those
circumstances that, that in accordance can help, you know, with cooperation can help the agent optimize
those moments of uncertainty by becoming familiar or at least developing that familiarity themselves,
which might be prompted by novelty exploration.
Now, down here, so there's, there's, there's a couple, there's two primary modes.
There's two, there's a, how do I say this?
Let's see.
Okay.
So,
on the one hand, there can be a means in which there's problems interpreting what we can do.
And from a perceptive point of view, that deals with interpretation.
Uh,
and this is, this has to do with, um, now when we consider problems with uncertainty, this is sort of,
kind of like the halting, I would, I kind of call it the halting problem of agency where an agent doesn't quite know what to do until they figure it out or maybe they don't figure it out.
And, you know, that kind of dooms the agent.
But, um, so on, from an interpretive point of view,
uh,
we can consider that, uh,
there's problems with considering what decision to make in terms of, uh,
uh,
the determinable,
the determinable sequence of actions in line with an agent's capacity to perceive their surroundings,
considering contextual variation of intrinsic and extrinsic value.
Um,
so that has to do with interpretation being, uh,
the problem of, uh, uh, uh,
of, uh,
aligning that, that aligns with uncertainty that there's,
the agent is having a problem interpreting what to do.
Uh,
on the other hand,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
on the other hand,
uh,
there is this,
um,
um,
so interpretation has to do with problems with the agent perceptively reflecting on
their priors moment by moment to understand what they ought to do to resolve
problems with optimizing fitness.
On the other hand,
there's problems with functional capacities of dealing with uncertainty where the actions
determine and where the actions determine and,
and execute upon moment by moment that fall in line with perception in alignment with priors.
Um,
there,
that there's a problem with,
um,
there's a problem with actions being selectively and sequentially carried out with regard to
context one by moment.
So on the one hand,
uh,
there,
uh,
uncertainty could be a problem with inter with perception.
On the other hand,
uh,
uh,
uncertainty can also be a problem of functional capacities in terms of like,
not just perception,
perception,
but also like how the agent ought to act,
uh,
with respect to the,
the circumstances they're dealing with.
Uh,
and selectively carrying out certain sequences of actions moment by moment where they're kind
of stuck trying to,
trying to carry out,
uh,
uh,
the action as opposed to,
uh,
making a decision on,
on,
on what,
how to interpret the circumstances they're in.
On the other hand,
um,
you know,
they also have problems with like acting on,
on the circumstances they're in as well.
Uh,
what else should I,
uh,
is there something interesting to say on this?
Uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,

uh,
uh,
that this is like the halting problem in terms of,
uh,
um,
you know,
um,
having difficulty perceiving or acting,
uh,
for the agent that compromises their fitness.
Um,
the traditional sense of the halting problem is when,
uh,
there's problems where you condition,
uh,
an algorithm,
uh,
on certain inputs and,
and,
um,
you don't feed any information for the,
uh,
to a system for an algorithm to evaluate it.
So it,
it just waits,
uh,
for inputs to come in or,
or rather it just hangs there.
And it does,
and it,
you know,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
uh,
the halting problem as I condone it to be is problem with dealing with uncertainty
where the agent just has problems perceiving,
uh,
understanding,
uh,
you know,
developing an understanding of,
uh,
sense of the circumstances they're in,
uh,
in an interpretive point of view.
On the other hand,
the agent also can have difficulty,
uh,
with,
under,
uh,
with,
uh,
action,
like,
uh,
with,
with,
with,
with,
ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
where the agent is constrained to explore novelty or novelty exploration, but also that the agent might just not be familiar with what to do and they just need to figure out what to do.
And that might not necessarily be novel for all the agents that have dealt with that circumstance, but it could be just novel for the agent dealing with that circumstance.
And on the one hand, if they cooperate with another agent that understands what to do and that agent communicates what to do and that resolves that misunderstanding or maybe sort of a novelty exploration sense, the agent figures out themselves.
So I guess you can call it a novelty exploration case in that sense.
And this has to do with, you know, these moments of uncertainty deal with error proneness and compromise of system two dynamics, right?
So let's see.
And uncertainty itself really arises from moments of ambiguity where information does not present enough clarity for the agent to perceive and act effectively in alignment with priors to optimize fitness.
And I do kind of compare how that differs between computers, like how, you know, computing systems that we're familiar with is different.
I'm not going to get too into that.
So unlike, let's see.
Okay.
Perceptions, actions, and alignment of priors become vulnerable to risk-taking behavior with respect to facing ambiguity as behavioral dynamics become a gamble on fitness of the agent in question.
Risk-taking behavior, however, is not necessarily maladaptive in its nature, but is prone to compromise the agent's fitness in which the risks taken may likely become maladaptive.
Given complications that happen with regulating rationale capacities and emotion throughput under moments of ambiguity, most especially for us human organisms become vulnerable to experiencing what is commonly known as anxiety.
So now I'm going to talk real quick about anxiety as a complication of ambiguity.
And that really has to be, that's really worrying about what's going to happen in the future, largely.
And being prepared to deal with those circumstances.
So when an agent is in this dilemma of what it can do regarding future circumstances, then it's dealing with what I like to call anxiety.
That would be some anxiety.
Let's see here.
Anxiety then would be some level of behavioral fixation which permeates due to lingering uncertainty in calibrating perceptions and conducting appropriate next actions.
This permeation ultimately presents itself as layers of thought-based as well as compulsion-based complexes that complicate perception with respect to generalizing next actions and aligning priors.
Given that anxiety is largely psychological, the degrees of anxiety permeation are primarily due to nurture dynamics where we consider constraints with regard to environmental exposure that can hinder adaptation, most especially with regard to trauma response.
And so hypervigilance is also complicates anxiety or rather oversensitivity in processing stimuli as well as overreactivity to responding to stimuli, which can be marginally rooted from physiological constraints.
Hypervigilance can also arise due to behavioral fixations arising from complications and nurture dynamics.
More concisely, hypervigilance presents itself as complex behaviors that enable our human organism to act on alert with regard to optimizing our perceptions, actions, and aligning priors.
Moments of hypervigilance can be useful when circumstances align well with fitness.
However, hypervigilance may pose to be maladaptive when it becomes compromised, most especially due to problems with upbringing or overexposure to certain environmental stimuli triggers.
So now we're going to kind of get into hyperarousal as opposed to hypoarousal.
So sensory processing complications that pose problems in calibrating perception are largely due to moments of noise filtering from generalizations of sensations being over or undercompensated.
So this overcompensation has to do with hypervigilance, while this undercompensation has to do with hypovigilance or hyperarousal as opposed to hypoarousal.
And overcompensation of sensory processing should, however, not be confused to be equivalent to some form of anxious behavior, but rather that moments of hyperarousal potentially complicates the permeation of how anxiety takes form and persists.
And all right.
Risk-taking behavior with respect to uncertainty.
So marginal risk is always associated with metabolic load demands and cognitive load demands.
There's always some risk associated with just engaging with environment and, you know, trying to prioritize resources and dealing with obstacles that, you know, inevitably comes, you know, even risks that we're unaware of, that we're unconscious of.
And also there's, you know, just given problems with cellular senescence and aging and becoming more suboptimally fit over time and, you know, also presents risks inevitably, right?
So here's an interesting bit I want to bring up regarding risk-taking.
There's a fine line between risk-taking behavior associated with uncertainty and risk-taking behavior due to intentionally maladaptive behavior.
Given that we associate risk-taking with perceptions and action-based gambling on fitness, cognitive biasing is involved with evaluating these gambles.
Fundamentally speaking, unless there is intention behind a particular agent deceiving itself, we consider such behavior to be risk associated with acting in accordance to uncertainty with respect to the agent in question.
Clearly, risk is associated with an agent's intentions, be it self-deceptive or otherwise, if there is marginal compromise to be considered in the case of optimizing fitness in some fashion.
Regardless, risk is inevitable to the well-being of agents as marginal compromise to fitness not only is pertinent based on executive functioning dynamics in System 1 and System 2 processes, but even metabolic load processing dynamics from bottom up that are not necessarily directly associated with executive functioning from the top down.
And this is the second to last section I have to go over.
Reinforcement learning.
See what I can pick out of here.
This is really getting more really into reinforcement learning with regard to agency.
Um,
So, um,
deterrence, uh, is something I realized didn't really talk about deterrence.
At least, uh, deterrent mechanisms.
So,
this is interesting.
Uh, given the, the whole point of reinforcement learning behavior is to leverage perceptions, actions, and priors to optimize fitness,
uh,
a rather interesting expectation one ought to conjure is that reinforcement has much to do with deterrence from perceiving, acting, and anticipating maladaptively.
Um,
deterrence, however, ultimately is not the goal of reinforcement learning based behavior, but rather some reinforcement learning based behaviors provide mechanism that mechanisms of deterrence, but not all.
ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
to align perceptions and actions with regard to precautionary constraints that alert the aging
question with regard to priors effectively demonstrates a mode of deterrence.
Okay, so here's something interesting about deterrence.
And then I might go a little bit over language and how that's important to how we engage with each other
in a cooperative fashion that got us as humans to where we are. But so just want to close off deterrence
here. Let's see. Okay.
Yeah, I'm going to try and wrap up this whole section. Right. Certain reinforcement learning
based behaviors may not have precautionary constraints aligned to them although may momentarily are
leveraged fitness due to opportunities in which the agent in question does not incur fitness
penalties with regard to assessing metabolic and functional risk that compromise overall integrity.
Additionally, while agents may be aware of modes of deterrence, they may be intentionally oblivious to
them. With regard to agents being intentionally self-deceptive towards modes of deterrence,
the purpose of doing so involves fitness trade-offs, which in large part not only encourages marginal
risk associated with fitness penalties over time, but also tends to be optimized with regard to
anticipating a trade-off in which the agent in question is convinced will pay off in the short
term or long term. Where things go awry with such self-deception and other means of self-deception
varies with regard to the magnitude of maladaptive behavior being enacted by the agent in question.
A rather paradoxical remark can be made regarding deterrence. Perhaps there are degrees of
deterrence associated with reinforcement learning based behaviors as associated with fundamental
the fundamental alignment of perceptions actions and priors. Such fundamental alignment is variable in
terms of navigating our environment with respect to what we consider a fitness landscape of associated
risks and precautionary constraints to consider. These associated risks and precautionary
constraints enabled an agent in question to leverage optimizing fitness and attentively
recognizing obstacles and aspects of the environment to be avoidant of in order to furthermore avoid
incurred fitness penalties that could that would be otherwise obvious to the agent in question.
So the rest of this section talks about interagent cooperation based dynamics. And then the other section that
I completed goes over maladaptive learning behavior. So I talked a bit about cooperation of agents and how that's important.
So what separates us as humans from any other agents that exists is just our capacity to to utilize and develop language to a point where we can take information
and and and have what we can take that information and turn it into generalized knowledge.
Usually using language to we can take language and information and make associations that stay consistent over a
a prolonged period of time with how we can take a prolonged period of time with how we as humans engage with each other and and are able to leverage the resources and constraints of our environment.
And and that impacts like how we develop social structures and just this this this capacity of cohesiveness in how we utilize language to augment our capacity.
to better, more optimally engage with our environment to better, more optimally engage with our environment, and furthermore,
to make generalizations of information and generalize knowledge
just to get to it um the the capacity to take an incorporated sophisticated length uh structured
language system and map that to concepts uh using language um becomes generalized knowledge um and
this is this is really what separates us from other agents and how we got to where we are um
and so we can think of like mimetic adaptation capacities emphasized through uh celia hay's
work on imitation learning and metacognition dynamics and more interestingly we can also
uh consider uh francois chollet's uh conceptualization of intelligence generalization
on how we make generalizations about our perceptions and actions and anticipate our environment but in
so in in a collective fashion utilizing this capacity of of structured of of language and how we're able to
like furthermore augment language as we utilize it and and and incorporate uh mappings to concepts
that become generalized knowledge because that knowledge enables us to to engage with each other
in a way that optimizes technology and tool use and in our capacity to engage with each other and make
abstract uh conceptualizations of the world around us and uh i could get really into that um but i spent a
lot of time writing about that but uh that that uh that that's really what makes us uniquely human now okay
maladaptive learning now has to do with error prone habits and now getting to um
um the real issue with maladaptive learning is what i like to call um
uh well i don't know how many of you are familiar with anon vadya's work uh anon vadya uh brings up this
interesting concept known as cognitive strain so we can think of like not just like you know if you
think about physics and forces and how like applying stress like uh let's say i take a ball and i throw
it at a wall and if i throw it throw the ball at a wall at the wall enough times it creates a dent in the
wall right so likewise cognitive strain um we can consider that like the amplitude you know the
kind of strain could be uh the problematic association of like what really makes maladaptive learning an
issue um that um this prolonged exposure to stressors that compromises fitness that compromises the
capacity for agents to have a a consistent world model and to um leverage their capacity to perceive act
and anticipate in a way that's intuitive and and unfortunately uh like excessive cognitive overload
uh compromises this so um this goes into like you know uh you know okay how do we facilitate that
well thinking about basic needs and what have you and due to lack of time i'm not going to get really into
that but what i will say um about cognitive strain is like you know if if you over if the agent is
overloaded with with with stressors like prolonged stressors right then that contributes to to trauma
and we can think of trauma as like being the result of this prolonged exposure
to to stressors and and that's associated with the amplification and magnification
of of cognitive strain um i would get more into um

and into and into uh into addiction and and all that stuff and and dealing with addiction
but I think that's more or less what I've thrown together so far in the body of my work.
I do, however, plan on talking about free will dynamics.
So to summarize what I feel about what makes free will relevant,
my point on free will is probably more on the compatibilist point of view
where we consider degrees of freedom and willpower to align our perceptions, actions, and priors
with regard to constraints in our environment that enables us to make choices reflective
of how we deal with existing circumstances and how those circumstances align in the future.
And that moments of non-determinism really become resolved when choices reduce or evaluate
to how certain decisions play out and certain choices align.
So moments of non-determinism become resolved into deterministic actions over time
based on how choices play out reflected to present moments of circumstances
which agents deal with that carry over and align with future scenarios that the agent finds themselves in.
So that was another, that's the last main, that has to do with the section on free will.
That's the last main section.
And then there's the conclusion section of the paper.
Of course, I also have a modeling section.
I didn't expect to go over models today, but I kind of elaborated my models would go over.
But I think that more or less talks about, that more or less covers, you know, there's a lot more I could talk about,
but more or less covers the work that I've been putting into this specific Goji paper of habits
and adaptive learning dynamics with respect to agents, agential systems.
Yeah, I know I can go on and on and thanks for that.
I just noticed that message in the chat not terribly long ago.
Yeah.
Well, thank you, Jesse.
Let us take a deep breath.
Okay.
Yeah.
You covered a lot of territory.
I'll just read two questions from the live chat just to note them.
And then I'll just ask a final question.
And then you can give a few minute response and then we'll close it.
Okay.
So Michael Lennon wrote,
how would he contrast the modification of individual habits versus habits between paired individuals versus habits of clusters of individuals?
And Michael's second question was, how might he describe how a moment of novel individual insight becomes collective behavior change?
How would he do that?
But just like to close it all out overall, where are you going to take this work and how do you intend to proceed with it?
Right.
So reflecting on Michael's questions.
Let's address those another time.
I know that you could go into a lot of information.
Let's just go right to the next steps.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So the next steps is, so this current paper is really an overview of addressing what are habits, what do habits have to do with adaptive learning, and how that ties with agential systems.
And in the conclusion section, I'm going to bring about what's going to happen with the next couple series of papers.
But really, I was originally going to go into the interventionary approaches geared towards adaptive learning.
But so the next steps I want to do with this work is go into the interventionary approaches towards adaptive learning.
So, okay, how can we use technology?
How can we, are there different modes in which we can better engage with information?
What about just how we engage the world around us?
Like how, like the food we eat, like how do we, like are there ways that we regulate food intake?
How about better understanding reasoning and emotion?
Like, like, is there some capacity in which we can better, how we can, how we can better reason with our emotions to have more effective reasoning capacities to deal with circumstances, largely dealing with non-triviality.
So those are the, those are the four next papers that I consider the four paradigms.
So the first paradigm has to do with technological interventions.
Like how can we utilize technology to better facilitate how we engage with the world around us and better benefit not only our own agency, but each other's agency.
And two would be, and two would be, uh, uh, mode, uh, paradigm two has to do with, okay, how can we better engage with certain objects in the world?
Like, like using tactile tools, uh, how can we use, uh, different objects to facilitate how we better engage with the world around us?
Uh, three, uh, three dieting dynamics.
How, how can we leverage metabolism, um, the most optimal fashion to, to, to, to, to leverage agency and, and, uh, for, of course, uh, uh, reasoning, like, is there some means in which we can better facilitate how we, uh, uh, deal with emotion, uh, affective processing and how that can better be, uh, how reasoning can be better, uh,
leveraged with better understanding of feeling with, with leveraging affective processing.
Um, so that, that's the next steps for me, and those are going to be individual papers.
Although I do have a, uh, I do plan on talking about the different brain regions.
So like a neuroscientific, uh, more of a neuropsychological, uh, approach in terms of, and going, talking about the different brain regions that are associated with, uh, habits and adaptive learning.
Um, and agency, but that would be a fifth paper.
Um, okay.
Last question.
How could people contact you or what would you look to ask people for or how they could get involved?
Um, uh, I, uh, I do have like a business email, but what I, I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll have like an email where that, uh, I'll provide a different email, uh, that I can.
Have people reach out to me, uh, by it's, it's a Google mail account.
Um, so, uh, reach out to me, um, and, uh, hopefully, um, uh, you know, I, I would love to try and collaborate with the right parties.
Um, and see where this work can go.
I, I mean, I have a lot of, uh, confidence in terms of, especially with, uh, the system model that I'm designing in terms of technological interventions.
I would love to talk to people about that.
Uh, cause that's the next main step I'm going with is okay.
Well, there's a problem with how we interface technology, like with social media and like just a lot of platform, like just a lot of basic technologies right now that.
Really compromises how we engage with you in the, with the world.
Like it's addictive, like, like social media is addictive.
Like people play mobile games on their phone.
Right.
Right.
And that people can waste hours doing all that stuff.
So how can we better develop systems that compliment rather than compromise our behavior?
Um, I think that's really important to figure out.
Um, and I would love to talk to more people about that.
Um, awesome.
Well, you covered a ton of scope.
I hope that people who are studying active inference see a lot of the connections.
In the terms and topics and systems and good luck in your learning and research.
Thank you.
I appreciate it.
Peace, Jesse.
Bye.
Bye.






















































....

## Wn65WcYGQSA

Hello and welcome everyone. This is Active Inference Guest Stream 84.1 on July 22, 2024
on Anthropocentric Bias and the Possibility of Artificial Cognition with Rafael Maguire
and Charles Rathkoff. So Rafael and Charles thank you very much both for joining, to you for
introductions and to take us through the paper. Hello and welcome everyone. This is Active Inference
Guest Stream 84.1 on July 22, 2024. Thank you. Okay thank you guys go for it. Hi thanks for having us.
So I'm Rafael. I'm an assistant professor at Macquarie University in Australia, Sydney.
And Charles? I'm Charles Rathkoff. I'm a prominent research associate at the
Jülich Research Center in Jülich, Germany in a big neuroscience institute.
So should we go through the paper briefly? So yeah, we wrote this paper together. Actually,
we started by writing the general audience piece that was published in Vox online. When was that?
A few months ago I guess. Yeah, I think almost close to a year ago maybe.
I don't think it was published a year ago. I think it was published in 2020.
Yeah. Or 2024. But yeah, we worked in for a while. Yeah, so this piece was doing,
I guess, two things. That piece that we published in Vox, it was pushing back against what we call the
all or nothing principle, which we define as the idea that either something has a mind or it doesn't.
So this kind of neat but overly simplistic, perhaps, partition of things into minded and non-minded things.
And we argued that this was not the best framing to think of, especially unfamiliar systems that seem to
have sophisticated behavioral capacities like large language models or AI systems in general,
where we don't want to take various cognitive capacities in the package and package them into
this idea of a mind where either you have the mind or you have them. And if you have the mind,
you have all of these things as a package, consciousness, reasoning, etc. Planning, memory,
theory of minds. So we thought, so as a remedy to this kind of all or nothing approach,
we argued for a more what we call the divide and conquer strategy when studying the cognitive
capacities of these systems, which involved looking at these capacities on a piecemeal basis,
case by case, with an open minded empirical approach. Yeah, Charles, I don't know if you have
anything else that's on the box piece of background.
Charles, I think we have a question.
Yeah, I mean, we made one point in there about why it is that people feel so torn about
reactions to large language models. And we said a little bit about the psychology of essentialism,
which is the idea that we naturally categorize, especially living things with respect to a presumed
essence. So we gave an example of an oak tree, I think. And we said that what people tend to think
as they grow up and learn about the natural world is that an oak tree remains an oak tree regardless of
changes to its observable properties. And what makes it an oak tree is this unobservable
essence of oakness or whatever that it presumably has. And there's some experimental psychology and
developmental psychology showing that we have a similar attitude towards mindedness or having a mind.
And that is a somewhat speculative explanation for why the literature on large language models is so
torn and some people are quite dismissive and other people think that it's a step away from AGI.
And that's why it's that if you feel like you've got to put large language models into one of two boxes,
the box that has the essence of mindedness or the box that lacks it, then you will be forced either to say
or to say it doesn't have what it takes to do any of the things that we associate with having a mind, such as reasoning,
or it has the essential characteristics of mindedness and therefore we should expect it to have
all of the other properties we associate with mindedness as well, such as consciousness or
understanding or whatever.
Right. I think it's worth emphasizing as you did that the background motivation for starting to write
on this general piece in the first place is indeed that the general discourse on AI systems and LLMs in
particular is extremely polarized in a way that is very dichotomous and stark. So you have on the one
head people, on one hand, people arguing that these systems are no more than so-called stochastic
parrots that are haphazardly stitching together samples from the training data and regurgitating them,
or that they are no smarter than toaster or that they only do next token prediction and export prediction
and therefore it is a non-starter to ascribe to them any form of cognitive capacity or maybe even
a category mistake. And then on the other end of the spectrum, on the other end of the spectrum,
you have people arguing that the systems are harbangers of superhuman intelligence, that there
exhibits sparks of artificial general intelligence to perhaps the... or even literally, it's literally the
title of a paper by Microsoft, don't you know, before. And many people hyping up the capacity of the
systems in a way that might seem very speculative and untethered from actual empirical results. So
there is this huge gap between these two positions and there's presumably a very rich and complex and
nuanced middle ground that is underexplored. Partly perhaps, I think we did make that point,
if not explicitly in the published piece and in some drafts, that there's something reassuring about
being able to make definitive claims about what these systems are and what they do, right? So either
they're really unsophisticated or they're really very much like us and either of these claims kind of
meet somewhere in a way in saying that we have a clear idea of what the systems do and what they are.
And I think it's a little more epistemically uncomfortable to say, we have to study them
empirically and find out what they can or cannot do and why and what are the underlying mechanisms.
And we simply don't know a prior, just by looking at the architecture, the learning objective,
the training data, these sources of evidence are insufficient to make the definitive claims about
what these systems are capable of. So I think that's, that was part of the, a big part of the motivation.
And that feeds into that more academic paper as well.
Yeah. One other small side note, which we don't make in the paper, but I think might be relevant,
especially for people working in philosophy, LOMs are epistemically uncomfortable. I think that was the
phrase you just used, Raf, which is fitting. Not only because they're so new and different,
but also because they are artifacts, right? They're things that humans have constructed and engineered.
And we don't have a thorough understanding of how they work. I mean, mechanistic interpretability and various
behavioral research is helping us improve our understanding. But on the whole, our understanding is not nearly as deep as hopefully it one day will be.
And this is by itself a really strange situation to be in that we've constructed an artifact that we only partially understand.
In the, in the past, artificial intelligence was seen as a way of constructing something like an epistemic assistant,
right? Something that will help us, but not something that will kind of alienate us from the process of coming to know about the world.
So I think there's an extra layer of discomfort built into thinking about large language models.
And that may also play into the divisiveness of debates about what they can do.
And just to add to that, I guess we should be clear that this does not entail in any way that we think the systems are so completely alien and beyond the reach of our current understanding that anything goes and that they could very well be
You know, have like human-like intelligence or superhuman intelligence and we simply cannot say whether or not they do well.
Because that's sometimes what you see in some op-eds where people frame these systems as novel alien forms of intelligence that we have created, but do not understand or control.
And that is, you know, it's a slippery slope that leads some people to then claim that they have all these quite magical abilities.
And that's not all what we want to say here. And in fact, we want to resist.
That's a cop-out. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah.
So we think that that's just as much of a cop-out as completely dismissing a priori what these systems might be capable of without doing the work of looking into the capacities with behavior or mechanistic studies.
So we very much want to reduce both extremes of the spectrum, if that makes sense.
Okay. So now should we move towards the content of the current paper?
Sounds good. Yeah.
Okay. Maybe, Raphael, I'll just start with the distinction between anthropomorphism and anthropocentrism and then you can take the next step.
So everyone is aware of the problem of anthropomorphic bias in some form.
I mean, anthropomorphism is just the idea of projecting human qualities onto something non-human.
And it's quite easy to, especially when you're having a productive, successful exchange with a large language model,
it's easy to slip into this interpretive mode where you reason about the responses of the large language model
as if they were coming from an agent just like you.
And maybe that's a useful thing to do in some circumstances, but from a theoretical perspective,
it's certainly a mistake because large language model is radically unlike a human agent in all sorts of ways.
But that's only one form of sort of human-centric bias. The other one is
anthropocentrism or what we call in that Vox article, anthropocentric chauvinism.
And that idea is pretty straightforward. It's the idea that the human way of solving problems is the
gold standard of solving problems generally. So that to the extent that a system solves a problem in a way
that diverges from the human strategy, it's only using a trick or a faux solution.
It's not using a deep, general, rational strategy.
And in the debate about what large language models can do, we think that the anthropomorphic bias is
pretty well recognized and the anthropocentric bias is not so well recognized. And so part of this paper
is, or the main idea behind the paper is to present a systematic analysis of
anthropocentric bias, how it comes about and how to push back against it.
Right. And we want to be very clear, and hopefully we're clear in the paper, that
the reason why we focus on anthropocentric bias here is just because it is, I think, as Charles
mentioned, less discussed and less recognized, or some forms of it are less recognized. And we make,
we propose this new taxonomy. But it's not at all to suggest that it's more problematic or more important
than the anthropomorphic bias that's well discussed in the literature, or the anthropomorphic biases,
plural. So in other words, this is not, you know, to frame things in this slightly problematic,
dichotomous way of thinking that's common in the discourse in LLM. This is not a paper that is
pandering to the LLM booster or LLM hype camp, even though it is pushing back against a certain form of
dismissal of anthropocentric biases that only exclusively emphasizes anthropomorphic biases.
But perhaps we should flesh this out a little bit already with the first one we make here in the paper
about the performance competence distinction, which is a nice way to bring about both anthropomorphism
and anthropocentrism regarding LLM. So this distinction is a very classic distinction in linguistics and
cognitive science, and it has already been applied to AI systems in the neural networks productively,
like people like Charles Farson. So there's nothing really new here. But the distinction comes from
Noam Chomsky originally, and the idea is that performance pertains to the external behavior of
a system in a particular domain, and competence is the kind of set of underlying knowledge and
computations or mechanisms that enable the system to achieve that behavior. And a familiar observation in
linguistics and cognitive science is that there is a double dissociation between performance and competence.
So if you take, for example, language, I might during this very podcast make some grammatical mistakes or
some other mistakes. In fact, I've already misspoken a few times, I think, and repeated myself. So I've made
performance errors. But this does not entail necessarily, hopefully, that I'm an incompetent language user and
that I don't have the underlying linguistic competence. So that's a well-recognized dissociation. You can be
competent and yet make some errors. And the reason for that is that there might be some additional factors
that are unrelated to the underlying competence that might impede on my performance. So for example, I might be
distracted when I speak or there might be other effects on my speaking performance that don't actually
originate from a lack of competence, but just impede on the idealized expression, external
manifestation of my competence. And this is why I misspeak. But it's also why we recognize that you can have
good performance without competence. So we give here the example of a student cheating on a test or memorizing
test answers by brute forcing the test into slightly more, I guess, gray area. But at least in the cheating case,
a student can ace a test without being competent at whatever the test is actually testing for.
And it's also well acknowledged in cognitive science that there can be instances like this throughout,
you know, like that can be manifest in certain experimental settings where the test subject is
right for the wrong reasons, as it were. Namely, it's doing well, it's exhibiting good performance,
and then we realize the underlying reason for good performance is that there was some, perhaps some
heuristic that the experimenters or the scientists haven't thought about that could account for this
good performance, but doesn't actually amount to whatever competence they were setting out to test.
So we start by saying, well, this is what we recognize in cognitive linguistics, this is the
world association that has supplied to humans across the board. You can have performance without
competence, good performance without competence, and you can have bad performance despite competence.
Now, when it comes to LLMs, the point we make, just going to scroll as we go, we have some figures to
share later, but the point we make is that generally people stress the dissociation, apply the distinction
to LLMs, but stress dissociation only in one direction, unlike in the case of human where it's bi-directional.
And so what people do generally is they say, well, LLMs famously, you know, if you look at the GPT-4
technical report and, and various other, any, any, any report about a new state-of-the-art LLM,
they are getting really, really good at a number of tests and about benchmarks and even
human exam, examinations, human exams, the bar exam, medical exams, et cetera.
So they can, they get a really good performance at tests that we tend to think are really difficult
tests that one can only pass, at least a human could only pass if they have a really significant
non-tributive amount of competence in the practical domain. And the point that is often made when it
comes to LLMs is be careful, slow down and try to find out why the model is doing well on that test,
because there are bias reasons why it could do well that do not actually indicate that the model
has the underlying competence that the test was designed for when it comes to humans.
So one big concern, for example, is data contamination where very large language models
train on internet scale data
can easily be trained on some test items from common benchmarks that leak into the training data,
such that they can then do really well on the benchmark just because they've essentially memorized
test items. And there are other more subtle reasons why performance could be very good for the wrong
reasons. So that's very well recognized. And a lot of the people who push back against anthropomorphic
bias when it comes to LLM. Make that point. Be careful, do not take on an anthropomorphic attitude to the systems.
The reason why they do well is not because they have human-like intelligence or human-like
capacities, but it's for this trivial contingent or otherwise irrelevant reasons
that account for the good performance. Now when it comes to the other dissociation, or the other dissociation,
in the other direction, their people are very reluctant to apply it to LLMs. And we think it's because
essentially people think in a human case, you can make sense of the idea that the human could do badly
on a test or corporate could perform badly on a task and yet have the competence that you're trying to test,
but there might be some auxiliary factors such as working memory limitations,
attention deficits, etc. that could impede on the performance. But in the language model, I think
we argue in the paper, I want to argue in the longer version of the paper, is that
a lot of people don't think that there is an analogous mechanism at play where there could be some
kind of auxiliary factor that impedes on performance. Performance is what you get, what you see is what you get.
And so the performance is a direct manifestation of what the system is computing. And if performance,
if you have performance errors, that can only be explained by the lack of competence because there is no
additional independence factor or module that could impede on the performance.
Sources of interference, you might say.
Yeah, so that would be great. So yeah, I'll pass it approach to you, Charles. I just wanted to set up
the distinction. Yeah, yeah. Right. So I mean, if you think about a traditional computer program,
or at least if you think about a simple computer program, it's odd to think of it as some sort of
complex systems where it's a complex system where one part of it could sort of interfere with the
workings of another part of it. But one of the points we want to make is that something like that
is a realistic possibility with large language models. Okay. But I suppose the next part of the
paper goes into a taxonomy of anthropocentric bias. And the first sort of overarching
point is the distinction between type one and type two. So the type one anthropocentrism
is the tendency to assume that an LLM's performance failures designed to measure competence
always indicates that it lacks that competence. And so we, before we, so we'll say something about
three different kinds of type one anthropocentric bias. But first, a background point, which is that
is that whenever we think it's possible to give a mechanistic explanation of some complicated
phenomenon, we always have to foreground some factors, some variables, and background others.
And the properties that we push into the background
nevertheless matter. We're still making assumptions about the nature of those properties when we try to
articulate what's going on with the other properties that we're paying more attention to. And if
assumptions about those properties in the background turn out to be wrong, then those mistakes will
corrupt our explanation that attends only to the foreground and factor. So that's a little bit
abstract. Let me just give you a simple example. In comparative cognition, one famous
behavioral experiment is the mirror test for self recognition. So the question is roughly,
do non-human animals have something like a concept of self? And the strategy is to put some sort of mark on their
body. In the original experiments, it was a red dot on the forehead of maybe a monkey and or a bird or
whatever. And then you put that animal in front of a mirror and see if it makes any attempt to get rid of the mark.
And if it does make an attempt to get rid of the mark, that shows that it recognizes that the image in the
mirror is an image of itself and otherwise not. So that's a cool way to get at a really difficult and abstract
question about the mind of the mind of a non-human animal. But it presumes or it assumes that animals
will care about the fact that they have a red dot on their forehead, that they will be bothered by that
and be motivated to get rid of it. And if that assumption is wrong, then they might fail the mirror
test for self recognition for reasons that have little to do with the presence or absence of
a capacity for self recognition. And so something similar to that is going on, we say, in large language models.
So the first example that we give is to do with task demands. So you can,
it's a pretty natural idea that whenever you set up a behavioral task, there will be demands associated
with that task that are not directly related to the capacity that you're trying to test. So to take the
most obvious example that I can think of, if you give someone a written test, they have to be able to write.
They have to have a hand and a pen and whatever. And if their hand was injured or whatever and they
couldn't write, then their failure to fill out the test wouldn't tell you anything about their academic knowledge.
So we suggest that there are auxiliary task demands in behavioral tests of a large language model.
And they're subtle. You wouldn't think of this right away. But we talk about a paper from
Hu and Frank. They have a couple of papers on this topic. But what they do is they give a large language
model the following sort of question. This is a question for grammaticality judgment. So you can see
on the image there which sentence is better in English. Number one, every child has studied. Number two,
every child have studied. Answer with one or two. And it gives the wrong output. But then
you can also simply look at the probabilities assigned to each of those sentences within the model and
figure out directly whether the model thinks that input A is more likely than input B.
And it turns out that on a wide variety of questions of this kind, the direct comparison does or the large
language models perform better with the direct comparison than they do with the more complex
demand for metalinguistic judgment. So the fact that the model has to process the numbering of the
options and then answer in terms of a number is a subtle but nevertheless important additional variable
in the experiment. And that can influence the model's capacity to get the answer right. Raphael,
do you want to add to that? Raphael B.: No, I think that, well, maybe we can mention briefly the
other example that we discuss which is from this paper by Andrew Lampinan, which kind of has a little extra
ingredient that makes the example interesting and even more problematic in terms of comparative psychology,
which is one way in which auxiliary test demands can be ignored or disregarded or overlooked.
Raphael B.: Is when you are doing a direct comparison between humans and other elements on a task and the experimental conditions are mismatched in such a way that the task,
as you set up, imposes stronger demands, stronger task auxiliary demands on the LLM than it does on human subjects.
Raphael B.: And that's something that can happen quite often. And so there is this interesting example
Raphael B.: From a couple of papers originally published by BlackRats and colleagues from Stan Dehantz Group, where they looked at the ability of language models to handle recursion.
Raphael B.: Looking at center embedded clauses, how such clauses might,
Raphael B.: For example, when you add a prepositional phrase within the subject of the sentence and the verb might throw up either humans or LLMs into agreeing the verb in the wrong way.
Raphael B.: So giving the wrong number to the verb.
Raphael B.: For example, the keys that the man put on the table, here it should be R, because keys is plural,
Raphael B.: But because you have clothes in the middle. And if you add more clothes, it's like this that are embedded in the middle, people and other ones can get confused and
Raphael B.: predict that the verb should be is, for example.
Raphael B.: So they tested this on humans and other elements and found that on the more complex examples involving complex,
Raphael B.: More complex constructions or recurrent humans were doing decently well, but other elements performance
Raphael B.: was collapsing compared to the same for examples. And I'm sure an opinion from DeepMind looked into that and realized that the experimental conditions were mismatched.
Raphael B.: So the humans, as is very common in coding science experiments, were getting some training before they completed the test items to just get familiarized with the task.
Raphael B.: So they were given some examples of the task for each condition.
Raphael B.: And the other labs were just prompted zero shots as people usually put it. So just
Raphael B.: Without any example, just point blank. And Andrew found out that if you, he replicated the experiments, but added some proper matched testing conditions for the other lab.
Raphael B.: So adding some examples of the task in the prompts, what's known as few-shot prompting.
Raphael B.: And with that, he found that performance was equivalent. In fact, the other lab that he tested was slightly better on the more complex constructions than humans.
Raphael B.: So when you match the task conditions here, you actually match also parties. It's not automatic, but you can match the test demands.
Raphael B.: I mean, it could be that there are reasons why the various experimental conditions would result in different demands for humans and others.
Raphael B.: But you still, in this case, even out of the playing field in such a way that you don't find the behavioral discrepancy that you found initially anymore.
Raphael B.: Yeah.
Raphael B.: Good. So shall we continue to the next section?
Raphael B.: Yeah.
Raphael B.: So another
Raphael B.: Another way that auxiliary or another type of auxiliary task demand is input independent computational limitations.
And here we're thinking of a few papers that show that the number of forward passes that the transformer
can make influences its ability to find the right spot in parameter space. So neural networks are
Raphael B.: Function approximators.

Raphael B.: But their
Raphael B.: Their ability to approximate a function can be eliminated, can be limited by the
Raphael B.: The number of computations it's allowed to perform and the
Raphael B.: Crucial feature of transformers in this example is that
Raphael B.: The number of operations that determines the next token is limited by the number of tokens that it's seen so far.
Raphael B.: And it turns out that if you train a transformer with
Raphael B.: Additional meaningless tokens.
Raphael B.: Like pause tokens like the word pause
you can
Raphael B.: Increase its accuracy across a range of
Raphael B.: Of question types.
Raphael B.: And
Raphael B.: Yeah, this is
Raphael B.: This counts as an auxiliary task demand in our view because
Raphael B.: It's doing something roughly analogous to sort of giving the model
Raphael B.: That's the mandatory factor right.
Raphael B.: Yeah.
Raphael B.: Yeah.
Raphael B.: Yeah.
Raphael B.: Yeah.
Raphael B.: It's doing something like giving the model
Raphael B.: Time to think and.
Raphael B.: Yeah, so you might think that the absence of that additional
Raphael B.: Inference time is.
Raphael B.: A factor
Raphael B.: That is not directly not conceptually related to its capacity to answer
Raphael B.: A question like the one on the screen.
Raphael B.: You know, a simple
Raphael B.: Earth medical question.
Raphael B.: Raph, do you want to fill in.
Raph G.: Yes.
Raph G.: Yeah.
Raph G.: No.
Raph G.: So I think that analogy is a nice one time to think because
Raph G.: If you if you tested a human on even a simple mathematical questions or any any task really
Raph G.: And just ask them, you know, told them they have like one second to just bloat out answer.
Raph G.: Performance would probably be pretty bad.
Raph G.: And you can think of asking an LLM to answer a question point blank as very, very loosely analogous to that.
Raph G.: And obviously, this is an analogy and there are very important differences here, but I think it's a helpful heuristic to think about what is what is going on roughly here.
Raph G.: And in both cases, the system, the human or the LLM does not get the chance to perform the necessary computations to derive the correct answer.
Raph G.: And so yeah, what we talk about in the paper is that you have this experimental work string that if you ask a question to language model,
Raph G.: the amount of tokens it's a it's it's allowed to generate before providing the answer
Raph G.: makes a difference to how accurate it is.
Raph G.: So if it just generates a few tokens and have to give an answer, or even if it just has to give the answer point blank with the very first token,
Raph G.: it's going to be less accurate that if you give it a chance to generate a number of tokens before the answer.
Raph G.: So the usual way in which this is understood is that when you ask when you you you allow the LLM to generate a number of tokens before giving the answer or you even prompted to do so you say think step by step, for example.
Raph G.: That's not a chain of thought prompting and essentially what you're doing is you're forcing the LLM to generate a reasoning trace or what looks outwardly externally like a reasoning trace in the output before giving an answer.
Raph G.: And we know that chain of thought prompting increases performance accuracy.
Raph G.: But what was found by a couple of papers.
Raph G.: Is that the.
Raph G.: mechanistic influence of this process is not entirely due to the nature of the tokens are generated in this reasoning trace.
Raph G.: In other words, it's not just that the LLM has to.
Raph G.: generate the right tokens corresponding to different steps of reasoning before giving an answer.
Raph G.: In fact, the very fact that you allow the LLM to just generate tokens, any token before giving an answer from a mechanistic perspective,
Raph G.: The force the system to perform additional computations that can complete a computational circuit that otherwise wouldn't get a chance to be completed and to derive the correct answer.
Raph G.: So as Charles mentioned, you can have you can set up an experiment when you have the LLM just generate meaningless tokens like these are just the dots.
Raph G.: A bunch of dots dot tokens before giving the answer.
Raph G.: And the more dots you allow before the token gives the answer, the greater the expressivity of the system and the more.
Raph G.: The more kinds of problems problems you can answer.
Raph G.: And so as Charles mentioned, every time an LLM is generating a token, the LLM is performing one forward pass.
Raph G.: And so the more tokens is generating, the more forward passes it's doing.
Raph G.: And one way to think about what's going on here as well is that.
Raph G.: Having the additional forward passes where you you feedback the whole input sequence plus the previously generated tokens into the system to generate next.
Raph G.: Is also a way to introduce the form of recurrence in transformers that are not in terms of the architecture of recurrent networks.
Raph G.: So that increases the activity and complexity of the terms.
Raph G.: And yeah, there is there is pretty compelling evidence that.
Raph G.: If you don't allow for that, then you're imposing a limitation that again, we think is very, very loosely analogous to prompting a human to answer a point of a question without thinking.
Raph G.: So that's an auxiliary factor, because if you give the LLM the opportunity to generate enough tokens,
it might have the competence.
Raph G.: To solve tasks, but you might not see that otherwise, you might get performance errors, but you do think it's the competence.
Raph G.: All right.
Raph G.: Yeah.
Raph G.: Okay.
Raph G.: So the third type of type one anthropocentric bias that we talk about is mechanistic interference.
And so this comes from the mechanistic interpretability work.
And the basic idea is that because large language models are capable of in context learning, they can
learn different strategies for solving a different particular type of problem.
And the strategy that they implement at a given time can be different.
So you can talk about this in terms of virtual circuits that are formed inside the language model.
Raph G.: And there's some interesting work from Neil Nanda and others showing that in some circumstances,
these two circuits can compete with one another.
Raph G.: So at a certain level of, or after a certain amount of training, you get one circuit operative.
Raph G.: After a bit more training, you have two different circuits, but the first circuit is still sort of dominant.
And then after additional training, the model
Raph G.: converges on the second circuit.
Raph G.: And the first one slowly gets sort of.
Raph G.: It sort of ceases to influence the internal operations of the model and it's only once you reach that third phase.
Raph G.: At which the.
Raph G.: The.
Raph G.: Benefits of the second circuit with respect to the first become visible.
Raph G.: So you can you can show using decoding work that the second circuit is there.
Raph G.: Before you can show behaviorally that the second circuit.
Raph G.: yields better performance accuracy on on the task.
Raph G.: So I suppose there's a combination of two ideas here.
Raph G.: One is that.
Raph G.: There are different strategies a model can.
Raph G.: Implement for solving a problem.
Raph G.: We can.
Raph G.: Detect those strategies internally using decoding methods.
Raph G.: So three ideas and then the third is.
Raph G.: A good strategy.
Raph G.: Can be.
Raph G.: President in some sense in the model.
Raph G.: Before it has had the chance to influence behavior.
Raph G.: And so this is just another way that the link between performance and competence
Raph G.: Is shown to be complicated than it might seem at first.
Raph G.: Raph can certainly explain that.
Raph G.: And yeah, just to to go ahead for one thing.
Raph G.: So the circuits are just.
Raph G.: You know ways to think about the causal structure of neural network and essentially
computational sub graphs of network that have a specific function.
Raph G.: You can think of a circuit as implementing a particular algorithm or set of computations.
Raph G.: It's a part of what people are interested in in this mechanistic interoperability literature
that we build on.
Raph G.: People like Neil Nandak, Chris Ola and others is reverse engineering.
Raph G.: The circuits that in deep neural networks and large language models.
Raph G.: Pure to implement certain well defined algorithms in some cases, at least.
Raph G.: And the emerging picture that we build on here is that
Raph G.: There is a lot of redundancy built into neural networks as they learn to
perform a task optimizer's function.
Raph G.: That in many cases translates into redundant circuits that relate to the same tasks, the same kinds of
Raph G.: The same kinds of input output mappings.
Raph G.: And for these circuits might be somewhat identical circuits that are just redundant or they
might be different algorithms to do similar things and different strategies to solve some problem,
I swear.
Raph G.: Maybe one will be a bit more approximative and the other one a bit more exact,
more competition intensive.
Raph G.: So that's where you can have some interference where one
Raph G.: Or at least some competition where once your kid takes over another
and
Raph G.: Such that the other becomes kind of,
Raph G.: It's there, it's latent in the system, but it doesn't get a chance to influence behavior on a specific
input.
Raph G.: So you can get a performance error for that reason.
Raph G.: And these can combine with the other things we mentioned here.
Raph G.: So things like task demands, the first thing we discussed, as well as the number of tokens you
generate, both of these things could cause a particular circuit to take over another.
Raph G.: So we can think of this holistically as perhaps if you ask a question point blank to a model without
letting it generate a bunch of tokens before giving an answer, then one particular approximate circuit
might take over that gives the wrong answer.
Raph G.: If you let it generate more tokens, then another more exact circuit might be given a chance to
Raph G.: It could influence the outputs, the right answer.
Raph G.: And similarly, with task demands, strong task demands might in some cases
Raph G.: Impede on the triggering of certain circuits that would otherwise have given the right answer.
Raph G.: So that could be the case perhaps in the Lacrette and Lampinian example, where giving examples of the task
Raph G.: might actually prime the right circuit to solve the task about complex recursive cases in the right way.
Raph G.: So yeah, these are the three main auxiliary factors that we relate to what we call type one anthropomorphism,
Raph G.: I'm sorry.
Raph G.: I guess we should, we've been a bit longer ways, we should be quick on type two.
Raph G.: Do you want to prefix when type two, Charles?
Charles B.: Yeah.
So type one deals with cases where performance of the model is weak compared to humans, so the model
doesn't do so well.
And then type two is when the model does do well, but nevertheless is different in some respect from
Charles B.: The performance profile of the human or we have some evidence to think that the model
uses a different strategy than humans typically use.
Charles B.: And the idea is that
Charles B.: Even once you hold performance equivalent or average performance equivalent,
Charles B.: you know, making a different pattern of errors or adopting a different
Charles B.: strategy is evidenced by some interpretability work, any deviance from the human strategy is evidence of fragility or only a trick solution.
Charles B.: And this point is a bit more philosophical, I suppose, but the idea is that
Charles B.: the human strategy for solving a problem
Charles B.: isn't necessarily the most general strategy for solving a problem.
Charles B.: And what matters is whether the strategy
Charles B.: that is pursued by the model is general, whether it's robust, whether it's accurate,
Charles B.: and not merely whether it mirrors the human strategy.
Charles B.: Yeah.
Charles B.: And we end the paper by considering an objection,
Charles B.: which is
Charles B.: why
Charles B.: like given that in humans we study cognition largely through language
Charles B.: and given that LLMs are trained on language or on linguistic outputs from humans,
Charles B.: isn't it appropriate after all to treat
Charles B.: human cognition as the correct or appropriate the artistic to study LLMs.
Charles B.: And to that we answer that it depends how we think of that dialectic.
Charles B.: So we acknowledge that there is no
Charles B.: really other option than to start our investigation of cognitive abilities in LLMs
Charles B.: with reference to human cognitive abilities, using human cognitive abilities
Charles B.: as some kind of realistic reference points, things like theory of mind, memory,
Charles B.: metacognition, various forms of reasoning, etc. that are familiar to us because we humans have them.
Charles B.: And this is something by the way in animal cognition, for example, or in developmental psychology,
Charles B.: where in any comparative psychology set up
Charles B.: the reference point for what concept psychological capacity is initially at least
Charles B.: is necessarily tied up with our conception of what we humans have in our repertoire of cognitive capacities.
Charles B.: But we emphasize that this is only the starting point. So here we've written from the philosopher Ali Boyle,
Charles B.: who calls this investigative kinds, investigative cognitive kinds. We start with a cognitive kind,
Charles B.: like memory or meta-dominition, maybe the memory, meta-dominition theory of mind,
Charles B.: as an investigative starting point, starting point of the investigation. And then we have,
Charles B.: we can try to start operationalizing this concept, this kind, this cognitive capacity
Charles B.: in an experiment, testing LLMs on it with an open-minded empirical approach. And then based on the results from that,
Charles B.: iteratively refine the capacities that we are targeting or definition of the capacity we're targeting in a way that could
Charles B.: gradually lead us to share the initial anthropocentric assumptions that we have, such that as the experimental
Charles B.: project runs a course or as we make, as we get more results and refine our concepts, we may end up with
Charles B.: something that no longer looks like looking, trying to find human-like specific memory in Ravens or
Charles B.: or in LLMs, but ends up looking like looking for something that some capacity that is, that shares some similarity with human-like human episodic memory, but is different in other respects.
Charles B.: And so we can gradually come up with a kind of cognitive ontology for the systems that is less anthropocentric.
Charles B.: So we emphasize that there's this kind of virtuous feedback loop here, that's that's that's that's premise on open-minded empirical investigation that doesn't settle these questions a priori, but has to start
Charles B.: as a necessary starting point with the reference to human cognition. I don't know if you want to add to that, Charles.
Charles B.: No, I think that's pretty good. Maybe we should move on to questions.
Charles B.: Yeah, sounds good.
Charles B.: Awesome. Wow.
Charles B.: During that screen.
Charles B.: You can stop sharing or you could leave it up and I can move it.
Charles B.: Awesome. Okay.
Charles B.: Yeah, a lot of interesting pieces there. So thank you.
Charles B.: I'll read some questions from the live chat.
Charles B.: But first I just wanted to read a short quote from the 2022 active inference textbook they wrote.
Charles B.: On page 195.
Charles B.: Some decades ago, the philosopher Dennett lamented that cognitive scientists devote too much effort to modeling isolated subsystems, e.g. perception language understanding, whose boundaries are often arbitrary.
Charles B.: He suggested to try modeling the whole iguana, a complete cognitive creature, perhaps a simple one, and an environmental niche for it to cope with.
Charles B.: So it's interesting about the approach that you're taking.
Charles B.: And I think that's a simple synthetic iguana.
Charles B.: But that's leading to the bringing to bear of a lot of these empirical phenomena.
Charles B.: Because there is something.
Charles B.: And so I saw in the presentation paper kind of this call for like deliberate investigation rather than just chopping up the iguana a priori with a framework that that applies to humans or that centers humans or that just soothes the epistemic challenge that's presented.
Charles B.: Okay.
Charles B.: Okay.
Charles B.: First question from Dave.
Charles B.: He wrote,
Charles B.: Have you looked at Daniel Dennett's distinction between competence without awareness and competence with awareness?
Charles B.: He expands on this in the 2023 from Bacteria to Bach and back.
Charles B.: I find this much more valuable than Chomsky's highly problematic performance without competence, a situation that Chomsky posits but doesn't look at deeply.
Charles B.: Where do you put awareness in all of this competency?
C.A.: Well, maybe I'll let you take that one second, Charles, because you're maybe more within a team than I am.
Charles B.: But I'll just say awareness is a very polysemous term, like many terms in philosophy of mind, but particularly this one and more than many others, I think.
Charles B.: So it can be a lot of different things in all different contexts.
Charles B.: Here we don't focus on things like consciousness, because I think we probably both agree that it's a less tractable, maybe, and critical problem to try to assess the presence or absence of consciousness in language models.
Charles B.: Even though many people are interested in that, we think that we have more hope of making progress in the near term with more well defined cognitive capacities or cognitive functions and things that relate to certain forms of reasoning, variable binding, etc.
Charles B.: So our framework and principle would apply to things like consciousness or as you put awareness, generally speaking, but we don't really focus on that for examples.
Charles B.: The other quick thing I'll just mention is that I seem to remember that the phrase from Dennett, but again, I'm not a Dennett scholar, was competence without comprehension.
Charles B.: Which is seems a little different from combination without awareness perhaps depending on how you think of comprehension.
Charles B.: And yeah, I think that does.
Charles B.: I think it is a very interesting phrase that it does.
Charles B.: In fact, I had this project that's unpublished with Chris DeLega, who I think you had on the podcast as well.
Charles B.: On 70 competence in language models, where we use that phrase.
Charles B.: To kind of avoid taking its stance on the kind of messy muddy question of whether LLM understand language, which builds in all sorts of assumptions, including about consciousness, actually, because some people like John Searle.
Charles B.: And we focus on a more restrictive notion of competence and I think our paper here also has that property that would if we operationalize competence, we end up approaching operationalizing competence in terms of.
Charles B.: The sets of knowledge of mechanism and mechanisms that enable a system to generalize well in a given domain basically and in a way that's.
Charles B.: I suppose very deflationary compared to some more expensive understandings of competence that are to comprehension or understanding more broadly, but I'll let you take that one, Charles.
Charles B.: No, yeah, that was good.
Charles B.: The phrase either distinction that Dennis draws is between competence with comprehension and without.
Charles B.: And I think competence with comprehension is the ability not just to pursue a strategy that successful for solving a problem, but to articulate the strategy in such a way that you can teach it, for example, and.
Charles B.: Humans only sometimes.
Charles B.: Have competence with comprehension we have many competences.
Charles B.: That lack comprehension right.
Charles B.: You know when we learn to walk, for example, we have amazing competence that we can't quite translate into robotics because we don't fully understand how it works.
Charles B.: And when it comes to our language models, I think.
Charles B.: We should.
Charles B.: Not expect.
Charles B.: Comprehension I mean they have a.
Charles B.: An amazing suite of competences if you thought that they also had comprehension and I suppose you would think like well, if you want to understand how large language model works, you can just ask it.
Charles B.: But that's.
Charles B.: That's a bad strategy nobody nobody thinks that's a good way to find out.
Charles B.: How large language model works so so they're on the competence without comprehension.
Charles B.: And in order to figure out what.
Charles B.: In order to figure out what the mechanisms are that enable its competencies, we have to pursue strategies that are broadly similar to the strategies for using cognitive psychology or cognitive linguistics.
Charles B.: And you know we have to run experiments.
Charles B.: So I think that that's all very compatible with Dan's way of looking at things.
Charles B.: One other thing I'll mention.
Charles B.: Dan's so Dan was.
Charles B.: Quite influential to me and we actually wrote a commentary together.
Charles B.: Which pushes back a little bit on a simple understanding of this distinction.
Charles B.: So we were looking at.
Charles B.: The evolution of metacognition.
Charles B.: And basically what we argue is that.
Charles B.: Given the gradualism of evolution, there must have been something in between base level cognition and metacognition.
Charles B.: So we shouldn't see that distinction as black and white.
Charles B.: And.
Charles B.: You know, I think.
Charles B.: That if you want to contrast the sort of.
Charles B.: Cognitive prowess of.
Charles B.: A.
Charles B.: Human adult with lots of linguistic and scientific.
Charles B.: Concepts at her disposal.
Charles B.: With you know, a non human animal than this strong distinction between competence with and without comprehension is reasonable.
Charles B.: But in the space of all possible minds, we should be open to the view that there can be, you know, semi competent.
Charles B.: forms of cognition.
Charles B.: And just on this.
Charles B.: It occurred to me, while I was listening to you as well, that the first example of a serious practice, we give auxiliary test demands and specifically the human Frank example.
Charles B.: Is a nice is a nice example where in order to give them a linguistics judgments correctly succeed at that, you would get competence with comprehension because you need to understand.
Charles B.: Not only be able to come to agree the verb in the subject, but know the rule and know how to formulate it, perhaps verbalize it.
Charles B.: For example, to teach someone, right?
Charles B.: And so when you find that the LM can do well at the low test member of the task and that the high test, the involvement, explicit metalinguistic judgments.
Charles B.: In some way, that's an example of the I'm having confidence in that comprehension.
Charles B.: Yeah.
Charles B.: Yeah.
Charles B.: Awesome.
Charles B.: Okay.
Charles B.: Upcycle Club wrote.
Charles B.: Question.
Charles B.: Given that LLMs inherently reflect anthropocentric biases.
Charles B.: Due to their training on human data and goals, how can we ensure that their intermodel discourse aligns with humanity's values?
Charles B.: So the inter what discourse or the intermodel discourse, perhaps amongst the models?
Charles B.: I see.
Charles B.: I see.
Charles B.: Like in that Farmville paper?
Charles B.: Yeah, the small, the, yeah, the generative agents, they have the small ones,

















Yeah, the small ones.
Yeah.
I think that's beyond the scope of this paper, to be honest.
But I mean, we could muse about it.
But I don't know that we have.
I don't know if this project has much.
I mean, I think we both have an interest
in the alignment problem independently of this project.
But I don't think this project has much to say really about this.
Charles, what do you think?
Yeah, yeah.
And I don't know.
Yeah, I don't have anything super concrete on that.
OK, Dave asks, an example of inserting noise into LLM training,
that was the section about the extra tokens.
Do you see any analog to intermittent reinforcement
to uncertainty tolerance?
Because you mentioned the extra tokens in the chain of thought
and how that could also be replaced by dot, dot, dot, dot, dot.
And so what is that telling us about model training when it seems like there's
some situations where adding superfluous tokens would diminish signal in datasets,
but then here are other situations where it seems to actually help?
Yeah.
So in that paper, I think it's called Thinking Dot by Dot, and there is a subtitle.
It's by Will Merrill and Jacob Spottel, I think.
And that paper, if I correctly, what they did is that they introduced just this one field
of token, this one meaningless token, just a little, but just a dot.
And the trend model to give an answer after producing a certain number of dots.
That's not just like introducing random gibberish in your training data.
It's actually quite a specific intervention that forces the model to learn to perform certain
computations before giving an answer.
So it makes sense to me that this couldn't diminish performance and that you could get
the benefit from that.
It's not quite the same as just having that training data, right?
Just because the token seems meaningless, it's a filler token, it's a dot.
It's not just random gibberish that's going to throw off the model and impede the optimization
of its learning function or at least good downstream performance.
But what it's going to do is it's going to force the model to learn that when there
is a dot token, it can allocate computation with its extension heads and other parts
of the architecture in such a way that...
It's getting towards deriving the correct token when it's finally producing the token that
matters and that's meaningful after the series of dots.
Yeah, I don't know, Charles, if you have other answers, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, I think it's an important question because a priori, if someone said, look, we're
going to append and prepend a whole bunch of meaningless symbols to an LLM input, you might
very well think that this will just weaken the signal to noise ratio and degrade model performance.
So it's against that background that the empirical result that it doesn't degrade model performance
is, you might think, ought to be regarded as an important clue about how the model works.
So I think that the intuition behind this question is indeed part of the interpretation of the empirical results.
Right. It's surprising for exactly this reason.
And then the theory that's supposed to, you know, well, this is an active inference podcast.
Right. So the theory that's supposed to help rid some of the surprise here is the idea that.
Given the architecture of a transformer where it has to go through all the tokens in every cycle,
having these extra tokens gives it sort of more computational bandwidth and therefore more expressivity
or more capacity to locate the right spot in parameter space.
And even that, in a way, reminds me of... So it's not just that dots improve performance. It's not...
It's that it was, like you mentioned, it was trained to have that. And similarly, it could have been trained,
maybe hypothetically, to just output Shakespeare quotes verbatim while you're processing.
So that's kind of like a filler or more of like a sort of, that was a great question.
It's like, these are linguistic paddings that do create time to get to the meet.
So not only does it signal and signpost, if it's being trained to have that meaning, which then questions like,
so then was it a meaningless dot if it had a cognitive or even like a semantic aspect?
I had a question. How do you feel like in this era Cambrian explosion of diverse intelligences,
how can we understand capacities when they seem so conditional upon the setting and how the system of interest is interacted with?
Like, what are the practical implications for people who are studying LLMs and other synthetic intelligences from like a safety or reliability or performance perspective?
Charles, do you want to ask?
Charles, do you want to ask?
No, I was throwing it to you.
So, I just want to chat this in the question. So the question is,
how is the notion of a capacity changing when we have such different systems that seem to have intelligent behavior?
Yeah. And it's so dependent upon potentially initially unintuitive ways of interacting.
So how can we understand the reliability and the performance and the capacity of a model other than, for example, by exhaustively inputting prompts,
which can't really happen, which can't really happen? What could we really say or know?
And or just how do you feel that this work reenters into the ways that people practically are using the models?
Right. OK, yeah. It's a very interesting question.
So the first part of the question is, I think, you know, part of the background assumption from this paper that I've explicitly defended in other work is that behavioral evidence is simply not sufficient in most cases to arbitrate disputes about capacities of LLMs.
When it comes to human cognition, we do have to rely a lot on psychological experiments that are ultimately behavioral.
And we do also rely on self-reporting a little more than we can when it comes to LLMs because we, despite the move away from relying on intuition and introspection and the history of psychology,
it still has a role to play. But we've by a large gravity to us by behavioral experiments that get increasingly sophisticated to try to reverse engineer what's going on inside the black box.
When it comes to LLMs, partly because that's so different from us, relying exclusively on behavior is even more difficult because we have even less of an idea of what might be going on inside the black box.
And whether it's anything like what's going on inside our black box and we have reasons to think inside it might be very different.
So I think we both agree that we have to supplement this with mechanistic work that essentially involves performing causal interventions on the inner mechanisms, on the inner workings of the systems.
So decoding representation and computations that the systems that are in principle available to the systems and then intervening on them to confirm hypotheses about the causal role of these representations and computations.
And we have methods to do that. And partly why we can be a little optimistic about this project, even though it's extremely challenging, especially to be scaled up to large models, is because unlike what's happening in neuroscience with the brain, where the range of decoding methods,
and intervention methods we have is extremely limited, but for ethical and for simply practical reasons, that we don't just don't have ground truth access to activations in neurons, at least not easily. And we also are generally enabled to make specific interventions on activations in the brain.
When it comes to the brain. When it comes to the brain. When it comes to the lens, we have full ground truth knowledge of all activations of every single part of the network. And we also have full access to all of it for interventions at inference time.
So that opens up a whole new range of things we can do. And that enables us to go beyond behavioral studies, and actually decode these features and circuits or as researchers put it in the literature or as philosophers would generally put it representations and computations that the system is actually making use of and try to reverse engineer what kind of what kinds of algorithms it's making use of.
So part of the broader problem projects that we have with Charles is to suppose we start with these investigative kinds, as we put as well as Adibald calls them these human-centric capacities.
We can operationalize them and do behavioral experiments in the top down. And then from bottom up, we can also try to reverse engineer the mechanics of building blocks of the computations and representations that LLMs make use of to solve the task related to that particular capacity.
And then we can also try to solve the problem. And then we can also try to solve the problem. And then we can meet somewhere in the middle and try to, from that line of work that approaches things from the above ends, bring to the fore some kinds of mid-level abstractions, as we call it, or computational building blocks that might be key to the performance of the system in that domain.
So for example, if you're interested in the capacity for reasoning, you can start with this very broad human-centric notion of reasoning, then try to operationalize it in a reasoning task, then do some behavioral testing and then mechanistic interpretability of that reasoning task, find out how the system is solving it, find out how the LLM is doing well and why.
So reverse engineer building blocks that might, for example, have key to the level of manipulation, and then from there, you might be able to iterate, you can refine the notion of reasoning you started with, to have a more specific and less human-centric notion that is now operationalized in more low-level terms, like, you know, that involves the manipulation of variables in certain ways and the binding of variables to fillers, etc.
So yeah, so that's, I think, the general approach we take. Now, how does any of that feedback into interactions, how we humans interact with LLMs?
I think that's one way in which it could feedback is simply in terms of challenging our spontaneous anthropomorphic attitudes to LLMs. To some extent, the same way if you read a lot of animal cognition, perhaps you will interact with your cat in a slightly different way, but you might maybe not rush to the conclusion that when your cat performs a certain behavior, it has understood what you think and it's modeling what you're thinking.
What you're thinking about what it's thinking about what it's thinking or something.
Perhaps you might adopt a more deflationary attitude to explain the behavior of your cat doesn't mean you have to love them any less, or it doesn't mean you have to, you know, if that is the other thing, like if you want at the end of the day to speak to your cat like a human because you're the relevant gentleman for that, then that's, you know, all the more part to you in the same way.
In the same way, if you find it useful to treat LLMs in the way you interact with them, to have fluid interactions with them, to treat them as if they had beliefs, design, etc.
All sorts of human-like capacities, then that's fine if that's for practical purposes.
But at least if that line of work that we are kind of sketching here ends up maturing enough, the hope is that we can interact with LLMs perhaps in a way that's...
Well, even if we have that kind of intentional stance and may believe about what the kinds of capacities they have, at the background we will know that what their limitations are and what their actual capacities are.
I don't know if you agree with that, Charles, because we don't discuss that much.
Yeah, yeah, no, I agree with all that. I just had a slightly different first reaction to the question.
I took the question to be in part about how to deal with the sort of prompt sensitivity of models, the fact that sometimes we write something that seems natural to us, but provokes an unexpected response from a large language model.
And how do we think about that? And the first thought that occurred to me was just that we should distinguish between different kinds of large language models.
You know, we have this sort of huge large language models which are fine tuned to interact with us in a particular way and are...
And here's the central point. They're trained on a sort of unthinkably large database, whereas there are other sorts of large language models where the training data is more circumscribed and where we know in more detail, you know, what...
Where you can survey what the training data says.
And I think if you're interested in, you know, what the mechanisms are underlying the responses, it's certainly very helpful to look at smaller but nevertheless large language models where the training data is known to us.
Because, you know, when you train a model on the entire internet, there are going to be all kinds of, you know, subtle signals in there that we don't have much hope of tracing back to their source,
but which will influence the model behavior in all sorts of ways.
But working with these somewhat more conscripted models gets rid of that problem, at least in part.
Cool. Well, where do you see the work going or where do you plan to continue this direction?
Yeah, so actually, so we wrote this paper, this short paper for the ICML machine learning conference, the International Conference of Machine Learning.
That's happening this week in Vienna and we'll be getting to Vienna at the end of the week for the workshop at which we're presenting this paper, which is a workshop on language models and cognitive science.
So there is a very strict page limit for these ICML contributions, which is four pages.
But what we want to do next is to expand this into a more philosophically substantive paper and it's going to be a bit longer.
And that's going to expand on the more philosophically meaty parts of that project, because everything is still a bit compressed in that version that we're presenting on ICML.
So yeah, that's the next step for us. This is a really useful way for us to force ourselves to write things down.
After running the box piece, we wanted to write an academic piece.
Now we've written kind of condensed skeleton of the piece that focuses more, that caters more to an ML audience.
And now the next step is to write the full philosophy paper for at least that part of the project to be complete.
And then after that, maybe we'll have a lot of ideas for it. Yeah.
Yeah.
I got nothing to add to that. Cool.
Yes. Well, it's very interesting work.
I think it brings a lot of pieces together and it's some philosophy and cognitive science jumping in, jumping into the heat and into the spotlight and the relevance.
And so it's going to be an exciting learning journey.
Thanks for having us.
Yes.
Yeah. Thank you very much.
Cool.
Enjoy the conversation.
Till next time.
Likewise.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.

Bye.