## _zW1BrLwACY

Hello and welcome. This is Active Inference live stream 58.0. October 29th, 2024. We're
discussing the paper from pixels to planning scale-free active inference. So welcome to
the Active Inference Institute. We're a participatory online Institute that is
communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference. You can find us
at the links on the slide. This is a recorded and archived live stream. Please
provide feedback so we can improve our work. All backgrounds and perspectives are
welcome and will follow video etiquette for live streams. Head over to
activeinference.institute to learn more about the Institute, get involved with
projects like live streams, and a lot of other things. Okay, before we jump into
the paper, let's say hello. I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in California and really
looking forward to this discussion. Arun, want to say hi, give any context, and
thanks again for contributing to the dot zero.
Hi everyone. My name is Aaron. I'm a software engineer in the UK. I did my PhD a
good few years ago in which I touched on dynamicals of modeling and active
inference. I've been thinking about it for a long time since then. I came across this
paper and thought it was really hard. And so I requested, guys, can we do a
live stream on this? I'd really love to understand this paper properly. And now I've
somehow ended up contributing to the live stream. So yeah, all good.
Okay. So we're discussing this paper from July 2024, from Pixelist to Planning, Scale-Free Active Inference, by Carl Fristen and colleagues.
The rest of this video is going to be some background and context and an introduction and an overview of the ideas.
It's not a review. It's not comprehensive. It will be part of an exciting series where in the coming weeks in the dot one and dot two, we discuss with the authors and the dot two is going to fall during the applied active symposium.
So that'll also be really fun. Okay. Let's go to the big questions. What are your big questions or whether it's about the paper specifically, or what are the big motivators that made you excited and want to pursue the
these affordances? So I think the big one is, you know, the title, right? And I think the question of scale is one that's plagued a lot of active inference, implementations and previous papers.
In the past few years, everyone's like, Oh, yeah, I'd love an active inference agent that can do stuff. But if I have more than a few states, I get a combinatorial explosion.
And things are fall over or they take a very long time compared to alternative methods that are out there. So the question of scale is a really important one.
And I think this paper nominally looks like there's a way around that. Also, the renormalization group as a way to do that is, I think, a very interesting one.
It draws from a lot of physics that I actually studied a very, very long time ago. So that really spoke to me and I thought it was really, really nice to see some things that apply to also like icing model of ferromagnetism, some other key parts of thermodynamics that now come into AI, which active inference has been doing for a while with the free energy minimization part.
But I think the renormalization group is a really interesting part of maths that seems to get you a lot further.
I also had some like much more technical questions, which maybe don't fall under the big questions, which will definitely come on to later when I was reading this paper and going, I'm looking at it and I go, I don't understand actually what's happening here.
So I'd really love to dive into those and particularly catch up with the authors in the later episodes to get some of the more technical answers on how these matrices and tensors play together, which seems to differ a little bit to the textbook by par and some of the other formulations by the RxInfer group as well.
So actually getting into the nitty gritty of how we implement this will be really fun for me.
Cool. Blue also contributed to the dot zero.
And so she wrote, what is a path more specifically, how are paths related to the renormalization group?
How is the renormalizing generative model RGM different from the active inference generative model that we usually study?
And how do paths tie into transitions between categories?
And I had similar questions.
What is the renormalization group?
How is it being used here?
How does that make the generative models structurally or functionally different?
How does that have implications for different media?
Few key claims.
They're considering one solution to the implicit scaling problem.
With scale-free generative models that are linked through the renormalization group.
They're going to explore generalized MDPs, Markov decision processes, as discrete models that do functional cognitive tasks like compression, content generation and planning.
They're going to pay attention to universality and scale and variance for specifying structural form of generative models.
And then there will be a sequence of worked examples that we're going to spend most of the dot zero walking through.
And they highlight that these kinds of RGMs with quantized paths may or may not be useful in certain application domains.
So that's kind of the meta ML question is where or how would we know where this would or wouldn't be more effective than another given kind of model?
No free lunch at all.
Could you read the abstract?
Yeah, sure.
So this paper describes a discrete state space model and accompanying methods for generative modeling.
This model generalizes partially observed Markov decision processes to include paths as latent variables, rendering suitable for active inference and learning in a dynamic setting.
Specifically, we consider deep or hierarchical forms using the renormalization group.
The ensuing renormalizing generative models can be regarded as discrete homologues of deep convolutional neural networks or continuous space models in generalized coordinates of motion.
By construction, these scale and variant models can be used to learn compositionality over space and time, furnishing models of paths or orbits.
In other words, events of increasing temporal depth and itinerancy.
This technical note illustrates the automatic discovery, learning and deployment of RGMs using a series of applications.
We start with image classification and then consider the compression and generation of movies and music.
Finally, we apply the same variational principles to the learning of Atari like video games.
Awesome.
Okay, moving on to...
Daniel, you're on mute.
Thanks.
Let's move on to the roadmap.
The first section is the introduction.
Section 2 is the background formalism.
This is going to make connections with the generative models from the textbook.
Then, section 3, 4, 5, 6 will go through a sequence of worked examples.
We're going to front load the focus in the dot zero on sections 2 and 3.
And then 4, 5, and 6 unfold kind of naturally.
Section 3 is a static image MNIST handwriting dataset task.
Section 4 is a cyclic video that then slides into a chaotic attractor dynamical system.
Section 5 and a natural video.
Section 5 goes into sound.
And 6 is the general planning case from pixels to planning.
And 7 is a short conclusion.
So, it's pretty much introduction and conclusion like bookends.
Section 2 is where the general formalism is.
And then 3 through 6 take us on from handwriting, several kinds of videos, dynamic images, sound, and then gameplay and planning.
So, here are the keywords of the paper.
Active inference, active learning, Bayesian model selection, renormalization group, compression, structure learning, RG flow, renormalizing generative model.
So, those are good terms if you're uncertain about to jump into.
Okay, we have a few slides on some of these background concepts just to get it up front.
So, we can proceed with the paper when we get there.
Let's start with what is renormalization?
So, of course, much could be said.
But, Erwin, what would you say?
What is renormalization?
Yeah, so I think this is, in itself, quite a loaded term.
There's a lot from physics.
And if you look at the Wikipedia page, the third link that's there, there's a lot in that Wikipedia page that's very confusing.
A lot of quantum electrodynamics coming in.
And I think Feynman has an attitude on it.
He says he's not a fan of it.
But I think for our purposes, the top quote that's there that's coming from the paper is actually good enough for a large part.
So, we basically take some sort of system, and we say, this is way too hard.
This is way too complex.
There's way too many moving parts.
What is a take home message?
What is the summary of what this is doing at a macroscopic level compared to the micro level?
And there are some examples in the upcoming slides, particularly talking about thermodynamics and materials, where this will become more obvious as to how this might work in practice.
But I think the coarse-grained version that retains the properties of interest is really what to focus on going forward.
And, yeah, lossy compression for the signal processing engineers in the audience.
This is very much a case of you're not keeping everything when you re-normalize.
You're keeping what's important.
Awesome.
Yeah.
As you coarse-grained so spatially, like thinking about a radius or like a convolutional diameter getting larger and larger, you're choosing a bigger chunk to grain over coarse-graining and re-normalizing what those edges and relations amongst blocks are.
So you have one model.
It's a 10 by 10 square.
So you have blocks of size one and all those edges.
And then you decide, okay, we're going to look at blocks of two by two.
You have fewer blocks, fewer edges.
So you have to re-normalize all of your parameter estimates.
And then you end up with hopefully capturing some of the signal with fewer parameters, AKA compression, whether it's lossy or lossless.
Okay.
And you, I'm going to pick up on one thing quickly where you said spatially, and you can re-normalize through space, but you can also re-normalize through time.
You can re-normalize through any dimension you want.
It's just easier to imagine the space and time ones.
So the time analogy that I think they use in the paper, which is quite a good one, is thinking about if you're, let's say you're watching TV and you're watching something.
And in that moment, there are two characters talking that might form part of a scene, which is one re-normalization.
And then you have a series of scenes, which would be an episode.
And then you'd have multiple episodes in a series.
Right?
So the time one, actually, I find a bit more intuitive to understand what re-normalization is.
And you can say, oh yeah, something happened in a particular episode.
You can say something happens in a particular series, something happens in a particular scene, but that thing you might be describing might actually be
more fine grained or more coarse grained.
Awesome.
Yeah.
The examples will start with the static handwriting and move on to include time.
And you're totally right about the timescales.
It's like saying, what's the transition matrix from minute to minute or hour to hour or day to day, but each moment is measurable with seconds, minutes, hours, or so on.
Okay.
How about the spin block transformation?
Yeah.
So now this is sort of back to material science and magnetism.
So there's a fairly well understood model of magnetism called the Ising model.
And physicists generally quite like it.
Mathematicians quite like it.
As you imagine a big magnet, there's lots of little magnets that are all line up in a grid.
And each magnet just talks to the little magnets around it.
And you can recover quite a lot of sort of actual behavior of magnets in the real world with a fairly simple model for this.
But the spin block transformation is largely going, well, if I have lots of little magnets together and they're all pointing the same way, I can just think of it as one big magnet.
That's some, that's a, some behavior of all of these little ones.
And this is a trick that we play a lot in physics of going from the micro to the macro, the micro is too hard to model.
It's too painful.
You've got all these particles.
They could all be doing, you know, spinning every which way, all their speeds and velocities.
And if you had all of them, then you could add them all up and you could figure out what's going on.
Or you can just, you know, get a thermometer and measure the temperature.
Right.
And the temperature, that one number tells you a lot about how this thing is going to behave.
So you can get a lot of value just from the macro, but that macro is composed of all of the micro.
So depending on where you are in your core screening of your scaling behavior, you can get either a lot done or a little bit done.
And it's just what's useful to you.
So I quite like this sort of quote at the bottom about the magnitude of an observable of a physical system undergoing an RG transformation.
And whether that observable is relevant or not.
I think that's quite important to bear in mind for the future examples of, well, if something is always increasing, it's always getting bigger than you're going to see it on the coarse grained transformations that you see later.
But if it's always decreasing at a particular level, you're not going to see it on the higher levels.
You're only going to see it on the lower levels.
So it will have.
So this gives you some understanding of causality of when you're going up or when you're going down.
You're going to see it on the coarse graining.
So yeah, like particle speeds and temperature is a nice example of this.
And similarly magnetism with the spin block transformation.
But by and large, what are these transforms doing?
If you take a grid of lots of little things, you just go, well, I'm just going to summarize this with a single thing that represents that behavior and then move on with my day.
Awesome.
Okay.
Quick on the singular value decomposition.
There's a nice interactive explanation.
This is related to principal component analysis, and it's a way to proportion variance and to take the biggest cut of variance for a given decomposition for a data set.
And you can take, we'll look at it in application a bit later, but it's used to assess the vectors of variance.
And then you can truncate them and use that to capture increasing amount of variance for a given data set.
And then you can take a look at it in a specific case and last kind of background topic on locality principle.
Yeah, I don't actually know a huge amount about the locality principle.
But I think it's a general intuition that things next to each other affect each other and things far away in theory don't affect you.
There are definitely some things where if this is violated, this feels very weird.
I think quantum entanglement is probably an example of that.
But I'm going to stop speaking there because we've hit the limit of my knowledge.
Yes.
I think Wittgenstein wrote something about that.
Okay.
And this is just a few of the other links, but there was a ton of other links that people brought up over the months preparing for this.
Okay.
Onto the paper.
So here's the link to the coda.
I'll put this in the YouTube live chat right now.
Just if anyone wants to follow back to the workspace where we did the preparation work.
If you're watching live, write any questions in the live chat and we'll check it at the end.
What we're about to do is go through much of the paper, pulling out some of the key quotes in the main thread.
And we show most or all the figures and some of the formalisms.
Of course, they're all there in the paper.
This is just the highlights so that we can get this done in a reasonable linear amount of time in preparation for conversations with the authors, further open source development and all that.
So, okay, here we go onto the paper.
So first three sentences of the paper.
This paper considers the use of discrete state space models as generative models for classification, compression, generation, prediction, and planning.
So for context, we're in the discrete time setting.
Figure 4.3 from the 2022 textbook.
We're in the top setting.
The inversion of such models can be read as inferring the latent causes of observable outcomes or content.
So this is the tail of two densities, meaning that generative models can be used to generate synthetic observations from latent state estimates.
That's the generative direction or decompression, as well as infer latent states from data.
That's the recognition direction from observations to latent states.
And then last of these three sentences.
When endowed with the consequences of action, they can be used for planning as inference.
So in contrast with sort of a sterile sense-making or perceptual inference task, active inference considers action as part of a joint inference distribution or problem which constitutes the agent.
So think about how the agent is defined as A, B, C, D, E, E, matrices as sense-making, latent state transition operations, and the consequences of action.
So improvements to generative modeling technologies have wide-ranging implications for a variety of both sense-making perception tasks on the inbound, as well as decision-making and action tasks on the outbound, which is kind of the theme of active inference.
So that action can be treated as an inference problem.
Any thoughts on these first lines?
No, I think we should keep going.
Cool.
Okay, specifically, this paper explores the use of generalized Markov decision processes.
This generalization in question rests on equipping a standard, partially observed Markov decision process, POMDP, with random variables called paths.
This affords an expressive model of dynamics in which transitions among states are conditioned upon paths, which themselves can have lawful transitions.
So we're going to return to this figure again.
But the big picture is that from the sort of textbook basic POMDP, we're going to add some sophistication, which is that variables called paths will condition the state transitions.
And those could fall under the agency or the efficacy of an agent or not.
There can be lawful probabilistic transitions among paths, which are like transitions amongst actions in a policy sequence, except that actions in a policy sequence would be understood to be under the control of an agent.
And those paths, states influence transitions of latent states.
Figure one shows that several concepts of depth in generative model.
We have temporal depth, which means a deeper unrolling through time.
So this is just predicting more time steps deeper into the future linearly.
So if this was each one was one day, this is just going rolling out for a bigger number of days.
Hierarchical depth would be if we had a model that had days, months and years.
And the way that it could deal with longer timescales would be have 30 days within a month and then 12 months within a year.
So nested hierarchically recursive layers deal with deeper timescales instead of needing to unroll 365 days.
And factorial depth can be thought of kind of like a multi-sensory model.
So here's an observation of sound and here's an observation of light.
And then those different modalities can be factorized separately from each other, like the what and the where in the brain to simplify.
And that's another way in which generative models can have depth.
Any more thoughts on this?
I think one thing to highlight is, first of all, the notation is quite difficult to understand in this figure.
I found it really hard.
There is also a difference, at least in my mind when I read this figure in the caption compared to say the textbook, which is the C matrix.
So I think previous formulations of actor inference, the C matrix tends to represent the prior preferences of an agent, sort of its goals, its values.
It's like, I expect to see these observations.
So if I don't, then I'm going to experience a higher free energy.
So I'm either going to change my mind or change, take some action to change the world so that my observations match my priors better.
And I get a lower free energy.
Here, the C matrix seems to be encoding probabilities of paths.
It's not entirely clear to me how we get value into that, as opposed to just what it expects to see.
So maybe there is a distinction here that I haven't understood, or maybe it is genuinely a shift.
I'd be really curious to ask the authors specifically about the C matrix and how that behaves in the future episodes.
Yeah.
Pending authors accounts.
But two things I would note to echo that first is every variable through time can be understood as a trace or a path.
Whereas path is also being used to refer to just this specific upstairs string.
And then a second case of overloading is C.
While in previous situations, like in figure 7.3 or 4.3 from the textbook, we have C as playing a role in expected free energy calculation, pragmatic value, the preference over observations.
Here, it's not the same C.
C as preferences is over observations.
Here, transition probabilities are encoded in C.
So it's kind of like a B.
But this just goes to show letters are just letters.
And future software will be able to flip out and have different shapes and notation and all of that.
So don't get too attached to the letter.
Look at how they're locally defining things, even though that can be really challenging learning too.
Okay.

So you can see a path and...
method which describes this renormalization happening across scales.
So you could have the inch by inch path and then that's nested within a foot by foot and mile by mile.
Or you could have the minute by minute path and that's nested within hour by hour and day by day.
So by having this layering of states and paths and states and paths, there's a clean way to get the separation of spatial or temporal or arbitrary scales.
So that's the big background formalism.
One other way to get an intuition.
Here's from our paper on the renormalization group in free energy principle applied to multi-scale biological systems.
On the bottom, we have the kind of figure that we've seen in many active inference papers where we're thinking about like the cognitive behavioral entity like a worm.
Where the sensory states can be associated with perception, the active states with action, internal states with cognitive states and all of that.
So at the end of the day, there's also this nested, extended evolutionary process that is happening at the population scale.
So that's kind of like nesting the phenotype of individual worms within a population of worms or within an ecological distribution.
And then last note here.
In this setting, a policy is not a sequence of actions, but a combination of paths where each hidden factor has an associated state and path.
This means there's potentially as many policies as there are combinations of paths.
So because these paths are kind of like context combinations, it means that there's a double explosiveness to them.
So understanding how do you handle that and understand the computational complexity class.
And again, where it wouldn't, wouldn't be useful.
Those are key questions.
Any thoughts?
Yeah, I think that that last bit, especially in a paper that's called talking about scale, preactive inference.
And then now we're not just combining states that explode that combinatorial explosion.
Now it's combinations of paths of states and actions.
In theory, this should be much worse.
So I think.
At the moment I'm reading this and I'm thinking we're going to pay even more of a cost in terms of computing what the hell is going on.
But I think the renormalization group and making these models hierarchical.
Pays for it.
That's that's my that's my intuition of reading this paper.
So, yeah, it's a good quote to have that.
It's a good thing to have bolded.
It's I don't think you're ever going to get a free lunch, but you have to pay for lunch.
Yeah, the number of ingredients for lunch.
Okay.
Okay.
In what follows, we illustrate applications of the renormalizing generative model RGM in several settings.
The renormalization group requires the functional form of the dynamics in terms of belief updating is conserved over levels or scales.
This is assured in variational inference in the sense the inference process itself can be cast as pursuing a path of least action, where action is a path integral of variational free energy.
Another classic term overloading action here isn't like the robot moving its arm.
This is the physics action, sometimes with a capital A.
Because all inference under free energy principle is considered in terms of a path of least action, we can be assured that arbitrarily thick, wide, thin, tall, small world, however you want to create the topology of a generative model,
we can be ensured that we're in an analytical setting where the models are, quote, doing the same thing at different scales.
And then this takes us all the way from the first principles framing of the problems, all the way on through the software tools like Rx and FUR, which might be implementing these kinds of generative models also in this kind of ecumenical way.
The only thing that changes between levels are the parameters of the requisite action, e.g. sufficient statistics of various probability distributions.
That's to say, the functional properties of the RGM are simply determined and described by how it's parameterized.
So was it statistics all along? And that's what we have in Figure 3 with showing what that blocking looks like.
These are statistical parameters that are learnt.
So the description of the topology of this graph is the structure, which is either fixed or designed or set or learnt as a structure learning problem.
And then there's the values for a given situation that these variables take on.
And here's that state-path essential coupling.
That's the state-paths, state-path.
So compare this with hierarchical or multilevel Bayesian regression.
Compare this with hierarchical predictive processing architectures.
State-path, state-path.
And each of those constitute a separation of scales.
All of this is a statistical model.
Any thoughts on this?
Yeah, I think there's the hierarchy part is absolutely key here.
There is a little aside in the paper about which things in a hierarchy can affect which things in the lower part to make the inference actually possible.
So this is the idea of the Markov blankets and whether you, whether a child can have like multiple parents, that sort of thing.
I think we possibly will come onto that later.
But overall, the main critical thing is stuff happening at a higher level in your hierarchy is determining a lot of what's happening at the lower level.
But information can flow back up with the observations that you get at the lower level to infer those parameters at the higher level.
So that's the classic active inference sort of top-down bottom-up approach.
Yeah. Awesome.
Okay.
Next section, active inference, learning and selection.
This section overviews the model, which is used in the numerical studies of the following section.
And figure one provides an overview of the generative model that's considered in the paper.
We already took a quick look.
Outcomes at any time depend upon hidden states.
That's the A matrix.
That's the partially observable part.
While transitions among hidden states depend on paths.
And that's this sort of way that we see the transitions amongst latent states.
So that's the B matrix, which is intervening between hidden states S.
B is being imposed upon by this path happening.
So it's almost like this is a, this is like a, a, a rail or a guide up top.
That's influencing how the actual latent state ends up unfolding through time.
And at each time point, there's the emission of an observation.
That's the generative direction, or it could be taking in an empirical data point and then updating beliefs through time.
So, um, they describe the variables just like in the caption.
The tensors are generally parameterized as Dirichlet distributions, whose sufficient statistics are concentration parameters or Dirichlet counts,
which count the number of times a particular combination of states and outcomes has been inferred.
We focus on learning the likelihood model encoded by Dirichlet counts A.
And that's known as learning by counting.
So that's the kind of classic case of pulling balls out of an urn and then tallying every time you see a certain kind of ball coming out of an urn.
Or here it would be like pulling balls out of an urn and it's either cloudy or sunny.
And then you're doing learning by counting on the context and the outcome.
And then you're using that to parameterize everything else.
Carrying on a little bit with this and again connecting back to the 2022 textbook.
Compare with figure 7.3 POMDP.
The details are basically the same, except notice that paths U are described.
As we mentioned earlier, C in the textbook, just the letter C.
It's not actually that variable computationally, but the letter C is being used for preference distributions over observations.
Here, C is playing a role in the transition.
It's kind of like a B, but for this meta path.
In the textbook, we have a single layer model.
Now, it has compositionality, but it's just a single layer model.
Whereas in the paper we're discussing today, hierarchical levels are described in terms of this state path, state path, alternation approach.
And there's factorial depth.
Here, the procedural order of operations for the generative model is provided as policy selection, generate hidden state sequences, and generate expected outcomes.
This is the forward or generative direction.
We could also go the recognition direction from real observations to policy inference.
So they're unrolling a policy centric approach that yields expected outcomes.
That's like running the generative model from policy inference out, as opposed to running a generative model from data processing to belief updating about policy going in.
Just to highlight some kind of points of contact similarities with the textbook for those who dabble.
Any comments?
No, I think that was really good.
Awesome.
Go show.
Okay.
Equations one, two, and three in this paper are akin to equation 2.5 and 2.6 in the textbook on variational free energy and expected free energy.
So to learn about the different decompositions of variational free energy in terms of the ones that look more statistical, like divergence minus evidence, complexity minus accuracy, or the ones that look more statistical physical, like energy and entropy.
That's variational free energy.
That's variational free energy.
And then analogously with equations two and three in the paper, or equation 2.6 in the textbook, we have expected free energy with the classical decomposition into epistemic value, pragmatic value.
Okay.
Okay.
Now we get to active inference.
There's a lot we could say here.
They describe that first sentence of active inference section.
In variational inference and learning, sufficient statistics encoding posterior expectations, which could be about sense-making as well as action, posterior expectations about what I am going to do, pi, are updated to minimize variational free energy.
So that's the idea of seeing everything it is that the agent is and does on the inbound perceptual and outbound action selection as part of a joint distribution that's undergoing variational free energy minimization.
That's the active inference concept.
Note the circle with a dot notation.
So, the notation implies a sum product operator, the dot or inner product that sums over one dimension of a numeric array or tensor.
So note the difference between circle with a dot as the inner product or tensor contraction, while circle with x is the outer product.
So, to look at the figure with message passing, which brings in this circle with a dot notation.
Here, we see the same graph that we saw in figure one.
In figure one, we have a Bayes graph.
So, the nodes are variables that we would encode in our program, and then the edges are causal relationships.
So, that's the kind of classic systems modeling kind of flow interaction mind map.
Here, in this figure, we see a factor graph representation.
Now, in Livestream 55 and in the Realizing Synthetic Active Inference Agents discussion, other discussions,
we've talked more about the relationship between Bayes graph and the Forney factor graph representation.
Suffice to say that what it is that nodes and edges are basically get flipped, but there's a full reproducibility.
So that here, we have ways to look at the logistics of message passing amongst these nodes.
And it turns out that under the hood, this is what RxInfer is doing when it's being implemented.
So, maybe if we get more into implementation, we could talk about that.
This figure is just showing that for that POMDP, which is going to be doing the real work of active inference on the perceptual and action selection side,
it's not just that we can link up the variables on the Bayes graph that account for what we want to do.
It's that there's a specific logistics and we know exactly which messages to pack and send in order to get this whole variational inference done at the graph level.
And that can be done with either a determined logistical schedule or it can be done in a reactive message passing setting.
Okay. Active Learning.
Bayesian model reductions a generalization of ubiquitous procedures and statistics.
In the present setting, it reduces to something remarkably simple.
By applying Bayes rules to parent and reduce models, so a model of k parameters and of k-1 parameters,
it is straightforward to show that the change in variational free energy can be expressed in terms of posterior Dirichlet counts a, prior counts a, and the prior counts that define a reduced model.
So, A prime corresponds to the posterior one would have obtained under the reduced priors.
The alternative to Bayesian model reduction is bottom-up growth of models to accommodate new data or content.
If one considers the selection of one parent model over another, augmented model, as an action.
These two equations in the active learning section are like the add and remove variable operations and ultimately what allow us to compare any Bayesian model.
So, model comparison amongst nested, strictly nested models can be done in the fully parametric setting using the hierarchical likelihood ratio test.
Bayesian models allow model comparison amongst models that differ in only one parameter, like adding or removing one parameter as part of structure inference,
or there can be radically different model topologies underneath.
And that can be evaluated in terms of like a Bayes factor support for one model over another.
It also connects to a lot of work theoretical and applied in sleep-wake type models,
where parameters are added, fit increases during wake cycles, and then synapses are pruned, models are reduced,
core screening occurs during sleep.
And the big picture is you can use Bayesian model comparison, framed as a free energy landscape optimization just as always,
comparing different Bayes graphs, comparing different generative models,
and then this results in the expression of a log Bayes factor or an odds ratio comparing the likelihood of two different models.
So, this allows comparison of different models and the selection of different models as its own inference task.
Any thoughts on this?
Yeah, just one thing I want to pick up on is, I actually can't remember, like, I guess with this paper,
I think they were just doing sort of like, it's almost like just purely the bottom-up approach, right?
They're not starting with like a massive model and then you couldn't like start with a very big one at the top and then coarse-grained down.
You have to coarse-grained sort of going up the hierarchy as it were.
So, I think we end up going with this bottom-up growth of models because you don't want more levels than you need necessarily.
Or like, if you have an image and you're trying to classify it and it's, I don't know, 32 by 32 pixels and you just subdivide it by two,
you need to start with your pixel, you need to start with your full image width first and then coarse-grained, coarse-grained, coarse-grained up,
rather than going, ah, 8 for R, I'm going to have n levels and then cut them down after.
So, I think that's, we're probably going to be more on the bottom-up growth of models for this particular paper.
Yeah, good point. How do you know how big to make each scale and how many scales?
Hmm.
We won't read all the text on this page, but big claim.
Renormalizability is feasible under the models in Figure 1.
So, that's kind of the rhetorical chain is, here's the models that we're working with in Figure 1.
These models have renormalization properties.
That is what makes this state-path, state-path layering amenable to scale-free or scale-friendly or multi-scale generative models.
The claim is that given the renormalization properties of Bayes graphs, like or including the ones that they're describing,
with this state-path, state-path nesting, there can be computationally tractable, possibly multi-level renormalization.
And the rest of the paper, they're going to be explaining and unpacking that and adapting it to specific settings.
These renormalizing transformations have the effect such that the dynamics slow down in time and space as one ascends levels or scales.
So, compare that with other work on information theory of individuality, bottom-up and top-down information flows and causality, gapping and laddering.
And also, they're saying that the structure and the tuning of the variables in the graph, which would yield the full reproducible description of the renormalizable generative model,
itself can be reached through this Bayesian model comparison.
We had some questions about how the discrete and continuous time are different.
A more intuitive view is that successively higher levels encode sequences of sequences and implicitly composition of events or episodes.
In other words, at a deep level, one state can generate sequences of sequences of sequences, thereby destroying the Markovian properties of content generated at the lowest level.
So, this is like encoding or sedimenting nested sequences or paths in event-based or ordered structured narratives.
Deep structure is what allows for possibly advanced or naturalistic, interpretable, fill in your preferable adjective there, models of complex phenomena that do have deep structure,
like speech and writing and story.
And they're going to be walking through renormalization through space in terms of pixels, time and in general spaces.
So, it's cool to think about like Chris Fields and Mike Levin's work on competency in navigating arbitrary spaces as an invariant for analyzing cognition in diverse embodiments.
So, the idea that space in states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states
a higher level. So here we have a state at a higher level, s sub 1 superscript n plus 2,
and then flowing out of it, we have the state and the path at a lower level.
Higher states only change after a fixed number of lower state change, so that could be 2,
it could just be twice as fast, like a frequency doubling every time there's a time scale
separation, or it could be fixed like 60 minutes per hour, and or it could be fully reactive
in terms of using rx and fur for a just-in-time type responsive updating. And this is somewhere
where I think that generalized notation notation will be really helpful, because talking about
what these variables are in detail gets pretty messy. Because each state and path has only one
parent, the ensuring Markov blanket, the blue circles of each state, red circle, ensures
conditional independence among latent factors. There is a strict uniparental inheritance factorization
pattern in the hierarchical model, so can latent factors remain conditionally independent?
So note that the s and the u here are not connected. Conditioned upon the higher s,
they are conditionally independent. That simplifies the runtime inference. In sum,
a renormalizing generative model, RGM, is a hypergraph parameterized by two sorts of tensors,
the A and the B, in which the children of states at any level by partition into initial states and paths.
In this example, the blocking transformation groups, pairs of states and paths.
So here, it's kind of like A and B. Again, not exactly the A and the B letters from the textbook.
But note that A describes the likelihoods or empirical priors, and B is the dynamics.
So A is broadly referring to like this instantaneous sense-making-like relationship between
latent states and observations, whereas B is describing the dynamics and the transitions through time.
So I'm not sure if it's exactly that simple, but A is kind of describing synchronous
attributes of the model, whereas B describes diachronous, through-time aspects of the model.
So, okay. Anything else?
Yes. I think one thing to really hook onto is the uni-parental inheritance thing. So I think you're
correct when you say, yes, that makes everything faster and less computationally difficult. That is a
good thing. But I think there's a more philosophical thing to raise as well, which is when we're talking
about causality going up and down the levels. And learning should in theory be a lot easier
when you only have a single cause for something. So that means that when you make an observation,
it's much easier to infer, oh, the parent must have been this in order to cause what I see. And you
don't have to consider multiple factors coming in and going, oh, well, it could have been any one of 10
different factors that mean I saw what I saw. So that learning process as well, when we talked about the
directly accounts earlier, should be a lot easier to do when you have only a single parent for a particular
variable. So yeah, that conditional independence among the latent factors, I think also features into the
locality aspect as well of when we were talking about the very beginning of the session, but I'm not 100% sure on
that. But that's my intuitive understanding of what's going on there. Cool. Okay. One can also
regard RGM as an expressive way of modeling nonlinearities. In the limit of precise likelihood
mappings, this can be viewed as the composition of logical operators. One can see why an RGM can compose
operators to represent or generate content that has compositional structure. The inversion of an RGM
could be construed as a simple form of abductive, e.g. modal logic. Okay. Now we're going to get to the
examples. Here we go. First example, image compression and compositionality. So first, it's helpful for
background to look at variational autoencoders. These take in some input observations. They project down to a
latent space space that's smaller and then decode out to reconstruct. So it's really similar to a
variational autoencoder. And look at the first word, variational free energy, variational autoencoder.
They just call it the ELBO, not the VFE. There's so many similarities between this method and active
inference that it's really helpful to study up. It just sometimes uses a little bit of a frame shifted ontology.
So here's what they do. They're studying the classic MNIST handwriting data set. They map continuous
pixel values to a discrete state space, and then they're going to learn the structure through
recursive applications of a blocking transformation. They group together local pixels by tiling or
tessellating the image. So that's the first step, is they tessellate over the image at multiple scales.
So the smallest dots is a 4x4 cluster of pixels. Then the medium-sized dot is 4 of those. So then 1,
2, 3, 4, these get clustered into this one. And then 1, 2, 3, 4 get clustered into that one,
and so on. So that's the spatial static renormalization via spin block locality principle
process. Each group is then subject to singular value decomposition, given the training set of
images to identify orthogonal spatial basis of singular vectors. So this is the grouping and
the reduction. Grouping is the tessellation. It's like a convolution. We'll talk more about how it
differs from convolution, like a convolutional neural net. And then they truncate. So here's an example from the
form index project, but there's many other places you can look at this. This is what,
for a principal component analysis or for an SVD analysis, every single time it selects the vector
that explains the most orthogonal variance. And then it takes that profile out of the original data.
And then it takes the next most variance explaining vector. And so you end up with
something that looks like a variance explanation curve. So the first 10 components explain 70%.
To get to 90% on this data set, it took 50. So if you say, well, my computer only has space for 10,
just take 10. Or if you say, well, I'm interested in this kind of Bayes optimal, Pareto optimal crossover
point, you can solve it that way. Or maybe you have other constraints. So that's pretty much how it's
working is they're structurally using the nesting with these four by four spin glass blockings. And then
they do a SVD truncation compression method on each level of that blocking.
This is how the path state, path state, path state works. It's a multi-scale blocking, convolution,
tessellation, operation to group, then SVD with truncation to reduce to a defined state space. They only retain 32
of the variables from the SVD at each level.
There's more on this slide. There's one thing that'll certainly be interesting to discuss with the author is
At first glance, this procedure may appear to generate likelihood mappings of increasing size because the combinatorics of
increasingly large groups could explode at higher levels. However, by training on a small number of images, one
upper bounds the number of states at each level. In other words, one can effectively encode a finite number of
images without any loss of information such that RGM inversion corresponds to lossless compression.
So what's the deal with training data? How do we know about what is going to be an optimal or effective
data size, variability, information content, or curriculum for the data set? How do we address
that data selection problem, sometimes called active data sampling?
And then to the point about the lossless compression, one can effectively encode a finite number of images
without loss of information. So how can or does this do compression better than, for example,
gzip or LLM? That was a great moment in computational history when people realized that in certain ways
these models are doing information compression and that even gzip or just file compression utilities
have attributes that trained machine learning models have because of information theory.
And how do we know and infer or describe these trade-offs related to the training data set and
the structure of the model, all these different things, as we expand the scope of our modeling degrees
of freedom? And how has this problem been solved similarly or approached differently
in other work on information geometry in variational autoencoders?
And then just last piece on working through this example. So again, they pre-processed the MNIST images.
The images were downloaded from the link here.
The image was converted. They were converted to the format that they needed.
Then they say an exemplar image is shown in figure 3 in the paper. I think that should be figure 4.
And then they're showing the centroids of each of these groups.
So this is just to get an intuition for what this multi-scale spin glass blocking is doing with the
success of clumping and grouping into these multiple spatial scales. Okay, any comments?
Yeah, I think I'm still very confused as to how this ends up being from the previous slide, how you get
lossless compression, if you're also doing the singular value decomposition and truncating some of
those vectors. I definitely want to follow up with the authors about when are we lossy and when are we
lossless? And as you said, the question of training data and how much, what goes in your curriculum,
that's going to be huge, I think.
Yeah, good point. There's a truncation of variance. So if it's close to lossless, that's also known as
lossy compression. Here is figure 5 that's describing these concatenated likelihood matrices. This is a
common method in a lot of models where four separate matrices can be included as sub-matrices in a bigger
matrix. That can make it simpler to deal with in programming. It might make it amenable to sparse matrix
methods or compression methods. It might make it just easier to visualize, but this is kind of a classic
trick going back to the SPM days. Okay. If we had imposed an additional constraint or structural prior
that likelihood mappings are conserved identically over groups. So for example, if there was the prior
that, let's just talk about these four major quadrants, that's the third level of the model.
If we had said all four of those are the same versus a situation like it was, which is it was left open,
upper left quadrant of 5 could be different than the bottom right quadrant of 5.
If we had imposed that additional constraint that the likelihood mappings are conserved identically
over groups, one would have the discrete homologue of a convolutional neural network with implicit weight
sharing. So this is a super key point because people might have a lot more familiarity with
convolutional methods from computer vision. In the case where the mappings are constrained to be the same,
so it's a situation where we're learning a single filter that optimally sweeps across a whole image,
this is the convolutional neural network case, convolutional case. Here in the multi-scale RGM,
the learning space is more complex. It's more general. So the advantage is we could possibly
describe more conditional relationships like, oh, the upper left quadrant of 5 looks like this,
but the bottom right looks like that. What's the disadvantage? You know, where is this lunch getting
paid for? It massively expands the search and training space. As always, you can have a more
expressive model, has more options, bigger search space, less expressive model, smaller search space.
And then figure 6 shows more about what these scales look like and connects it also to receptive fields in the visual processing.
But just like the 4x4 spin block window or the 32 truncation dimensions for SVD or the 10 levels of this factor,
that's a big question. It's like, what about 3x3 with 25 dimensions of SVD and an 8 factor or 8 levels for the factor? So how much meta optimization do you do to determine what these variables should be?
One thing to pick up on that, which maybe they don't do in this paper, but I'm sure they've done in others is,
well, if I need to optimize something about my model, why don't I just create a bunch of them and then
check my free energy and just pick the one with the lowest free energy? So parameter optimization through free energy
minimization happens everywhere else in active inference. I'm not sure why we couldn't also do it here for some of these.
So you'd set up your RGM, but you could have different parameters on how many variables,
how many principal components to keep, how many levels to do, etc.
And so long as you can generate observations and see which ones are the most internally consistent
of the probabilities based on the training data, you could probably learn which, like how to do your RGM.
Yeah. I think that's the dream is you say, here's the meta structure of the one by one,
two by two, three by three, four by four, you know, n by n
grouping. And then we'll learn how many n should be grouped by on how many levels per factor with how many
variance retention elements from the SVD. And then you say, okay, well, should we retain the same
number of SVD variables for every level? Or should we open up the possibility that, well,
maybe the first level we retain 10, but the second, we only retain three. Again, that might be more
expressive if there really was 10 variance contribution in the first level and three in the
second, but it's a bigger search base. So that's, that's the sort of meta question, but that's cognitive
computing. So it's exciting times. Figure seven, getting to the performance on the MNIST. So figure
five, it says in the text illustrates the results of active learning, but I think here they mean figure
seven during exposure to the first 10,000 training images of the MNIST dataset. So in this example,
images were assimilated if and only if they increase the expected free energy of the RGM.
So in the absence of prior preferences or constraints, this ensures minimum information
loss by underwriting informative likelihood mappings at each level. So my question was,
does this address the data sampling issue? It seems like they're selecting from a larger data pool,
the informative examples, which improve the performance of EFE. So how much to threshold or how
to prioritize that? How do you deal with a path dependence in training, the order of the curriculum
of the points that are seen, or does it not matter? But for real time and online inference methods, it
often really matters. It's a complex landscape. So if you head out left or head out right, it's going to
make a big difference. And isn't this substituting another cost, possibly quite challenging inference and data
selection problem, just so that a special smaller RGM can be made. So there's going to be situations where
it is worth that entry cost to set up a smart active data sampling method to train a powerful RGM.
There might be another case where the data sampling component is challenging, and it's not worth it. And
there's another simpler way to do it another way. So of course, in any specific situation, it's an empirical
question how these different methods perform. And then just again, with these images, figure eight.
The thing to note here is classification accuracy increases with a marginal likelihood that each
image belongs to the class of numbers. So here they're showing that their accuracy is very high
where they're most confident, and their accuracy drops as their confidence drops.
And from a quick perplexity search, I'll also be curious to see what others have to add. Classic
shallow machine learning algorithms can easily achieve 97% accuracy on MNIST. In 2015,
the main convolutional neural networks approach achieved an error rate of just 0.29%. So 99 plus percent.
So especially at the way that they're presenting it here without code and things like that,
keep in mind that it's more of a proof of concept in analytic foundation, not necessarily being described
as a computational advance, which would have a lot more details on what was run rather than just saying
it was learned automatically within a few seconds on a personal computer. That's kind of a casual way
to describe it. I think it's very colorful and inspirational though. More assessment would need to be looked at.
How does the fit relate to other methods? And so this is a super exciting open source direction to support empirical reproducibility efforts to establish how and when and where different code bases do differently on different datasets.
Okay. Yeah, 100% just want to echo on the making the code and things available. We really do need that. It can't just be in a MATLAB script on Carverton's computer. It's got to be out there so that we can use it and build on it and understand what's going on.
One thing I think that's also worth highlighting is this classification and confidence question. I'm not sure if the convolutional neural networks will also give you that. So if they classify something, maybe they just say, oh, I think it's the digit zero and I'm like 95% confident. I don't even know if you get that necessarily.
Like I think maybe you get something that's a pseudo confidence number on a scale between zero and one, but it's not really confidence in the same way that this is like, this is like, you've got a probability distribution and you can do like a credible interval on it if you want. So I think that's something to really, really highlight the explainability is often in many cases worth swapping a few percentage accuracy points so that you know why your algorithm has suggested something.
Yeah. Earlier work by a lot of those authors have highlighted that true element of interpretability and uncertainty. For example, in a LLM today, even if it does say something like, I'm not sure about X, that string, I'm not sure about X was actually achieved as a high confidence outcome.
And so it doesn't actually reflect an introspection of the uncertainty intervals on X. So fun topics to go into. Okay. That was the first example. Now we're going to go faster through the next examples because they're structured much the same way. It's just each of these following examples is going to bring in a new dimension.
So the next dimension is going to be video compression. Generalize the renormalizing procedures of the previous section to include dynamics for recognizing and generating ordered sequences of images. So video is sequence of images.
Also, algorithm one has the fast structure learning. Even just copying and pasting this into perplexity and working in cursor from there does amazing things. So I'm super excited for what people come up with in terms of using the algorithms that are laid out and implementing them in different languages and so on.
So this section is going to generalize the static univariate grayscale example of MNIST into an RGB three color, three channel plus time, time color pixel voxel tuple structure.
Here's where we get to time. Time wasn't present in the MNIST example, but by partitioning each sequence into non-overlapping pairs during the timescale transformation at successive levels,
one effectively halves the length of the sequence when ascending from one level to the next.
So we talked about different ways to do nesting in time, 60 minutes in an hour, 24 hours in a day.
Here is going to be a strict frequency doubling.
This means that higher levels encode sequences of sequences of sequences,
paging exhibit, that can be regarded as episodes of successive events.
So key idea.
State path, state path, state path, state path encodes transitions through time,
and there's this enforced frequency doubling.
So processes are encoded relationally.
Look into something like successor representation learning or cue learning to see some other approaches.
So, it's possible to define and use message passing among levels.
It could also be possible to provide alternative operations orders or, like in RxInfer,
use graphs that have no preset order of updating or other rules for how updating occurs.
Okay, here's where in figure 10, 11, and 12, we get to the example.
We used a short video sequence of a dove flapping her wings.
The original video was downsampled to 32 frames, and they describe a little bit more.
They used the same 4x4 blocking.
So, this is key information on the video processing.
And it's really exciting to think about what they do to these file formats as analytic affordances.
I found this actually more from the discourse analysis area and rhetoric studies.
But if we think about the choices and the degrees of freedom that are made in the data processing and meta-modeling,
those are analytical affordances.
And it relates to how we were talking about you could do inference on those variables.
And so, here we see analogous to the images that were output for the MNIST summaries and performance.
Here, we similarly have prediction through time of this dove flapping the wings.
It's a cyclic generated video.
And, for example, the stimulus here is just if a spotlight is only on part of the dove.
And then it can reconstruct through space at the same moment and through time
how it will continue to unfold given the patchy observations that it gets.
So, that's the kind of dove video example.
I think there's one thing just to, yeah, some background on why does that matter?
That you can just all do the spotlight thing and recover the original in a way.
So, this is a fairly common way of understanding sort of like unsupervised learning.
Has your algorithm actually understood the data?
And so, masking parts of the image and asking it to infill it is a very common way of testing
that what you've got actually understands what's going on
and it's not just going to hallucinate anything random.
So, yeah, when I first came across it, I was like, oh, this is a bit odd.
But then, yeah, it's worth looking into just as background of like,
well, if you have an unsupervised learning technique,
how do you know it's actually doing a good job?
Yeah. Cool.
Okay, the next example in the video section.
In the preceding example, the sequence of the image constitutes a closed path,
namely a simple orbit.
So, it's like a gif of the dove flapping the wings.
It returns to the same spot and then it continues again.
This can be regarded as a quantized representation of a periodic attractor.
In the section paths, orbits, and attractors,
they use the same procedures to compress and generate stochastic chaos
using images generated by a Lorenz system.
The aim of the example is to show how active learning after structure learning
furnishes a generative model of chaotic orbits.
So, Lorenz system and active inference is discussed in the four-part series on Livestream 32,
stochastic chaos and Markov blankets.
And here we see an analogous process to the MNIST, analogous to the dove.
We have an image or sequences of images through time.
It's traces from this Lorenz chaotic attractor.
Similarly, there's this grouping and reduction operation happening through space and time.
And then, parameterization of those models, that's the structure learning followed by parameterization,
results in the ability to have, even when there's a gap in the observations,
like in figure 15 on the right,
here we have a gap in the observations, but the predictive posterior is able to continue.
It's an empirical question how well it lines up,
but this is just really fascinating because it shows, well,
even though the generative process, we can say,
has this chaotic instability
that might make it analytically intractable,
from the generative modeling perspective,
the RGM enables a really nicely typed way
that can accommodate systems that have these chaotic properties.
What was exciting to you about this part?
Yeah, exactly that.
It's, you know, chaos is fascinating.
And modeling it, famously very difficult.
So, yeah, I think this is actually,
I feel like they should be shouting about this more in the paper, in a way.
Like, maybe they could have opened with this.
I don't know.
But I would really like to see some more,
like actually simpler examples
of chaotic systems being modeled in this way.
And maybe that could be a separate paper entirely.
But even just, you know, one-dimensional signals,
that change in time,
that are famously quite chaotic,
that we don't do a very good job of modeling,
would be really interesting to see how getting that into an orbit modeling procedure
using this would be and see how that goes.
We were very excited to try that.
Awesome.
Yeah, totally agree.
The next example,
continuing in the image and video sequence,
is a bird.
So, a natural extension.
Figure 16 illustrates the spatial blocking of a more natural video,
a short sequence from this website.
So, that URL was no longer active.
But either way, it was just a search URL.
So, it'd be cool to see the exact video.
Maybe it could be uploaded.
But either way, this is a short video
of a bird in a natural setting.
And again, figure 17,
staying with this theme,
there's a latent state prediction,
ongoing,
even though the stimulus,
the observation,
is withheld sometimes.
So, in a way,
that's like what happens when we blink
or have an eye saccade.
We have this ongoing posterior prediction
of the visual scene,
which is what's being experienced or attended to,
with color everywhere,
and equal precision everywhere,
and all this stuff,
including continuity
when we blink or have an eye saccade.
Because it's basically what's happening here.
There's just transiently no stimulus,
but still the likeliest thing that's happening
is the latent state prediction.
So, that last little sequence
took us from handwriting,
static images, grayscale,
into three video settings,
which was a cyclic,
oscillatory, synthetic video,
a synthetic,
chaotic video,
and then a natural video.
So, you could imagine if this was
more structured natural video,
it would be easier to learn
with probably any method.
If this was a more complex scene
with multiple different things,
switching positions,
it would be a harder video to learn.
Any more thoughts on the natural extension?
Yeah, actually,
so, if it's trained on this particular video,
one thing I wasn't sure is
what frames does it predict
sort of at the end?
So, we've talked about like,
oh, if you like,
miss some frames in the middle,
and then it can catch up and keep up.
But if you just run this indefinitely,
I'm not actually sure
what the bird would be predicted to do,
and would it just eventually loop back?
Because it's sort of like,
if you had that chaotic path
in the previous one,
it's still in orbit.
It still returns to the same attractor states.
Whereas, here,
I'm not sure what the bird would do
when it's predicted to be doing stuff.
Maybe it just flies off the screen
and we don't see it anymore.
I don't know.
But that's,
it's kind of like a sci-fi.
It's a simulation to run.
It's like a sci-fi.
Like, what if,
it's like the movie's an hour and a half
long,
and then you keep watching,
it's like,
wait, it's still going.
What's happening?
Okay.
The next case that they study
is sound.
So,
the video examples
in the prior three
were just transitions.
It was an ordered sequence of images.
Whereas,
the video,
more broadly understood,
like the live stream
that you're listening to now,
is video as image plus audio.
So, here,
they just kind of
leave the video behind
and say,
let's just look at the audio.
In this setting,
pixels,
and there's an analogy
for the multimodal LLMs,
where the tokenization methods
that work for natural language
in the discrete setting
also work for tokenization
of image
and audio
like GPT-4O.
So,
in this setting,
pixels,
i.e. picture elements,
are replaced by voxels,
volume elements
over frequency and time.
These constitute
time frequency representation
of time series
or a continuous wavelet transform,
CWT.
Renormalizing generative models
for sound
are simpler
than for video content
because there's only
one metric dimension,
frequency,
that accompanies time.
using a spin block transformation
to coarse grain
over frequency
reflects the factor assumption
that neighboring frequencies
fluctuate in a correlated fashion.
So,
kind of similar
data availability setting,
URL provided
but unclear
what the songs were,
and then we see
the similar
visual representations
culminating in,
for example,
20,
where predictions,
latent state predictions,
are able to continue
even though
part of the stimulus
has been redacted.
So,
it's kind of like
a video chat
or a phone call
and then someone
drops out
for a few seconds,
but you're able
to still have
your unrolling
expectations
about what did happen
even though
you might be missing
some observations.
So,
any comments
on
this first sound part?
No,
let's carry on.
All right.
All good.
From sounds to music.
One might ask
if RGMs
could be applied
to language,
perhaps in the spirit
of hierarchical
Dirichlet process models.
We will not
address this here,
but provide
an application
to music
to illustrate
the generalized
synchrony
that accompanies
communicative exchange
Fristen and Frith 2015,
the classic
songbird dyad.
So,
keep in mind
that the birds
that are in this
dyadic
songbird setting,
which is also
reflected in the
2022 textbook,
are literally
singing from
the same sheet music.
They have the same
single fixed song.
So,
it's not
modeling
the flow
of language
as conversation
at the level
of new
lexemic
information provided,
like go to the store
and get me
milk,
or
meta
lexemic
like prosodic
or stylistic
elements
of language.
It's a very
restricted
sense of language,
but it's part
of the tech
tree of
building towards
models that
capture more
sophisticated
elements of
language,
but here
is more
structured
than this
sound example.
It'd be
interesting to
hear some
of these
songs in
their original
versions and
in their
generated
versions,
and like,
how well
does this
do
from a
performance
and file
size
perspective,
how well
does that
do to
MP3?
Which is
another
example of
data compression,
and that's
exactly like
the GZIP
and LLM
comparison
earlier.
if at the
heart of a
variational
autoencoder
or an
RGM or
something else
is using a
structurally
determined
model as
parameterized to
have a
smaller
representation
of a
larger
space,
how do
these
physics-inspired
first principles
of intelligence
models or
classical
machine learning
and compression
related models
do,
are we
getting
what fraction
of compression,
how good is
the performance,
all these,
you know,
can you tune
the bit rate,
all those
kinds of
questions.
Okay,
on to the
last
section
from pixels
to planning.
So,
in the
final section
we turn to
the deployment
of RGMs
for planning
as inference
and implicitly
their use
as synthetic
agents and
decision makers
under uncertainty.
So,
we're getting
to the
generalized
active
agents,
which is
to say
the capacity
for control
and navigation
in arbitrary
spaces.
And so,
here we
also see
a comparison
or juxtaposition
of active
inference
and reward
learning
and ran
way,
give a
great
guest stream
recently
on similarities
and differences
there.
And they
make some
more
comments
about
how
the
RGM
has
relationships
with
generalized
multi-level
learning.
So,
now we're
kind of
briefly
dropping
any specific
case,
like a
data set
of images
or video,
and just
thinking
more
generally
about
how
this
RGM
could be
used
for
multi-scale
active
agents.
Any
comments?
No,
it's
carry on.
Procedurally,
this looks
very much
like
conventional
reinforcement
learning.
However,
it is
simpler and
more efficient
because it
learns a
compressed
representation
of and
only of
paths
that link
rewarded
states.
So,
that might
have some
connections
with the
inductive
behavior
paper that
they also
wrote.
Another way
of looking
at this
is smart
data
selection.
That relates
to my
earlier
question of,
well,
if you knew
which data
to select
and in
what order
for free,
then maybe
the model
can be
trained
effectively.
But,
if it's
a hard
problem
to determine
which data
to sample
or what
order to
do it
in,
then it's
just
substituting
one type
of problem
for another,
which might
be effective
in a situation,
but that's
not a general
approach.
Effectively,
this leads
to the
automatic
selection
of model
structures
that can
only recognize
and predict
rewarding
episodes,
thereby
eluding
subsequent
parameter
learning.
This rests
upon the
fact that
one does
not need
to learn
how to
maximize
reward
if one
has a
generative
model
that can
only
predict
paths
that lead
to reward.
I was a
bit uncertain
about this
because
different
paths
may
probabilistically
lead to
different
reward,
and then I
thought,
well,
wait a minute,
that's just
pragmatic
value.
What about
the automatic
selection of
model structures
that can
only recognize
and predict
epistemic
information?
isn't the
expected
free
energy
going to
be able
to select
data,
active
data
sampling,
live stream
57,
smart
data
selection,
according
to epistemic
plus
pragmatic
value,
and thereby
specify the
next action?
Again,
reinforcement
learning selects
the next
action based
upon highest
expected
value or
reward,
but expected
free energy
has epistemic
plus pragmatic
value.
In what
follows,
we will
illustrate this
approach in
sequential policy
optimization and
unpack some
of its
corollaries.
Games and
attractors.
So here,
they use simple
Atari-like games
to show how
a model of
expert play
self-assembles
given a
sequence of
outcomes under
random actions.
The first
simple game in
question is the
game of
Pong.
They describe
how they
core screen
the blocks,
and then
they selected
frames that
started from
a successful
outcome.
So they
trained on
successful
examples.
In short,
we use
rewards for
and only for
data selections.
That's kind
of an
interesting
possibility
that there's
a pragmatic
filter on
training data
followed by
then an
epistemic
openness to
whatever it
is that that
data has.
renormalization
happened through
space and
time like the
video examples
and through
the action
policy.
That's the
section that
we're in here
where we're
saying in the
general case,
we're also able
to do RGM on
nested policy,
but here there
was just one
timescale of
policy.
figure 25,
26,
and 27 go
over some
of those
representations.
So any
thoughts on
this?
Yeah, I
think it's
the training
part is
really
interesting.
and what
I think
maybe possibly
as well,
we're getting
a bit close
as to why
they use
that C
letter for
paths.
If it's
only ever
encoding
paths that
are rewarding,
then we
sort of go
full circle
back to the
definition in
the path
textbook of
C is like
rewards.
It's just
rewarded paths
rather than
rewards of
observations.
But I think
they come onto
this later on
in the paper.
This feels
like a very
brittle way
of training
a model.
If it only
ever encounters
positive states
or things
that it likes
or things
that we
want it to
like,
what happens
if you drop
it in a
situation that
it hasn't
seen before
where there's
a negative
state and
it has no
way to
recover back
to a
positive one?
So if you
think of
for training
on a game,
if you start
in a losing
state,
how do you
bring it
back?
How do you
recover?
So I think
that's something
that we will
come on to
later,
but it's a
really interesting
thing to bear
in mind of,
well,
what are you
training on?
Are you only
training on
success?
How do you
deal with
failure?
Yeah,
great point.
That also
makes me wonder
about the
transfer
applicability.
So we train
it on that
bird video,
but then what
if it's the
same bird,
but it's just
a little bit
darker light,
or it's a
different angle?
what are the
transfer limits,
or what is it
really training
on?
And then
especially if
there's a sort
of data
filtering or
selection to
pass data,
that is one
of the
critiques of
large data
set related
training.
So maybe
this uses
a subset
of it,
like a
filtered
subset,
since there's
already a
database of
successful and
unsuccessful
plays,
just selecting
the successful
ones.
And then at
the same time,
there's this
interesting
biological tie-in,
which is like
the organism's
training data
through life,
in a way,
is all
successful with
respect to
survival.
So by
having the
training data
only reflect
a certain
kind of
success,
perhaps with
a lot of
variability still,
it's an
interesting question
what it
learns and
how
transferable
that could
be.
And then
this is the
last of the
worked examples.
Figure 28
shows the
same simulation
using a
slightly more
complicated game
based upon
breakout.
So what's
happening in
these gameplay
settings
is gameplay
is like
a video
plus
controllable
state
transitions.
So it'd be
like if there
was a dove
flapping its
wings,
and then
also there
was another
parameter,
which was
lights on
or lights
off.
And then
there's
one latent
state,
which is
where is
the dove's
wings
really,
and then
how does
the dove's
wing state
get emitted
to observations
when the
light is
on or
off.
And then
that would
be like a
simple example
where the
dove does
not respond
to the
light.
And then
a more
complex
example would
be,
oh,
it flaps
differently
in the
light and
the dark.
And so
that's where
you start
getting into
these
factorized
models and
paths on
states on
paths and
states.
So here
they study
this game
Breakout,
where there's
in a way
niche
modification
happening.
it doesn't
show any
of the
cells on
the top
getting
broken,
but that
would be
interesting.
How does
it represent
down into
the really
fine scale,
what numbers
represent the
presence or
absence of
a block?
And how
does that
really get
encoded?
So,
any last
comments before
we go to
the conclusion?
I actually
found this
example the
most difficult
to follow in
the paper.
I think
it's
still not
entirely clear
to me how
this RG
operator
handles the
action inside
this as
well,
and how
you
coarse-grain
the effects
of action
that might
happen at a
particular
time step
that then
gets sort
of diluted
out,
as it were.
So,
that's just
something I
think for
the game
section that
I'd quite like
to ask the
authors about
is to go
into a bit
more detail
on the RG
operators
when action
is happening,
but that action
can only happen
on a particular
time,
like,
what's the
word,
sort of
period,
as it were.
Yeah,
also,
I wasn't sure
if these were
meant to be
empty or
something,
but then I
wondered,
well,
is there a
natural
interpretation
separation of
levels 1,
2,
and 3,
and do
these scale
separations
capture some
natural
components of
the game,
or is
there a
possibility that
by using
like a 4x4,
any nxn,
or using a
strict doubling
of time,
that there's
kind of an
aliasing where
real natural
scales of
analysis
get sort
of chopped
up strangely
with different
timescale
separations,
and so
then it
depends a
lot on
what
spatial and
temporal
scales are
divided on,
and then there
would be some
training data
for some
partitionings
that would
work really
well,
like if you
had a ton
of good
information on
the structure
of a
problem,
then maybe
one measurement
would be all
you needed.
Like if you
knew the
whole class
schedule of
the university
and how all
the class
beginnings and
endings were
related,
and then someone
said,
there's a lecture
in that hall
on Tuesday,
and then you
could have a
ton of information
about how that
was correlated
with everything
else.
But then if you
were studying it
on a meter
by meter
subdivision
on a timescale
that wasn't
related to the
timescale of the
classes were
happening,
you might
need a ton
of data
and still
be shocked
with the
next time
step.
So that's
just the
structure
learning
challenge,
and I
think that
is the
hope and
the question.
How can
automated,
semi-automated,
and ultimately
unified methods
for structure
learning be
applied?
Okay.
Conclusion.
The paper
has showcased
several applications
of a generative
model for
discrete state
space approaches
based on the
renormalization
group.
The appeal
to the
apparatus of
the
renormalization
group is
relatively
straightforward
in the
setting.
This is
because
active
inference
is an
application
of the
free
energy
principle
which is
itself
a
variational
principle
of least
action
whose
functional
form is
conserved
over scales
or hierarchical
levels.
Having said
this,
the restriction
to spin
block
transformations
and pixel
spaces
could also
be regarded
as a
limitation.
Classic
answer.
In
principle,
any
outcome
space
could be
a
candidate
for
course
graining.
How do
we know,
understand,
and balance
where and
when these
spin blocks
would work
or not?
We've
discussed
in other
conversations
the applicability
of the
viability
of doing
sweeps
and structure
learning
and
act
inf,
on act
inf,
on act
inf,
on RL,
on act
inf,
on RL
and how
many layers
back
before your
data science
team is
just like,
I think
this is
fine.
RGM
with quantized
paths may
or may not
be useful
in certain
application
domains.
The
applications
above
illustrate
the simplicity
and efficiency
with which
the structure
of the
models can
be learned.
So that's
the key
claim.
That's
the key
point.
Further
limitations
of the
approach
described
above rest
on the
efficiency
of the
accompanying
methods.
The
efficiency
is both
a gift
and a
burden.
Again,
great.
Clearly
in terms
of sample
efficiency
and compression,
the schemes
described
above are
designed
to outperform
conventional
learning
schemes.
Okay,
but designed
to outperform
is something
that anyone
can say.
So,
did they
outperform
when other
learning schemes
weren't presented
in the paper?
This follows
because model
construction
procedure is
constructive.
as opposed
to the
reductive
approach
of Bayesian
model
reduction
and related
procedures.
Enabling
the self-assembly
of a minimally
expressive
model to
recognize,
generate,
and predict
the content
at hand.
So,
that's this
bottom-up
construction
through
tessellation
that we've
discussed.
This should
be contrasted
with the
reductive,
but not to
be confused
necessarily
with reductionism
or reductionist
account,
but reductive
in terms of
starting with
a large,
overly expressive
model that's
reduced or
pruned,
minimizing
complexity to
recover predictive
validity
and generalization.
So,
one way to
think about
that is
like in
the
VAE,
the latent
space is a
bowtie.
It's smaller
in the middle.
Whereas,
for an image
processing neural
network,
you might take
in 64 pixels,
output 64 pixels,
but then the
thickness in the
middle is huge.
So,
these are the
approaches saying,
well,
you can kind of
have this
constructivist
approach to
building a
smaller latent
space that's
projected down
to and then
unpacked from.
That's the
VAE,
RGM type
style.
Another
approach is to
start with a
massive surfeit
of parameters,
you know,
70 billion,
405 billion,
and then use
that as a
function approximator
to fit
an approximation
to some
other function.
But,
more generally,
how could
efficiency be
a burden?
They make
some more
points about
learning
and skills,
and this gets
to our
question about
the successful
trials for
training.
So,
these such
models are
necessarily
brittle
in the sense
they will not
recognize or
respond to
events they
have not
previously
encountered.
That almost
seems like
too far to
say.
I mean,
the MNIST
model will
be able to
respond to
a digit it
has never
encountered.
It won't be
able to
respond to
a temperature
reading because
it just doesn't
even have that
capacity, but
it's like out
of sample
learning or
out of
structure
learning.
A useful
heuristic here
is learning to
ride a bike.
In this
kind of
procedural
learning,
we learn
from a
starting
position and
accumulate
successive
cycles of
pedaling until
we avoid
falling
completely,
but we
do fall
and we
learn from
when we
fall.
In other
words,
we retain
only experiences
characteristic of
successful bike
riding until
we can ride
fluently.
However,
we would
not be able
to ride a
bike starting
from any
arbitrary
state,
e.g.
falling
over.
We would
have to
return to
a known
starting
position to
recover our
flow.
Flow is
meant in
manifold,
which itself is
a pun,
senses here,
the fluency
associated with
being in the
flow,
control flow,
dynamical flow,
and of course
RG flow.
So what is
really being
claimed about
what are the
situations where
successful examples
are enough,
where negative
examples are and
aren't learned
from or
recovered to,
and then how
well do these
methods work
within and
out of sample?
After all,
that is what
the whole question
is in training
a model,
is how well
do you do on
the training
and the test
for different
kinds of
out of sample
being from
really similar
but not in
the exact
training data
itself,
all the way
on through
totally different
kinds of
work.
So,
we don't know
the next steps
or implications,
we have a lot
of questions
and hopefully
do too.
What are you
looking forward
to or just
what are your
thoughts having
now gone
through all
this?
I'd love to
see some
code.
I'd love to
see some
implementations
that we can
hack around
with ourselves.
and yeah I think it's a really because a lot of what's come in the past for active inference has
been it's felt very like I need to write my generative model down on paper I need to really
sit down and think undistracted and think how do I model this problem what are the causes what are
the observations how do they how might they relate and then I create a function which will generate
these observations and then you can plug it into active inference and go all the way but the often
the hardest part is writing them writing down those a b c d matrices right it's actually really difficult
from lots of people you know you can be a trained physicist and it's still really hard to think how
do I model this problem in the real world in terms of mathematical matrices that's really hard so in
theory if your algae operators are good enough and you just you can just chuck some data maybe it has
to all be positive data all the happy path stuff but that's already quite powerful I think and moves
I think active inference closer to more traditional machine learning in terms of accessibility and ease
of use so that data science teams could just use this in production I think what this is this paper
does represent quite a significant step forward for that and I think you know with all the work that
you've done on this channel of just making active inference more accessible and easier to play around
with easier to try in new scenarios that's that's such a good thing so very excited for the future
live stream sessions on this paper awesome yeah great point that how much of the modeling specification
today and tomorrow will be manual semi-automated automated like would you just put in the EEG data
and just say go for it or how would you embody side information about the EEG problem and then how would it do on
training and test and how would it transfer all these different questions so it's great do you have any last
comments uh yeah I just think the explainability thing is going to be the key here so as soon as you
go to unsupervised sort of structure learning what did those levels mean and what did those factors mean
that it's learned from the data itself if I if we go the old-fashioned route if I come up with a
generative model and I say this is how I'm modeling the system I can explicitly say this level this latent
variable is for whether it's raining or not and this observation corresponds to water observed on the
graph outside but because I'm coming up that model I can use words to communicate that to you and you
have that full explainability of this model with this approach we are going to lose some of that and
it'll be really interesting to see how whether we can recover the explainability of well what does this
factor mean when I did a principal components transformation and ditched half the components
what does that actually mean you can sort of look at it on the MNIST example and go oh yeah it's a
digit right but we still have to look at that so getting that in a semi-automated way would be very
exciting as well yeah that makes me think about what natural joints of the world handles for the world
will a possibly automated method fail to find and then conversely what new natural scales
might it come up with for example just doing PCA analysis on natural language it's like
okay principal component one is whether it's happy or sad or whether it's written in this language or
that language but then you get to principal component seven and it's like huh does that eigen term
mean something with it a little bit more of this and a little bit less of that does that what does that
really mean and then the further you go out usually the less reliable those variance components are across
different data sets so then that comes back to how do we interpret
and set up systems that have few or many you know when shorter lists are more interpretable
but then when you clump under fewer things they have more grouping of dissimilar things so it's like
lumpers and splitters the neats and the scruffies those those are all coming to play right on that
field so thank you very much arun and also to blue and to courtney for the contributions to the dot zero
so looking forward to the next two weeks peace thanks very much
thank you

## OPapscuD05s

Hello and welcome. This is Active Inference live stream 58.1 on November 7th, 2024.
Welcome to the ActInf Institute. We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning,
and practicing applied active inference. You can find us at links here. This is a recorded
and archived live stream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work. All
backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow video etiquette for live streams.
Head over to activeinference.institute to learn more about live streams and other projects.
We are in the second in the 58 series. Arun and I last week did 58.0 with some background
and context. Kind of the approach to scratch the surface. And today we're going to pick
it up with Lance and looking forward to this discussion. So people watching live, please
write any live chats. Arun has also prepared a bunch of questions. Let's begin though with
Lance if you want to say hi and welcome back. And then any overviews or any introductions,
what's the question that you feel will help set the table for today? Thank you.
Well, thank you so much. And thank you so much for having me. So yeah, I'm super excited
about this discussion. And I feel a lot of us are trying to understand renalizing objective
models. So I'm sure I'm going to learn a lot as well. Yeah. So just to give a little bit
of background. So now Kyle Friston is the chief scientific officer at Versus. And one of the
challenges that we are kind of like moving towards, and this is public information, is of course
scaling active inference. And there's one particular challenge that we're looking at. It's Atari. So
for those who don't know, Atari is just a suite of like about 30, 31 games. They've been around
for a long time, maybe since the 80s, or I don't know exactly. It's a famous benchmark for
reinforcement learning. Now there's been a lot of work in RL solving Atari and maybe stuff even
like 10 years old already that solves Atari. So the question is, why are we trying to do
that with active inference? And the answer is, all of these RL methods, they use a lot of
data. They're super data hungry, and they're not, so they don't have this human level efficiency
that we're looking for. And so that's where active inference could potentially come into
play. So one of the things that we're looking at at the company is scaling active inference
to show that we can solve Atari with a human level efficiency. And so this scale-free approach,
planning from pixels, emerged out of these efforts. And this has been work led by Carl. So he's,
you know, come up with the ideas and the code and so forth. And, and yeah, and so now we're still
pushing with this approach and other approaches. So yeah, it's super exciting. And there's many,
many research questions of things we could explore. So very excited to discuss it today.
Okay. Do you want to give any connective tissue between some of your previous conversations or
papers or streams? And then we'll jump into the listed questions we have.
Sure. So, so for those who don't know me, so I'm Lance, I've been working on the
principle active inference for a long time, primarily on the, on the mathematical side of things. So
back when I started, possibly the only person understanding active inference was Carl himself.
And if he privileged people around Carl. And so a lot of the work I did was to try to understand
things and put them on a more rigorous mathematical footing. And so we've had a, a few conversations
here, a few live streams, speaking about some of that. So we'd say the, the RGM work that we're
discussing today is a, is a bit different from, from what I've been working so far. So,
previous work was mostly on the theory of the principle theory of active inference,
the math. Today, it's more about a piece of code that does things, and it does really cool things.
And so it's a much more pragmatic agenda. And I'm personally moving in this more pragmatic
set of things, but I have a lot to learn. Yeah. So this is, this is how things stand at the moment.
Yes, it was live stream 52 on the geometric methods for sampling optimization,
inference and adaptive agents. That was a great and very epistemic setting. And then also now that I'm
seeing it also 26. So it was sort of a 26 52 full card Lance situation, but both of these were some of the
clearest and most fundamental papers and unpackings in the series.
Arun, anything you want to begin with, or we can just jump into the questions you wrote.
Uh, I mean, first of all, just to say like, I need to catch up on those because they sound great.
Um, also, I think some of my questions are still fairly, like, I don't want to say like towards the
end of the paper, they're much more like discussion points, but I don't know if maybe for some people who
might not been able to catch the first session to maybe go into a very high level summary of the
paper first, uh, and then set some background that might make the discussion points, uh, a bit clearer
as they happen. Uh, but very happy to, for you to take the lead on that one, Daniel.
Daniel
Yeah. Lance, what would, what would you say is the overall summary through line and then we'll turn to the
specific questions.
Sure. Um, so, so I'll give a quick summary.
Yeah. Um, right. So, um, yeah, so, so the problem that we're looking at is planning from pixels.
So you have a bunch of pixels and we want to, you know, the decision making.
Um, so for, for those who are familiar with active inference, there's typically two flavors of active
inference. There's the reflexive type of active inference where you're not really planning in
the future, but you're like, uh, if, if I infer it and I'm in this state, then I should do this.
And if I infer, I'm in this state, I should do that.
And it's typically what we see and continuous active inference.
Um, and then there's the other favor of active inference and also sophisticated inference,
which is typically in the speech states.
And, um, and that has planning that has expected free energy. It has expiration and so forth.
Um, here we are in a setting when, where we are doing things in the speech states, but we are reflexive.
So this is just to situate with the other things that are in the literature.
And so what happens is we, we get a bunch of pixels.
So yeah, just to go back a little bit, this is, um, the pixels of the planning paper is a way to
learn from expert data.
So if I, if I look at expert data of an agent doing something, I'm going to be able to learn that
with an RGM and reproduce it in some kind of a, like a habitual reflexive loop, but I'm not going to do
any kind of the, no, for learning.
Um, and, and yeah, and so then there's like a very specific, um, architecture for the RGM
generative model, uh, that allows it to do what it, what it does.
And there's a way we can, you know, learn these things, uh, but that's kind of like the, yeah,
goal idea or, or a little context.
Okay.
Awesome.
Yeah.
Just, we have the figures if there's any to jump to, let's go to the first, uh, question.
So how are renormalizability and sparsity linked?
And also if you could connect that to how else we've seen sparsity discussed in the Markov blanket
concept, what's sparsity in a graphical model?
How is renormalizability doing something similar or different than the sparsity conditions that we've
studied before?
Right.
Um, so, um, yeah, just to give a bit of, uh, a bit of context on that question, because you
talked about Markov blankets.
So, uh, Cal and a number of people have this idea that living systems and I guess systems in general
are made of Markov blankets, I mean, they're themselves Markov blankets.
And so if you take an organism, it would be composed, for example, of, uh, organs with their
own Markov blankets and themselves, uh, made of cells with their own Markov blankets.
Uh, and, and you can, you know, subdivide, uh, many, many times sort of zoom in and you'll still see
Markov blankets everywhere.
And so the, what, what you get from that, or, or probably what Cal, uh, got from that is that
there is some kind of, uh, spell free invariance about the nature of things.
Um, which is that if you, if you zoom in or if you zoom out and, um, you know, arbitrary zooming or
zooming, you would still have this kind of like fundamental structure.
And, um, and I should say, uh, the renormalization group is a mathematical apparatus for zooming in
or zooming out on things.
And, and so basically these, uh, renormalizing, you can't, and models, they have this, um, assumption
that the world is renormalizable, that the world has some kind of a spell free information.
Uh, within them.
And, uh, and so we can get more into the details of that, but basically long story short is that
this renormalization aspect, it gives you a very powerful inductive bias on the structure of the
genital model.
Um, and in this case, it gives you this kind of renormalizing genital model, which is
a genital model that looks the same at every scale.
So it's a genital model that if you, uh, you know, give it pixel data that sort of
very zoomed in, uh, that part of the model that feeds that data is going to be the same
in terms of its structure than the high level parts of the model that look at like much more
causal grain features.
Um, and, and these models are very sparse.
Um, yeah, just because, uh, when you look at the representations in the model,
there's many, many, uh, connections are missing, but by design on purpose, right?
So, to have a lot of, uh, sparsity, uh, so it means that they're very lightweight.
Um, and yeah, I would say that's kind of, um, the main advantage, right?
Uh, so when we, when we compare with, uh, traditional machine learning architectures,
this is not to say that, you know, this approach has a lot of limitations, but one,
one of the strengths is that we, we get some very lightweight models that can learn things with a
a relatively low number of states.
And, and I think that goes back to sparsity.
Okay.
Let's look at the figure and, and talk about the architecture.
Maybe continue a little bit on what, what specifically
can, can, uh, where, how can we see that renormalization structure in figure three?
And how does this have similarity and differences than like the textbook generative models that we've
worked with?
Right.
So, so I should say a full disclaimer, I don't think the explanation of, uh,
renormalizing data models is very clear in the paper.
And some will say it's extremely unclear.
Uh, so I'm going to try to, to clear some of that confusion.
Uh, but there's also a part of it where, where I'm probably still confused.
So, so apologies in advance if I cannot clear all the confusion.
Um, but so, so I can try to describe the, the figure that you have here.
And then I, I can also give you my own, uh, kind of personal summary of gender models,
uh, of renormalizing gender models.
So, so here we have kind of, um, a classic, a classic, uh, hierarchical partially observed,
uh, market decision process.
And the special features is that, um, there's a time horizon of one at each layer.
Um, and then you, you have this renormalizing scale-free aspect, where, as you can see at the
bottom level, you have two states, two actions.
These are grouped into one state, one action of the level above.
And then if you go one level, even, even further above, there's, again, two states at the level
below and two actions that are grouped into one state and one action the level above.
And you can go like that for as many layers as you want.
Um, in, in the current code, what you do is you specify the number of layers that,
that you want, uh, to start with.
And then you would kind of learn, uh, you know, the transition mappings and, and so on and so forth.
What aspects of the code are available or what languages or timeline for overall applying it?
Um, you mean for, for applying it in, you know, to machine learning test?
Is it, is it, is it, or, or just for any of these settings, what is the code availability
or, or what do you think are the pro, the promising ways today and going forward for
people who are interested in the open source active inference implementations to work with it?
Right.
Um, yeah.
So, so I'm not entirely sure, um, as to the kind of like privacy constraints on the, on the code right now.
Um, I would assume there's a link in the paper pointing to a repo, but if that's not the case,
it's not the case.
Okay.
Well, um, so I know it's on a private version of SPM.
Um, and so if it hasn't been released yet, uh, then there surely, uh, talks inside the company
of like, when to release it, how to release it.
Um, yeah.
So I'm not exactly sure about the timeline of that, unfortunately.
Okay.
Okay.
All good.
Yeah.
I mean, the, it's, it's an interesting, that, uh, piece with the research and being able
to share that.
And with this information here from the pseudo code, it, it gives a lot of the recipe and the
anatomy of the, uh, model.
But let me just, uh, is there, is there another part of this figure or another figure to continue
specifying a little bit more about what's happening or do we want to jump back to the questions?
Um, yeah.
So, uh, there's a presentation by, by Tim Ferberlin that, that, um, um, and there's a useful slide
on, on that presentation, uh, that, that could potentially show.
I don't know if I can share my screen here, but I think it would be quite useful to illustrate a
bit more.
Sure.
What's going on.
Oh yeah.
Share your screen.
And, uh,
I said, see if I can do that.
This is a new computer.
Um,
Okay.
Yeah.
Unfortunately I'm not going to be able to do it because it's, um,
I mean, I could, but I need to fiddle with the settings or you could, you could email it
and I don't have admin rates.
Okay.
You could email any slides.
Um, if you wanted to,
to, uh, admin.
Yeah.
I'll check, I'll check and, um, yeah, I'll get back to you on that.
Okay.
But I can, I'm happy to explain.
Yeah.
Continue.
Um, what, what I was going to show.
So the idea, and, and here I'm going to have to wave my hands a bit, but hopefully it's, uh,
it's clear.
I'm going to show you the picture.
Um, you get some pixel data, you get a movie, but basically that's what our RGMs do.
You get a movie of an agent doing something and you're going to learn a gentle model that,
you know, learns that and is able to reproduce the agent in the movie.
And so it's able to learn its actions and reproduce its actions depending on the state.
So the way it works is you, um, you take one frame of the movie and you take the next frame.
And, and this would be like your low level observation for the renormalizing during the model.
So why do we take two consecutive frames, uh, as one observation, because we want to extract position,
but also momentum, uh, information.
So, so that's our observation to consecutive frames.
Then each frame we're gonna, um, we're gonna divide it into several overlapping patches.
So this, like, uh, convolutional neural network would, so, um, yeah, you have like multiple patches
that overlap each center, for example, around pixel.
And then each of those patches, you do a singular value decomposition,
which is that you, uh, you take the eigenvectors.
So you have those pixel vectors, you take the eigenvectors and, and you essentially do a PCA.
And, and the reason why you do that, so, so just to give a little bit of, uh, context.
Um, well, first of all, uh, planning is, is much easier in discrete states.
Uh, so somehow things work a lot better, or, or, or at least that's what we think, uh, at this moment.
Uh, so we want to convert this kind of like very high dimensional, kind of continuous data,
that are pixels into some more, uh, manageable size, uh, low dimensional discrete representation that we can
then work with in the RGM.
And so there's potentially many ways you can do that.
And one way would be to use, uh, like kind of, uh, for example, um, uh, variational autoencoder,
where you would then discretize the latent space.
That would be one way to get from continuously discrete.
So there's many, many ways, uh, you can do this step.
The reason why, uh, I suppose, Carl chose SVD is because it's very lightweight.
And it's also very, um, I would say context sensitive.
If you gave one bit of data, I will adapt to that data.
If you give it another bit of data, I will adapt as well.
Um, there's arguably also pros to using a deep learning architecture.
The cause is that it would be need to be trained.
So lots to explore there.
But for now we use it as GD.
And so, um, so once you've done your, your singular value decomposition,
you get these eigenvectors that, um, you still get a list of eigenvectors for,
for each patch that tell you, okay, well, this is like the most important feature
in, in the patch of pixels.
This is second most important feature, third most important feature and so forth.
What you do is you truncate that.
So you take the most important features and then you discretize that.
Um, so it's, it's a lot of stats, um, I know.
So hopefully I can, um, send you a picture.
But the point is that you extract the features using SVD.
So you get a much lower dimensional, uh, representation of the data.
And because you truncate it, you kind of eliminate the noise,
you eliminate the things you don't care.
And then this low dimensional thing, which is still continues,
because these are eigenvectors, you can discretize it using multiple bins.
So now you have discrete data.
And once you have your discrete data, then you can fit it to the picture that you have
in the slide right there and do your hierarchy point.
And kind of like much more classic.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Yeah.
And the dot zero, we talked a little bit about that process about going from the continuous
to the discrete to enable planning over the discretized form.
Arun, go for it.
Yeah.
And thanks for that summary, Lars.
That was really like clear and informative.
Uh, one question I have just to follow off on that is when you said something you said
quite early on, which is that planning in the continuous space is really difficult.
Um, could you say a little bit about why that is?
So the reason I ask is, I think it's a very common thing that people would want to do
is have an agent that can plan an action to do this thing, but control the degree at which it does it.
So I would like to move, but by a certain amount, how do I choose how much to move in a continuous distance?
So I guess maybe could you say a little bit about why it's so difficult to plan in continuous space?
Yeah, it's a really good question. So I think, um, so planning is always about doing things.
Um, so when, when I talk about planning, I don't talk specifically about action selection.
I talk about imagining what will happen, um, you know, in a certain time interval in the future.
So it means that you're looking at, uh, what would happen if I did that in terms of what is the trajectory of what would happen if I did that.
Now, if you're in discrete spaces with time, you're looking at a sequence of future states.
But if you're in, um, and, and so your space of trajectory is that you're kind of like planning over is discrete.
Because it's like, um, possible steps of the next time step and then 10 possible step of the next time step.
So it can be huge, but it's discrete.
When you're in continuous space, if you want to plan, uh, in a certain time and to run the future,
you're looking at trajectories of what would happen if you took a particular trajectory of actions.
And so if you're in continuous space, continuous time, the space of trajectories is infinite dimensional.
So I think that's kind of like the, well, it's infinite and it's also infinite dimensional.
So it's kind of like really bad.
And yeah, and there's probably, I mean, there are algorithms that kind of do this.
I'm not really an expert on that, but I think that's kind of like the underlying limitation,
the, the fundamental, fundamental mathematical limitation.
And so the thing you can do then, uh, to plan in continuous space, continuous time is you abstract
away on a discrete space and then, and then you go back down and, and this is what, what we've been
doing.
I mean, as you know, um, in active inference, it's kind of like the, the hack, uh, there's probably
other ways to do it, but yeah, that's where we're at.
So maybe something just to clarify there is the nature of these infinities, right?
So you said infinite dimensional, but then also it's almost like infinite values for each of those
dimensions.
So that's why it gets really explosive in the number of things you have to consider.
Uh, one of the things that we talked about in the dot zero was the path-based formulation
and how that seemed to be even more combinations you would have to consider
compared to the textbook, uh, formulation where now we're considering paths over states and actions.
And there are as many, uh, combinations of paths of like common, combinate, combining states and action
choices, uh, which already sounded like quite difficult to solve relative to sort of the toy examples
of just what, what's in the book.
So maybe you could, uh, say a little bit about that.
Right.
So, so just to make sure I'm, I'm on the same page with you.
Um, what, what do you mean exactly by the path-based formulation?
So I think it's, um, when we're now, just, just, just figure 4.3 from the textbook is kind of a good touch point.
Um, on the top is the discrete time explicit states and observations that time points are considered.
Time point 1, 2, 3, 4.
In a continuous time.
Future time points are only predicted through a Taylor series generalized coordinates expansion,
which is something we talked about in, in 52.
Um, or continue from there.
Just wanted to bring in those two textbook figures and how they can be combined in, in a hybrid architecture
that kind of presages what we're talking about today.
Yeah.
Okay.
It's interesting that you bring up generalized coordinates because, um, yeah, when I, when I was mentioning, uh,
myopic active inference or like not using path, um, I wasn't specifically mentioning, referring to generalized coordinates.
Kind of like the more simpler version without the generalized coordinates, because you're right, you're absolutely right that when you have generalized coordinates, um, you, you do get trajectories again.
The, the difference or, or one of the differences is in discrete states, um, you, you may have a limited computational budget that kind of limits you in several ways,
but at least theoretically you can plan infinitely or arbitrarily far ahead in the future.
Uh, even though your beliefs would get very imprecise, um, in continuous states, when you have generalized coordinates, you have this notion of, um, encoding implicit trajectories in the future.
Through these Taylor expansions, but the Taylor expansions are only by design, only going to be accurate on a very small or, or small, uh,
time interval.
So, so already theoretically, if you have only finally many generalized coordinates, which is what you always have in practice,
you are now able to plan very fine the future.
This is, um, this is like much more sophisticated than, than any kind of active inference without the generalized coordinates
or the things I was mentioning before.
The, yeah, what, what, one other thing, um, is so, so when you do planning in the sweet states here, like comparing multiple trajectories of actions,
if I remember right, but, but correct me here if I'm, if I'm wrong, when you do planning in the continuous states for generalized coordinates,
so then, uh, at the bottom of 4.3, you're always minimizing the gradient of the free energy with your actions.
So even though you plan the, the trajectories of states in the future, if you did that, you don't plan for sequences of actions.
I, I believe that that's true or another way to say that is that the continuous time formalization,
even if you do have a high degree, uh, Taylor series expansion or a lot of generalized coordinates,
it isn't explicitly considering counterfactual scenarios like tree search in chess.
It's like seven moves down the road. If one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, then eight, a eight, b eight, c.
Whereas in a continuous time expansion, you get one polynomial approximator, but it isn't saying, well, what if time point 12 were different?
All you could say is something about the statistics of that path as interpolated, but you wouldn't be able to directly, um, make strong guarantees outside of following the gradients around that inferred path.
So maybe, maybe I've mistaken something, but I, either in one of the points that you've written there, Daniel, or something Lance said,
I remember the word reflexive for the continuous time action of inference. Is that, is that what we're saying here is that, um, yeah, there we go.
Without planning, um, at least with the continuous, um, time formulation.
Yes. It's sort of doing something with the expectation of what's going to happen in the future.
But as you say, it's not considering counterfactuals. We're not considering if I do this, then this, if I go 10 meters rather than 20 meters, this will happen, et cetera.
Yeah. Yeah. I think it would be interesting if he, if he has that question to Cal, um, if he, if he draws the same distinction, but, but I would totally agree with you.
Um, I would say, so at the beginning I was referring to continuous active inference without the generalize coordinates as being reflexive.
I would say that with generalize coordinates, it's still reflexive, but you're right.
That it's still, it's already much more sophisticated in the sense.
Yeah.
The generalize coordinates are like a way to bring the depth in.
It's like doing momentum trading on a stock over multiple timescales.
You're still making an instantaneous decision in the sense you're looking at a vector of the current moment and then looking at different trends and first, second, third, et cetera, higher moments.
However, again, there's not explicit planning.
So this sort of gets into the functional underpinnings of anticipatory behavior and whether anticipatory behavior can be loaded up into a sort of reflexive, intuitive moment or, and, or to what extent it involves explicit tree-based search of branching possibilities.
Yeah, totally.
Um, okay.
Okay.
But just to close the loop on the sparse, on the sparsity, could we say generative models are defined by their sparsity.
We're literally talking about some set of random variables, nodes, and their edges, which defines their sparsity conditions.
Any node interpolating between two other nodes is a blanket.
People often are interested in the agent environment blanket as interface.
However, taking the graphical model as a base graph itself, we can think about the B matrix here as being a blanket, for example, between these other two nodes.
So this is the sparsity conditions of figure three and the, I mean, whatever model you design, the connectivity is the sparsity condition.
Renormalization generative models have a special template or recipe for how the sparsity conditions are related within and across levels.
levels.
Okay.
Arun, want to pick one of these or which one to go to next?
Um, I actually think the next one is they're sort of roughly in an order.
Uh, so yeah, I think talking about the RG operators, because it is
the really new thing in this paper, what makes a good one?
What makes a good RG operator?
So, um, yeah, I mean, I'm assuming if you ask this question, you probably know more about RG
operators than I do.
Um, so it'd be interesting to know what you think about this.
Um, yeah, to be honest, like, uh, yeah, just to give like a comment, um, this is one of the
things that I really need to read up on.
Um, Kyle repeatedly says there is this universal aspect to renormalizing giant models.
And I agree that there is some part of nature that seems to be scale-free in terms of like
these marker blankets had different scales.
But to me, there is also a lot of nature that is not scale-free.
I mean, not everything that you look at is a fractal.
So in what sense are RGMs universal?
Uh, the super cool thing and surprising thing for me in this paper is that, uh, there's a lot of
things that you can do with RGMs.
There's a lot of things that you can learn.
I'm not sure to what extent, I mean, I would really like to know, okay, well,
this is one thing that you cannot do with RGMs in terms of like, uh, I cannot memorize this.
Yeah.
That's something I'm not, I'm not sure about.
So maybe I can sort of come back on that.
Uh, so I think the use of the SVD and effectively principle components analysis in this paper is
actually like a really nice introduction to renormalization groups.
If you don't know what they, if you haven't heard of them before, uh, it's very common in other
aspects of more like traditional pattern matching and machine learning.
And there's loads of good tutorials, uh, just out on the web.
We've got a couple of links in the slides, uh, to explain what it does.
So I think just saying like to summarize that very quickly, PCA is, uh, you do a transformation
on your data to maximize variance amongst particular dimensions.
And then you can do a dimensionality reduction by throwing away the dimensions you don't want.
So that really neatly leads into the definition of RGMs in this paper, which is the core screening.
It's the critical part is that you are throwing bits away that you think aren't important at
particular levels.
And then as you go up levels, you throw away different dimensions, but they feed into the lower levels.
Uh, but I think it's, there's also a lot of talk in this paper about like the spin block transformation
as well, uh, how the pixels are sort of blocked up and then you say, okay, we're going to core screen in space,
uh, and also core screening in time.
That's in a couple of the examples in the paper as well.
Uh, but I guess my sort of question is particularly on the, like, how do we know our core screening is not
throwing away actually useful information?
And how does that relate to the data that we're putting into the training as well?
Uh, I think that's cause I know you mentioned before, this is all about learning from expert play,
but are we also possibly throwing away some of the expertise when we core screen?
Totally.
Um, yeah, totally.
I mean, um, as far as things stand at the moment, this is more of a open question, a research question.
So some of the things that we're, we're doing is, you know, testing RGMs on, on different kinds of, uh, expert play for different games
or for different environments, uh, in and outside of Atari and looking at how well it works.
Um, so my own take right now is that RGMs are pretty good at memorizing, uh, really a bunch of things,
a bunch of expert play.
Um, the, well, two things, um, the, for, for RGMs to do well, the, the game or the environment needs to
have some kind of orbits, some kind of, um, orbit structure that, um, yeah, the RGM would learn.
So that's like one thing that's pretty important.
Um, the main challenge of RGMs that, that we've kind of, um, been looking at or, or looking into is, uh, generalizability.
So one of the things that, uh, we show in the paper, which is, uh, pretty cool, I think is this, uh, Dove example.
So we, we learned this Dove video with the RGM and then we occlude, uh, the Dove and the RGM is able to infer,
oh, um, um, I'm actually, so it's going back to its training data, its reconstruction of the training data
and reconstructing the Dove. Um, so that's one type of generalization that works very well.
But it kind of highlights, um, perhaps, I mean, what, what seems to be a drawback as well. So
the RGM, uh, learns representations of the training data, which means that when you expose it to non-training
data, so, such as the Dove, which is occluded, it will go back to training data and be like, okay,
well, this is the Dove that I saw in my training and so I'm going to reconstruct it. What if, um,
you train it on expert play for a game or expert something for something, and then you initialize
the RGM at a different condition. So let's say, um, so, uh, let's say you train the RGM on walking data,
some robot walking. The RGM will learn the orbits of walking and it will be able to reconstruct the
motion and the actions of walking. But now if you initialize the RGM of like, I'm lying flat on the ground,
it won't be able to stand up to go back on the walking orbit. It will infer that it's walking and
it will execute the actions of walking even though it's flat on the ground. So you can imagine the motion,
um, the motion that you get out of it. Um, and this is a kind of a generalization aspect where RGMs are
really lacking is if you're outside of the training data, you're going to infer that you're in your
training data when in fact that you're not, how do you go back to the things that you've learned? How
do you pick up the orbit? Yeah, this, this definitely came up in the previous one, the point zero as well,
Daniel, we're talking about resiliency of models. Um, and, uh, this is, I think a really interesting
question of, yeah, how do you know if you're out of distribution? If you like, there are, there are
other sort of machine learning applications of maybe like kernel density estimation or whatever,
where you might say, okay, I've trained on this data, I get this new data. Can I compare it to
probability distribution and say, oh, wait, this doesn't look like anything else that I've seen before.
Hit. I'm now very uncertain on what to do. Is there a way we could apply those sorts of principles here?
Yeah, I suppose so. Um, so this is, um, this would be a very interesting project because,
um, yeah, I mean, this is the main limitation with RGMs right now. And, uh, yeah, there's possibly many
routes forward, but, um, yeah, the moment that's the main challenge. So taking inspiration from those
things that you mentioned would be super promising. One, one way that, um, active inference models
at least have a diagnostic is surprise bounded by variational free energy does give you a measure of
overall how likely something is apt to be. So if you have a, um, training on driving safely,
then you're minimally surprised by the safe drive. You have a measure, at least this kind of threat
agnostic measure of something different is happening. However, it's almost a general information theory
problem of, well, how the space of what you don't know is always going to be so much large. There's
always more that you could be surprised by like for all the combinations of valid English sentences
that language models are trained on. There are more combinations of gibberish sequences. So then how,
how to make something that can weave its way back into the orbital zone or into a zone of control.
And that's, that's where some of the multi-scale architectures and switching architectures
come into play because the, the variational free energy value itself isn't going to say what to do when
the car is off road, but at least it would be a diagnostic of how, like a kernel desk density estimator,
how similar it is to training information.
Just a, another thing to bring in as well. I think we still bring all the questions in at once, but,
uh, it's all, it's all related and it's all relevant. Um, the question of how, if we are only training these
things on expert play, uh, how can we create resilient agents that can recover from unseen positions to,
so quote unquote, get back on the path. So I think one of the things that came to my mind when I was
reading the paper was if you give it data where it starts off in a losing position and you can show it
ways of going, ah, if you are losing, this is how you get to winning. Then that would become a new
potential attractor set that, okay, if I am losing, I can then move to another sets where I'm winning.
So you explicitly give it that journey as data that it sees. But then I think we come on to one of my
other questions, which is how do we then tell an agent that has learned the structure from the data itself,
which attractor sets are good and which are bad. How do we inject value into these to say,
okay, we've given you this data where let's say the self-driving car is a really nice example. Driving
safely is great. If you are in an accident and you drive off road, this is how you get back onto the path.
But if it's learned the structure of those actions from the data itself, how do we then inject the
value that actually driving safely is good and being operated is bad?
Yeah. I mean, yeah, really interesting questions. So I have a few thoughts that I think echo what you
said and I don't have specific solutions, but just echo what you said. So for example, in the case of
walking, we might ask, okay, well, if we have the training data for walking agent and somehow the
agent is like down, either sitting or lying down, we should teach it how to stand up. And then once
it's recovered, it's starting position, we can go back and use the RGM policy. So that's one solution.
Yeah, going back to the starting point of the orbit that works. But there are challenges. So for example,
and this is maybe a slightly different challenge, but also coming back to self-driving cars.
A self-driving car is a very, very high dimensional system. Lots of moving parts, actions,
things that are going on. So if you give the RGM a lot of driving data of driving safely,
I'm assuming the RGM would learn comfortably. But now if you expose it to a new situation it hasn't seen
before in the training set, and I would assume this would just happen very easily, right? Because we're
such in a very, very high dimensional space. And when you think about it, it's kind of a
personal dimensionality problem. Because you're feeding trajectories to the RGM. So trajectories
or Orbeez, these are one dimensional objects. And you're in a state space that can be very high
dimensional, for example, in a self-driving car. And what you want is to get full coverage of like the
underlying manifold of state driving. And what you also want is if you're in an unsafe driving situation,
you want the trajectory that gets you back to the manifold of self-driving. So you have these two
problems. And, and yeah, so one problem coming back to the curse of dimensionality,
is that if you have this extremely high dimensional manifold of state driving,
you want to cover it with one dimensional trajectories. The higher the dimension, the harder it's going to
be because you're in a trying to cover a large n dimensional thing with one dimensional objects.
So computationally, it's going to be a problem. And yeah, so there's this generalization that
doesn't work like within, as you said, like within data distribution generalization, that's a problem.
Because if you give it a lot of data of the driving safely situation, we would want it to kind of
extrapolate over all safe scenarios of driving. And we don't, we don't really see that at the moment,
or at least maybe it happens, but it could be a challenge in some situations. And the other one,
which is maybe the more fundamental problem is you have this huge region of driving not safely. How do you
go back to driving safely situation? Also coming back to the example of walking, how does that happen? And
and that's also very hard, right? Because I think you really want to, you know, have a trajectory back to
the safe situation from every possible starting location. But as the state space becomes very large,
that also becomes very difficult.
Yeah. When thinking about all the angles, your joints could be in all the muscle energies,
there might be a very small zone.
So how, how to really think about adaptive active inference agents at the agentic level,
and then also more at the systems design level, how could components be robust and adaptive
and simplified components doing better on a subtask, and then design
a composed system where the sort of low energy efficacious operation of the smaller units
is designed in a way where they are not dealing with that massive overall computational challenge.
They're dealing with local computational challenges. However, that moves the
design challenge to, or moves the the functional challenge to design time rather than inference time.
But most morphologies don't walk. But if you have one that walks through the revolution or whatnot,
then it may be a relatively simplified inference problem at runtime. However, the challenge is
basically figuring out which of those sparsities and message passing schemes would result in tractable
node level inference. Otherwise, it would be hard to do on a relevant hardware.
So that's the way that we're going to do that.
And adding to that, if I may, so going back to the walking example that you mentioned, and also the
generalizing within data distribution. So there is evidence, and this is also something that we've
kind of encountered empirically that walking is a chaotic orbit, which means that if you...
So let's say I'm here, and I'm going to take some actions, and I walk. Now, let's say I start from a
slightly different, infinitesimally different initial condition, and I take the exact same actions,
I'm going to fall at some point. And I just take the chaoticity, right? So if you take the same actions,
but you start from a different initial condition, you're going to diverge very far away at some point.
And so we have, I mean, I think we have this problem in RGN that if we teach the agent to go back to the
standing position, and then take the RGN policy, if the agent has a slightly different initial condition than
what the RGN was trained on, the RGN will infer that it is in the true starting position, even though
it's slightly different. And then we'll take the actions of the RGN, and it will fall at some point.
So you have this idea that just memorizing just doesn't work in that situation. And yeah,
that's also an issue.
But maybe just a small question there. Is the issue there with the coarse graining part,
in that a slight change in initial conditions is being thrown away by the PCA and throwing away
dimensions early on? And then when we go back and do the inference, we infer that we are sort of in
quote unquote, the same place, because we're thrown away, like something that we've is actually
signal has gone to the noise part of this.
Yeah, I imagine that's one way to look at it. The way I've been looking at it, but I haven't been
thinking about it in those terms, is just if your training data is one particular, you know, orbit
trajectory, and you start slightly different, because you're inferring where you are based on the
training data based on the structure that you've learned, you're going to infer that you're on your
right trajectory, even though you're not, and you're going to reproduce that, but you're going to
land arbitrarily far. But yeah, I assume it's the same phenomenon.
This kind of gets to the whole structure determination question. Chaotic systems are
sensitive to small changes near critical points, but then there might be another zone of the system
that isn't so susceptible to critical points. So like, let's look at the chaotic attractor example from
the paper in figure 13.
If we were to make a small change while we were out on one of the arms of the attractor,
it might not change things that much. But then there might be some other points where it does lead to
taking a bifurcation. So if you can break up systems so that the coarse graining captures
those bifurcations into two discrete categories, then it discretizes a continuous chaotic system well.
But then if you are applying a grid that's in commensurate with what's actually happening,
then any grid you draw is going to include trajectories that have radically different outcomes.
So the overall predictive efficacy or the variance retention of the SVD is going to be low.
Like if there's actually two zones in a city and they're one mile squared and they have different
properties and you have a one mile grid and you actually capture it, you carve nature of the joints
or articulate it at the joints. But if every block has mixed zoning and all you have is a one mile grid,
you could do the best placement of your one mile grid,
and you could do the best placement of your own grid. But it still is always going to capture something
that's kind of mixed. And this kind of related to a few of our thoughts and questions like,
how do we determine what window to use just from a generic perspective? Like there was 10 levels
in the discretization of a grayscale image, or there was a 4x4 or the MNIST images were pre-processed to 32x32 pixels
and then they were blocked in 4x4 grids. So how much
sweeping or how do you do inference on the number of discretizations and the window size and all these
other features? Like what kinds of trade-offs computationally do you look for? Or how many levels
of meta modeling do you feel like are relevant to engage in when you could sweep across discretization of
N and windows of M? And then you could have, well, window size of 6 with a discretization of 3 gives this
performance. But something, so how do you even navigate through that combinatorics?
Yeah. Yeah, really good question. So yeah, at the moment it's very much, I mean, because this is very
much a new thing, for the moment these are hyperparameters and we're very much in the exploratory phase of,
okay, well, this works and this doesn't work.
I mean, I'm assuming for, I'm thinking for the paper there wasn't much hyperparameter tuning,
like it was all, you know, powers of 2 that were chosen and a small number of layers.
But when you think about it, I mean, you could do renormalization by powers of 3, powers of 4,
4. You could choose to have smaller or bigger patches, increase or decrease the number of patches. So,
there's many things you can be looking at. And I would say that's also a problem that you would get
if you were to do structure learning with a genitive model that are not specifically renormalizing
terms of models. You also have that problem of, okay, how many patches, how many layers and so forth.
So this is not a problem that's like specific to this approach. What this approach has,
which makes the problem a lot easier is that there is a lot of interplay between the number of layers
and the number of patches, right? So if you choose, I'm going to renormalize by 2. So it means that
two states at one level become one state at the next level and two states at that level become one
state at the next level. This gives you a relationship between the number of states and the number of
layers that you have and also implicitly the number of patches that you have. So you have this like big
constraint that comes in renormalizing terms models that makes the search a lot simpler than otherwise.
But I think ultimately what you would probably want is to infer, and I think we hinted at that, infer
like the number of patches and so forth. Yeah, we're not doing that. It would be helpful to do that.
I think another possible thing we could try is maybe start with a budget of this many layers, patches,
like basically combinatorics and set. Okay, you have this much computational power for understanding this
data. Figure out the best way of allocating that, because at some levels, you might have more
variability than others. And maybe you want to allocate your computational budget at the higher
abstract levels than you do more so than you want to do at the pixel level. And perhaps we could learn
that from the data itself, given a constraint of this many parameters. And I think you could probably
code that up multiple ways. But one way you could have priors on those hyperparameters. And then I think
as Daniel suggested in the point zero, do a free energy calculation on that, compared to that your priors
on those hyperparameters and just minimize free energy that way. But you could also probably do a hacky
approach as well, and just go, well, what gives me the best performance, call it that.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: Yeah, and just to kind of echo that and complement that. So, as you both mentioned,
the issue is, well, there's so many hyperparameters. I mean, there's so many quote unquote, right? Because
if we're using GENT models that we're not, we don't imagine there would be even more of them.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: But even here, we have a lot of hyperparameters. And so that's a separate thing
that we're also working on, which is, can we infer the structure of the model? Instead of just saying,
oh, well, we have this data, this is the model that we get. I think we need to be recognizing the
fact that with limited data, you're always going to be unsure about the resulting model.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: And so we need to have probability distributions over models.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: And so one instance of that is what you mentioned, like we have probability
distribution prior over the number of patches, and we optimize that with respect to free energy.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: But we could also have probability distributions over three layers or four layers,
and so forth. And I think this is where we, this is kind of
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: I mean, yeah, beyond this paper, but where we need to be going is
having uncertainty about the model. And so then if I have uncertainty about the model,
I can take actions upon the world that maximize the expected information gain about the model.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: So I'm going to get data that's maximally informative to refine my beliefs,
ultimately converting about the best model of the world, or maybe a set of candidate bests,
if there is a fundamental instruction where you cannot find which one fits best.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: But the point is,
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: In this approach to structural learning, and I think in every other approach
that we have in active inference so far, we're not recognizing the inherent uncertainty about the model.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: And so what we're doing in the
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: yeah, in all these structural learning approaches is
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: is a kind of, well, imagine if you have a prior of the models,
and then if you have data, you have implicitly a posterior of the models.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: Now, this is what I think we need to do, and what we're currently doing
implicitly by taking the model with the lowest free energy when we actually do that,
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: is taking a flat prior of the models, and then taking the most likely model
in the posterior. So we're doing this maximum a posterior estimation when we're optimizing model
free energy. And yeah, ultimately, we want to have a distribution of a model, and also recognize that
a priori models are more likely than others. Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: That's funny about having a flat prior
over models. It's almost like return of the frequentism. All models within this class are equally likely,
so that's the special case of Bayesianism where it sort of anachronistically is frequentist again,
because then you're selecting the maximum likelihood model structure or weighting model
the model. So that's the total reliance in a portfolio on its maximum likelihood estimation.
But then rather than using an ML value, the model itself is actually engaging in a Bayesian inference
process. How about representations of uncertainty within the model? Like, just taking a given
architecture as fixed. I'm curious about how are uncertainties represented? There was some discussion
of lossless and lossy compression. And do we have any way to have interpretability
of the uncertainties across layers? Like, do you find that you can trace those state estimations and
uncertainty estimates and they ring true? Or once we're past the pixel level, is through the SVD and all
of this, are we already in spaces that are not human semantically interpretable?
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: Good question. So yeah, coming back to one of the points that Arun made,
because we do this SVD and we throw away some less relevant components, we are throwing away information.
And so we're always in this lossy compression kind of setting. Now, what we've done in this paper and
also in other experiments is to just try to reconstruct expert play or any other kind of video or agent from
the RGM. And usually it works pretty well. So we, as you can see with the DAOV or with many other examples,
the RGM does a good job at compressing and reconstructing. But we haven't actually looked into
mechanistic interpretability of like this state in the RGM actually encodes this and this state in the RGM
actually encodes that. So that would be interesting to look into.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: I think in the MNIST example, there is a little section where it said like,
okay, at the very top level, we say there's basically a value per class of digit, which feels
very much alike. Okay. In the intermediate stuff, it's very uninterpretable, but at the end, we're going to
have, okay, we're going to say each of these values at the top level can have corresponds to a digit,
because we're designing a classifier. I think it's a really interesting question that's not just
specific to this paper or to Active Inference. I think it's a self-supervised learning in general,
which is how do you interpret that if you're learning the structure of data from the data without
anything labeled? How do you get that interpretability? I don't think there's an easy answer to that.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: Yeah.
So here at level four, okay, so this also notes, the matrices in this figure are not simple likelihood
mappings. They're concatenated likelihood mappings from all hidden states at one level to all hidden
states and paths at the subordinate level where the sum to one constraint is applied to states each
child could be in. So we're taking some higher level path trajectory and pulling lower level observations
from a probability distribution sum to one at that lower level for the child. So here at the top level,
there's 10 states. So it's almost like if you came across an alien handwritten text, how would you know how
many letters there were? Or if there were several writers with different styles, how would you say how many discrete symbols?
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: Because that's kind of like this unstructured or semi-structured learning question. You have cursive handwriting from a language where you don't know how many discrete symbols there are.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: So you know there's a discrete compositionality at the level of the word, let's just say. However, you're getting the raw data and then the pixels to planning in the linguistic case, or the phonemes to planning,
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: is like how do you go from a continuous visual or sound data to inference and planning over language production.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: But then you don't know how many discrete elements to have
per se. But if you can have a, if you can be making a domain specific model, that may not be a relevant
question. You may just be able to say, we know we're going to get to 10, find me the best 10.
But it's interesting that the compositionality of the RGM could extend to higher orders of structure
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: with the trade-off that there's just more and more as you continue to expand how many states there can be.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: It doesn't escape the curse of dimensionality.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: It's like swimming in the curse of dimensionality or casting the spell of the curse of dimensionality,
but at least in a way where the model architecture is going to be able to be implemented using
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: The inference methods that are the same across different scales.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: Quick question on that. Do we think that the PCA part of this
could give you a clue as to how many values a particular state could have in a layer?
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: I think Daniel, you had this idea in the point zero of saying, well, maybe we just
have as many values a state could occupy that explains 80% of the variance at that level.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: So then you could say, then, I mean, we're sort of moving the complexity from this
part into construction of the training data, which we should definitely talk about at some point on this
call. But you could then say, yeah, exactly. That's the graph that I wanted. If we're going to just a
priori say, I only need to explain 80% of the variance on this stuff, chuck some training data
at it. And then we say, ah, this training data had like 10 digits. And then you basically end up picking
10 values because that explains enough variance in the training data to do a good enough job.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: Yeah, for sure. And I would say that's also basically what happens when we're
optimizing model free energy, right? Because we're trading off accuracy and complexity. And what you're
mentioning, maybe like a more deliberate way of saying, well, we have this target. What is the
minimally complex model to achieve this accuracy target, for example? And yeah, yeah, that would
be super cool to do. I think specifically for more like engineering and industry applications,
that would be something that people would be very interested in because,
for example, regulators, they don't talk in terms of, oh, your free energy should have
lower than this value. And then you can use your model for self-driving cars, right? You're approved.
It's more like, oh, when some kind of accuracy or some kind of explanation of some data
about a third threshold, then yeah, it would be very worthwhile for this kind of application.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: Yeah. How to convert from a sort of model intrinsic currency, the way that
different structural models are compared with each other, or the way that alternative parameterizations
are compared within the same active inference model through comparison of their free energy values,
how to convert that into a value or a currency that matters, like an actual risk profile or a cost or a time
estimate. That's the critical question. How does the reliability of the inference translate?
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: What would be an interesting way to go, Lance? And then for those in the live chat,
please feel free to write some specific questions that I'll ask.
Lance Stavroson, Ph.D.: Sorry, specific interesting way to go for a way.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: Or just what do you feel like we should continue with or...
Lance Stavroson, Ph.D.: Oh, yeah. Okay.
Daniel Ponga, Ph.D.: How, also, how do,
how do others pick up and continue with this work beyond studying the background 11 and a half
Ph.D.s needed to continue with this, knowing that better and more advanced open source tools are
under active development here and elsewhere. But I mean, what's the way to engage with this material,
with the current state or what are your next plans for how it continues from this preprint form?
Lance Stavroson, Ph.D.: Yeah. So good question. I think there's already a lot of
ideas that have come up in this poll. I think my interesting idea is what Arun mentioned, like using
tools from machine learning to improve generalizability in RDMs. More broadly,
my personal take home message, because we've been talking a lot about, well, first of all,
how our RGMs work, but also what their limitations are. So this is my understanding is that this is a very
new kind of model. And there are a lot of limitations. But there is the, like the recall thing about this paper,
and this is why I'm personally excited about RGMs, is this universality claim. The fact that
RGMs are super expressive, you have this like one architecture that can learn many, many things that are pixel based,
as we've seen in the paper. And so this is what we've seen empirically here and in other places.
And there's the more theoretical reason for why that's the case. And I would say that's more of a physics
question of like, understanding renormalizing groups, and why the world may be or may not be renormalizable to
some extent. So I think it would be super cool from a theoretical perspective to have a better
understanding of that from an applied perspective. So we've seen all these limitations. And it was already
clear on this call that for each of these limitations, we don't know exactly whether it's a fundamental
limitation, whether the limitation lies from the current implementation, or maybe from the current
instance of RGMs, that we can modify them in some clever way to actually overcome the limitation. So
there's many different places where improvements could come. Third, the actual structure of the thing,
or maybe even the theory, maybe we need more than renormalizing different models, maybe renormalization
is not all you need, you need something else. So at the moment, I think we should be, you know, looking at
where each of those limitations are, and you know how to go forward from there. The other thing is
classical active inference, like the discrete planning, is does actual planning, you know, it plans multiple
steps ahead. And it has this counterfactual aspect. In RGMs, you don't have that. You just learn the
transitions from state to state at each level, and then you infer them from the data. So you're just like,
you're like in this self fulfilling prophecy mode, where you've seen your training data, and you're
reproducing that from the RGM. And it would be cool to know if you can combine the strengths of
classical active inference and the RGMs. To have some planning at one or multiple levels, some actual
planning with information gain, to actually help this generalization aspect. By improving the model with
some, you know, new relevant data. So there's many, many, you know, directions this work could be taken in.
Personally, the direction I'm most excited in is this idea of moral uncertainty. Because in, so, I mean, a big
question in machine learning, and also developmental cognitive science is this idea of structural learning,
how do you learn the structure of your model of the world? Now, there's a lot of papers, evidence, and I
think there's also a lot of debate. But one interesting paradigm is this idea of model inference.
And the way we've been thinking about structural learning and active inference so far is about
optimizing model free energy. So we take the model that that has the lowest free energy. When we do that,
we are frequent, we are Bayesian in the states and parameters, but we are frequentist in the model.
And that goes exactly to what we're saying before, this idea that you have this flat prior, and you're
doing much more posterior estimation. And so we know that being frequentist is fine, but you can,
this means that you can overfit. It means, yeah, basically you're selecting the model structure that
overfits, that best fits the data and which may overfit. You're not recognizing any kind of uncertainty.
And there's actually a lot of theorems that show that with limited data, but even unlimited data,
there's many instances where multiple models could explain the data equally well, which means that
they would have the same free energy. Now, which one do you pick? And two different models could yield
two different decisions. So if you're in a real world scenario, one model may be, you know, the true
model or what we want the agent to have, the other one would be wrong and could have some, you know,
unsafe decisions being made down the line. So what we want to be moving to is this idea of full model
inference, not just map estimation, but actually having a full posterior of our models. And this would be,
for example, a particle approximate posterior where you're entertaining a mixture of models. And so
basically means that we would be doing basic model averaging for all of your predictions. And yes, we
want to be moving towards that, in my opinion. And what this affords, which I think is super important,
is so when you have this uncertainty about models, you have this idea of taking actions that maximize
the expected information gain about your model. And so now you can start to learn your model in a
self-supervised way. And hopefully in a way that also generalizes, because you're making this epistemic
search that informs your model, which we're currently not doing. At the moment, we're seeking data that's
informative for the states and parameters, and we're overfitting the model and we're going to be moving beyond that.
Awesome. Yeah, very interesting. It's like equivalent to only doing policy selection on pragmatic value
is just utility seeking. So then if the utility of the modeler is model fit, they have entered into a
pragmatic only analytic mode that in single-minded pursuit of what appears to be a totally valid,
defensible, analytic goal of accuracy or of data poster posteriori fit, ironically produces local
overfitting. So it's like exactly why we use expected free energy for policy inference, because it does
have the epistemic value component. And then now with this level among portfolios of models, it's like,
we need to remember why we put the epistemic value into the architecture at the base layer,
because it isn't enough to just have the epistemics at the base layer and then forget about it at the
modeler's level. There's actually a role for the epistemic value and also for the lifelong learning.
Whereas in the examples here, there was a training phase and then a test phase, as opposed to like
the rules of the game, like sleep-wake type train and test and updating with online inference,
like if the rules of the game changed or something like that.
Yeah, totally. Yes, you want to be able to handle environments. Let's say, coming back to games,
because I guess we love games, but it doesn't have to be games. Let's say you're in an environment,
and you learn how to play the environment, you learn the genital model. And then you get to the
end of the level, you get to a new level, and the environment changes somehow, the number of
categories changes and so forth, you want to be able to handle that in a graceful way. And you want to be
able to handle the inherent uncertainty about the world. So there's a lot of work on AI-driven scientific
discovery. And you can argue that, I mean, science is about understanding the mechanisms that generate
the data that we have. And in particular, the mechanisms of cause and consequence, right? What
causes what among our latent states. So this is like, a totally, I mean, like an example that all of us
can relate of the fact that we have uncertainty about causal structure. And we may also have uncertainty
about the number of representations used to explain a particular dataset. So let's say I'm a young child,
or I'm a zoologist, and I'm in the forest, and I see an animal I've never seen before. Is that animal part of
an existing species that I know? Or is it part of a totally new species? And there's two hypotheses.
At this moment, I don't have enough data to decide between either of them. I'm going to conduct as a
scientist experiments. Well, just going back a little bit, it means that I have a posterior with two
different models that are equally likely or somewhat likely. And then I'm going to conduct an experiment
to decide whether this animal is part of an existing or new species. Which means that to do that, I need
to have some notion of what would happen if I did that, like information gain about the model that I'm
using about the world. This is like a super simple example of like, we fundamentally need that in a,
for one in a biomimetic agenda of like creating agents that, you know, resemble us and modeling and
so forth. Also from a statistical perspective of like not overfitting. But it's like pretty hard to do in practice.
How about coming back to one of Arun's questions. In what ways is time a special dimension?
We talk about planning through time and that's intuitive. From a folk psychological perspective,
how does the model handle time similarly or differently about RGMs or just in general? I mean,
what, what, what is time? How is it being treated similarly or differently to other dimensions?
Um, yeah, good question. I think it's a very fundamental and also physical question. Um,
um, but just in terms, I mean, very, very simply in terms of the model, time is the only direction that we
can, uh, control. Is the only, I mean, we can't control the flow of time, but we can control
the evolution through state space as time unfolds. And those are actions. Now, uh, one interesting thing
about the paper is that we not only renormalize in space, in state space, but we renormalize in time.
And so we have this, uh, in the current architecture, this one step ahead actions at each level,
uh, time horizon of one, it could also be two or four or whichever you want, as long as this is the same
as at each level. Um, but yeah, the point is we renormalize both in space and time. And, uh, I would be,
I think this would be a good question for Carl of like, why is it important to renormalize both
in space and time? I don't really have a sense for, uh, why that is, but he probably has a very
compelling reason for, for what that is.
So I'll give a little bit of detail as to why I asked the question. So there's a very technical
reason. And then there's like a wider reason. The very technical reason is to do with the overlapping
part that we talked about before. And I noticed in the paper that doesn't seem to be, there doesn't
seem to be overlapping time, uh, uh, sort of factors you go from one state above to generates the initial
state at the level below, and then a transition. And then you do the next pair, but the pair of
observations at the level below don't overlap. Whereas in the MNIST example, you had, uh,
there were radial basis functions that were like four pixels wide or whatever. Um, but they overlapped,
which I thought was really interesting. So that was the very technical reason why I asked, oh,
is time separate here when the pets don't overlap as you're doing the renormalization.
But I think the wider question of why it's interesting is that I don't really understand how
you would plan with respect to space. But as you say, like with time, it's, it's the rollout.
That's the critical dimension of you go, if I do this, then in the future, something happens.
But I, uh, my, my brain doesn't compute what planning would look like in space.
Uh, but yeah, we will definitely ask Carlin the dot to, and probably be just as confused at the end, but
that kind of makes me think of a wave propagating out like in a game of life situation, a wave is
propagating out at one, one click per time step. So it's moving. It's a wave front in space time
from the surfer on the wave. They're not moving, but then re-normalized over space. It's like,
what will happen to that time step at the next time step? Well, if it's, if the wave's going to hit it or
it's going to leave, but from the waves perspective, re-normalizing through space time, it's stationary.
It's a stationary traveling wave
that still is treating time in a little bit of a different way than space.
But for all systems that we're studying in time, which basically are the natural systems,
we can't really get away from it. But maybe there's like a hyper time crystal view on some of these
systems that spatializes time.
So, yeah, in some of our last pieces, again, if anyone has questions, feel free to write it. Okay.
Rex asks, how has the progression been with the Atari challenge? Encouraging results?
Yeah, I mean, really good question. I'm not sure how much I'm able to share, just because of
confidentiality issues. But I would say, overall, it's quite challenging. Definitely very interesting
results. Many different approaches that are being tried, because of course, you could, I mean, you have
this RDM approach, but there's many other types of generative models that, you know, you could be
exploring for solving this type of task. The really interesting question is, what kind of structure
or structure is sufficiently universal to be able to express any kind of Atari game? And the day we solve
that, we'll actually have learned a great deal. At the moment, we have some leads, we have some
promising results, but we are still far away from being able to solve all the games with the same
structure. So I think there's a very interesting progress in terms of scaling up. But yeah, so still
far. And as always, with these research questions, it is always hard to know, you know, how long we'll need
to actually solve the challenge.
Yeah, maybe just think of the game, how children pick up games, and Calvin Ball making up games,
and what cognitive capacities support the idea. Like, maybe there's a game
game, hangar, or high level game virtualizer, that then can be like a sandbox for creating games with
arbitrary structure. You know, you're going to tell me a number that ends in a seven, and then I'm
going to do this dance. It's like, that's our game. But because it's a rule set within a space, within a
container that's understood. And so, although generalized coordinates, RGM, and so on, in theory, can go for
infinite number of dimensions. For any finite system, it may only be several levels of generalization,
or path extraction, or just in the example of time. Even with two time steps per level,
at some point, with time doubling, you're talking about a transition that's longer than a lifetime.
So, it becomes a kind of an extraneous inference. And similarly, making it finer scale, you're going to
quickly get to the state transitions of walking at a picosecond, which again don't really matter. But if
there were either automated ways, or interpretable human in the loop type ways, to say, okay, the SVD is
looking pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty uninformative at this small scale, and at this large scale.
Here's the bulk of the meso variants that we're working with. Here's the information content across
these coarse grainings. Here's sweeping across different windows and grainings. This looks like
a good, a good graining approach. Here's where the meat is to chop up. And that relates to the focusing,
the computational resources on where the information content is.
Focus the resources on where there's information to glean, and then truncate the model's dimensionality
beyond the point of diminishing returns.
Like, it almost, it's, it's, it goes without saying, slash is hard to say sometimes, but
that's an extremely different paradigm for fitting small to very large models than coming with a fixed
number of parameters of a large model and a fixed data set as much as you can,
and then colliding the two until you can optimally reproduce the training data.
While there is this element of parameterizing it on training data,
in principle, you can just specify generative models and generate synthetic data. We do this all the time
for different models. It doesn't, you don't have to train them on anything. You can just make a
thermometer and a synthetic room and just let it play.
So it's just interesting how with these new Lego toolkits and new composabilities
that can deal with data and play in that sort of empirical test train mode,
that they also lend themselves to a lot more dynamic reconfiguring that I think is the main piece we've been
wrestling with, which is it gives us more affordances in building and modulating these models.
And so, I think that's a lot of the models.
But every degree of freedom in the modeler's toolkit is double-edged because it expands the combinatorics of what is possible,
possibly diminishing the proportion of good solutions.
But maybe those good solutions get better and better, though they're rarer and rarer.
So, I just want to come in on a quick point, which I think you've talked about at the very high scale,
nothing really happens across, you know, beyond a lifetime at a very small scale. You don't want to
consider walking on picoseconds. From a practical point of view, I guess that's going to be very
limited by your training data. So, for example, on the spatial point of view, what does a pixel mean
in your training data? And presumably you have to normalize across all your different samples to be
a pixel means the same distance in an image, regardless, potentially. Or do you have to do
some sort of pre-processing to mean that you're only ever taking pictures from the same camera at the same
distance for that to mean the same thing across the different bits of your data? Or if they are
different, does your model then have to learn that from a structural point of view? And then going
on the time one, I think that's also quite interesting, maybe it's another reason why it's
different, if you're introducing videos of different lengths. So if you say, okay, here's some data where
in this particular video, it's 100 frames and this one is 200 frames, there's different levels of
re-norm, you're limited in how far up you can go if you're just going to continually pair and pair and
pair, if you've only got 100 frames compared to 200 frames. So there could be very practical
considerations here for the number of levels you can have and what timescale you can operate on.
But then also, I think it does beg the question, at the very top level, if you've only got, I think,
for, let's say for the music example in this paper, you've, if you've got a length of music,
and you, it breaks it down, like it was jazz music, and you break it down to like, notes and bars and
potentially could go up to a movement, but you can only go up to the maximum level, like length of your,
like a piece of music that is, that you're, that you're exposing in the training data, you can't go
a level above that. And that sort of like, highest level thing could only really have like one value,
so you might as well get rid of it. So there's some, there might be some redundancy at the very
top there that you just sort of can always implicitly throw away.
Yeah, I think so. I mean, when, yeah, and when we have the current architectures, I mean,
we always show the, the top level as having, for example, one state or, or two states with a
transition to another two states. But then implicitly, you have this, even higher level that has one state,
and that static, but yeah, somehow he, I mean, it doesn't do anything. So
yeah, there's many things, I guess, many questions and many things that can be explored. The other thing,
another question that I have is, so intuitively, let's say we're thinking, okay, I need to go to work,
I need to take a certain amount of actions to go to work. Intuitively, when we plan in that setting,
there's several actions that happen in the same, at the same level, or arguably, maybe not everybody's like this,
but it's like, I need to go down, I need to, you know, take my car, and then I need to go up the elevator,
at the workplace, and so forth. It seems that this plan maybe happens at the same level of abstraction,
or like, there's many cases where we plan on the same level of abstraction. And the current RGM
architecture, we just have one step ahead, or like a fixed amount of steps ahead, that are reproduced
at each level. So, yeah, I mean, it, you can definitely reproduce the example that I talked about
by saying, okay, well, we're going to plan, you know, 10 steps ahead at each level, and then
it would fit with more complex plans. But, you know, how can we allow some flexibility there? Or
is there some flexibility that we need for the time horizon at each level? Should it be different
from one level to another, and so forth? Yeah, well, it's like, the controls in the studio are being
explored and fleshed out, because you could sweep across different planning horizons, or you could
plan for the same amount across horizons, like, just like, and it's brought up with the when it's
connected to the convolutional neural network. It talks about how the special case where all of the
where the likelihood mappings are conserved over groups, one has the discrete homologue of
convolutional neural network. So if you're just trying to make the best single filter to pass over an
image, you have a CNN. Whereas if you open it up to different locations of the image having different
filters, that's the blessing and the curse. Now you have that many times larger of a state space,
but for problems that have that statistical structure, that would be the way to go. So that's
what motivates this meta modeling question of how would we recognize whether we're in a situation where
single filter is better than n number of filters. Like, these are where the modeling questions quickly rise
in a way, because where our inference hits the metal, we know how that's going to happen. In terms of Bayesian
graphical model and variational free energy, it's just how to know what level of abstraction to enter into
the problem and really what's the purpose of the model. Because it's really easy to set up a situation
where the, for example, policy inference is a slam dunk. And it's easy to set up situations where the policy
inference is hopeless by design. So what is that sort of Goldilocks zone where if you could curate only the
expert gameplay examples and do resemblance modeling, but if you already knew who is expert, then you already
have those traces. So it's like just, it's interesting how with a strong floor and grounded in a really low level
way to balance accuracy and complexity,
we really quickly hit these data science questions about what the analysis is for and what structure the model
should be taking on. Okay, in our last minutes. Okay, another question. Are any other benchmarks being looked at? Or just what kinds of benchmarks
do you think for the open source community would be interesting for us to pursue?
With active inference searching and with RGNs?
With RGNs? So yeah, I mean, there's several things, right? So there could be imitation learning benchmarks.
I think this would be very interesting to go into because arguably this isn't, I mean, the current state of RGNs, it's an imitation learning tool.
It's not really a planning tool. It's also a compression tool.
In terms of, so there's a tire. But arguably, if we really want to solve a tire, we want to put a planner in the RGNs.
So we just, we don't want to be able to learn necessarily from expert data, we want to learn in a self supervised way.
And so the very things that we're exploring there, extensions of RGNs in various ways.
And then, and then, you know, I mean, there's, there's so many benchmarks out there.
One thing that's interesting for going to Atari is mini Atari.
And then there's all the robotic benchmarks that I think are quite interesting.
I mean, you probably know many, many other interesting examples that, yeah, I think these are the most interesting ones, at least from my perspective.
It also depends on the, on the feature that you're developing, right? So maybe RGNs are particularly good for imitation learning.
But if you're in a multi-agent active inference, then you probably want to look at multi-agent games or things that require cooperation to, to solve certain types of problems.
Yeah, I would say it's very much open-ended and depending on, on the strength of the particular approach.
Okay. What are your next, uh, moves? I mean, how will your year proceed and what are your, what are you excited for?
So I'm super excited about, um, this model uncertainty thing.
Um, this idea of, uh, how, how do we do based on principle models in a way that's fast, fast enough so that we can plan.
Uh, to take actions that improve our model over time.
And, um, this is also interesting, I guess, from, um, bridging multiple fields together, because when we look at, um, for example, the work in computational cognitive science,
um, by, by folks like, Josh Tenbaum, Sam Gershman, they, they think very much in terms of inferring the model of the world, having a distribution of a model of the world.
It's not something that we're doing again at the moment.
Um, and I think this is a limitation.
Um, when you look at other folks like, uh, Joshua Benjo for interesting AI safety and also AI driven scientific discovery, they also have this uncertainty about models.
Um, and there's Bayesian inference, which is, uh, very important and interesting.
So then when you accept that this is, uh, the way that things need to be done, then there's the question of how do you infer, how do you do the Bayesian inference in practice?
And there's, uh, and there's a wide set of tools of, um, for doing approximate inference of a model.
It's still relatively young field.
So there's lots of improvements to be done there.
Lots of, uh, hardcore statistics and machine learning, very deep questions.
So this is like one direction that I think is interesting to pursue.
And, and then once you have that working well, and by working well, I mean, you want a method.
That's able to infer models very fast.
It doesn't need to be super accurate.
Uh, when you think about humans, uh, we typically only have, uh, you know, a few hypotheses about the core structure of something or something in the world.
So we don't necessarily need to have a super complex approximate posterior of a model.
Also, that would be very computationally complex.
So we want to look for, uh, things are fast and that operate online.
And so once you have these kinds of methods for inference about the model, then putting that into an agent and having the agent learn to know,
um, you know, in a, in a self supervised way, uh, in, in its environment.
And, and the other challenge for that is, uh, because you're doing model inference, there's no,
it's not strictly speaking, it's not model growing or pruning anymore.
You're just doing model inference.
So your space of model is fixed from the outset.
Um, and so therefore, if you want developmental agents or lifelong learning agents,
you want a space of models that can pretty much explain anything the agent would ever encounter.
Or you want a space of model that is able to express anything that the agent would need to survive.
Um, so you don't necessarily want something that's doing complete, but you want something that's,
you know, a class of model that's pretty expressive.
But it should also be sufficiently coarse that you are able to do efficient inference on it.
So you have this trade off, which is very difficult to navigate of, um, trying to find a class of model that is universal in some sense,
but also sufficiently coarse that you can, you know, do things, uh, manageably.
And I think this is where, um, RGMs can potentially be very fruitful, um, because they are very expressive.
And they're also, I mean, they have very powerful inductive biases, this like renormalization aspect
that makes your model space a lot smaller than it would be with other methods.
So this, uh, yeah, this is a one way forward.
I'm like particularly excited about.
Cool.
Yeah.
Expert learning is kind of the inductive side and then the creativity and the abduction
interaction and being able to jump to an adjacent possible from what has been induced.
That's exciting.
Um, Arun?
And then we kind of have our last, uh, thoughts here.
Uh, I thought that all of those, uh, directions of future research sound really interesting.
Uh, I had a very possibly silly question, uh, which is on when we're talking about learning
about the structure, are we also learning about potential new actions that an agent could take?
And I think that ties into the AI safety part quite nicely of currently an active inference.
If you come up with your own generative model as the modeler, I can say, these are the actions
available to my agent.
It can only do these things.
It has to pick one of those things and it can't do anything else.
But if we're going to learn online about possible actions, like new actions I could take suddenly
now I've learned that I have the choice to drive car.
Whereas before I could only walk, then suddenly the range of impacts that I could have my,
me as the agent can have on the world massively increases and is possibly not predicted by the
modeler at the time they're creating their agent.
So I think that, so yeah, my question is sort of about what type of structure do we want to learn
with these new models and does that include actions that an agent could take?
Yeah.
Um, I mean, really interesting question.
And, um, so, so I'll give you a couple of thoughts.
Um, there is a Toby Sinclair Smith, uh, which you've probably had, had here on the show.
He, yeah, he, he does category theory and, and in his latest formulation of, um,
structure learning, active inference with category theory, he talks about blankets that change over
time.
And so this would be this idea of adding, removing actions of observations.
Um, so I think that's interesting and, and he would probably have some, some really cool thoughts
about that.
The other perspective is let's say you fix the observation space and the action space.
Um, and let's suppose that each, that I, as a person exists only in a, like a small part of my head
and my observations and actions are the information that's coming in and out of this small part of the
head.
Now, when you're a baby, you don't know that you can act on your body, right?
So you don't know that your foot is you and your arm is you, but you're gonna learn eventually that
there is a very precise mapping from the information that's coming out of your action neuron to what
your arm can do.
And so eventually, even though your arm is a latent state, you're gonna associate moving my arm with an
action that you're taking because there is a very precise mapping from your neuron to what the arm does.
And I think this would be, um, this would, basically when you, when you think about it this way,
there is maybe a lot of actions that we can lump into the latent states of the environment.
the, that we have direct, uh, very precise control over that. That's the way I'm thinking about things.
Yeah, that's, that's the babbling. It's interesting. I'm also just thinking of expert video of figure skating,
but then there, that doesn't mean it's safe for a non-expert or there could have been a body
position that was safely reached. But then if a different object in a different context is so
that there's so many interesting, um, fundamental issues and that is the sort of benchmark
and reproducibility question is how can we compare models with these radically different forms, possibly
in the future, also radically different substrates solving these problems in different ways,
such that the ways that benchmarks are even conceptualized in terms of like CPU or RAM may only be a constrained way to think about how some of these embodied problems are solved.
So, um, Lance, thank you for this and all the authors for the work.
We're very excited to, uh, talk with Carl and others in 58.2 during the Applied Active Inference Symposium.
So, good luck with your works. See you next time.
Thank you so much.
Thanks, everyone.
Thank you.
Thank you.