## zqiZjjY9H7M

SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Hello, welcome.

It is September 2nd, 2022, and we're in ACT-INF live stream number 48.0.

Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

This is a recorded and archived live stream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

Head to ActiveInference.org or ActiveInference.Institute to come to our website, learn more.

we are in act inf stream number 48 series we're going to be discussing the paper communication as socially extended active inference and ecological approach to communicative behavior paper in 2021 by Remy tison and Pierre poyer

the video is a total introduction to some of these ideas it's not a review or capturing every aspect for that you can read the paper and explore some of the ideas we are going to talk about aims and claims abstract roadmap keywords and bring up some notable points

It is still upcoming with the 48.1 and 48.2.

So people are welcome to submit questions or things to discuss, write comments and join the panels live if they want.

So let's begin with introductions and warmup.

I think we can share more with our big question.

So Dean, why don't you say hello and introduce your big question?


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks Daniel.

I'm Dean, I'm here in Calgary.

Well, I could read out the big question, but it's pretty long-winded.

So I'll just say that I'm always curious about what happens when active inference isn't something that we look at as a subject or a topic, but it's something that we actually use or perceive as being around us.

And so I think the question of whether or not you focus on what's inside an ecological space or look at the ecology and the system in which we believe

active inference exists as and maybe within, because in the last 47 livestream, we kind of touched on the idea it could be both.

If we're going to expand our horizons and look at what kind of limits are and describe that as an ecology, my question then is, as communication and

of communication?

What is the product of communication and what is communication serve as?

So those are kind of my big questions.

And I hope in the next three live streams, we can start maybe at least staking out where that ecology begins and ends.


SPEAKER_00:
nice well very interesting thanks a lot also for so much of the preparation here we're uh still coming down off of 47 and so i think it's gonna be interesting to see how we approach pragmatism in this discussions so the big questions that brought me to this paper or that i was thinking about during the paper were what are the applications and implications of different interpretations of communication

why does it matter what would be the things in the world including the mind that would be changed as a factor with or downstream of how our interpretation of communication is and then what are the causes and consequences of different perspectives we take on active inference where perspective also includes action propensity

and engagement with.

So perspective is like where one is situated and viewing.

And so it's the view from somewhere, from something, rather than a view from nowhere slash everywhere.

And I think in that specificity, we can have a lot of discussions about ecology as a great system to learn from.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think when we're outside or if we perceive ourselves where we're framing things,

that would be the, on this slide, that would be the first box.

That's our sense that we're kind of outside of the system looking in.

Whereas the second box on the right would be, well, we're embedded.

And now the reason we're embedded is the genie came out, got out, and now it's all around us.

It's kind of like that the perfume has now been

distributed through the air and now we're walking through it.

So which of those two things, depending upon how we want to analyze, which of those two things produce what results sort of thing?

And I think we're both kind of asking the same question.

If this, then what?

If that, then what?


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

I'll read the first half of the abstract.

in this paper we introduce an ecological account of communication according to which acts of communication are active inferences achieved by affecting the behavior of target organism via the modification of its field of affordances constraining a target organism's behavior constitutes a mechanism of socially extended active inference allowing organisms to proactively regulate their inner states through the behavior of other organisms


SPEAKER_01:
In this general conception of communication, the type of cooperative communication characteristic of human communicative interaction is a way of constraining interaction dynamics towards the goals of a given joint action by constructing and altering shared fields of affordances.

This account embraces a pragmatist view, according to which communication is a form of action aiming to influence behavior of a target and stands against the traditional transmission view.

Sorry, I just have to pull it up here because it kind of slid on my screen.

Where am I?

Transmission view, according to which communication fundamentally serves to convey information, understanding acts of communication as active inference under this ecological interpretation allows us to link communicative and ultimately linguistic behavior to the biological imperative of minimizing free energy and emphasize the action-oriented nature of communicative action.

Interactions.


SPEAKER_00:
all right nice here's the roadmap and there's some light sometimes consistent highlighting at play the paper is prose based there are not any figures or formalisms however many are suggested so we'll have a

interesting time i think making some representations using words maybe some non-linguistic communication because there's so much to add it's not providing visual centers as many papers outside of especially philosophy do so first there's an introduction then the central distinction or dialectic or division is introduced the transmission

and the influencing the and versus but or the contraries and negations that we've kind of explored this time that type of a dyadic comparison is being brought to two views of communication

two supporting witnesses join which are ecological interpretation the ecological developments and the turn in that area and active inference and they're going to then in communication active inference focusing on human cooperative communication

describe how under ecological and active inference starting points, justified starting points, as they'll argue, that we can endorse a pragmatist view at the detriment to the transmission view.

Any other thoughts?

Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
Now, the authors are pretty clear.

They describe this paper or these arguments as a sketch.

So when we say roadmap here, I think it's not a highly detailed, highly specified zoom in on a very precise Google map.

This is kind of a back of the napkin idea for a conversation starter.

And so I appreciate that because, I mean, at least by the author's saying,

We want to get this down.

We want to stake this out and then let people decide how to come at this empirically to maybe fill in some more of the precision.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah it's like planning a road trip uh in its implications especially though itself is an entire completed work um let's just jump to the aims well the top two aims are some of the largest they summarize their work as introducing a pragmatist conception of communication

grounded in ecology of active inference so the three threads are pragmatism ecological interpretation and active inference about communication and they're going to argue that all of communication be understood as socially extended active inference be understood by whom when and uh those are some of the points it brings us to

secondly there are some direct contradictions slash tensions described and um contrasting with the transmission view which is the uh the dancing partner of the advance of the ecological pragmatic

act inf view is to con is by contrast with the transmission view which can help a lot with literature continuity in in uh setting direction for research field people looking for transmission view can see that there's a paper

from 2021 that's that's connecting and finding concordances and as dean mentioned they will stress in several different ways that it's an initial account with many gestured to next directions that we'll get to any other thoughts yes yeah i think without using these terms they're they're saying um


SPEAKER_01:
know there's there are nodes out there there's there are connect there are potential for connections out there one way of viewing that is through a transmission line and what we would like to do is maybe um advance the idea that those links are are a little bit more embellished than something simple and so again those aren't the terms that they use but

Daniel, you're better at this than I am.

We had a recent live stream this year, I think, where we talked about offloading as being a really important part of extending the active inference term.

Do you remember which one that was?


SPEAKER_00:
Kind of.

Yeah, yeah.

Extended.

If something was extended, let's look.

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Yeah.

It was with a cognitive offloading.

Cognitive offloading.

Communicate.

This is 48.

Oh, extended active inference, constructing predictive cognition beyond skulls, number 41.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

And that live stream, there wasn't really, there wasn't anything in that idea that the betweenness was,

was like the whole idea of how a Markov blanket may function as a way of focusing or bringing down the amount of noise and raising up the amount of signal in a space outside yourself.

There was no


SPEAKER_00:
didn't have a lot of pushback on how that theoretically would work so i don't think that they're stepping into the twilight zone by mentioning this nice all right so they make several claims they're summarized here but we'll we'll deal them in the sections in a rough order anything to add though absolutely okay these are just they're going to come up yeah

Yeah, these are some summaries of some important claims, but we're going to come up with them soon.

All right.

And then last stop before we jump into the background, which is one term and then the paper itself.

What are the key words in your eye?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I mean, we had dynamical systems model in the last live stream, too.

So there's a lot of people that are depending on that theory.

to advance whatever arguments they want to make.

And the other, I think the other term that comes up quite often is joint actions, without really getting into some hard specifics about what that may look like on a scale friendly level.

So I think when the authors join us, I think both of those things are things we'll have, there's fertile ground there to, to grow some conversations.


SPEAKER_00:
awesome the the one i would just want to highlight is dynamical systems model you you mentioned how maybe just rephrasing that people use it to in a lot of different ways and just that being raised made me think about what is being advanced by claiming that alone or together something changes through time

Does anyone disagree?

And would it matter that everyone disagrees?

But what does dynamical mean when we're talking about time-dependent real existing systems?

What does it mean that you have a system or a model or a systems model

what does that mean because that's something that's an artifact or is it a quote mental model and so there's a lot to explore about what is being meant by dynamical systems model we're thinking about time or does it mean something more than that continuous time discrete time implementation effects

There's so many aspects to it.

And it's actually going to come back at the very end.

All right.

And pragmatics, also the top part, you could mention anything.

Otherwise, Dean, how does this connect to what we discussed in 47?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I kind of wrote this down, so I'd rather read it.

Pragmatism and introduction, especially the question of what makes up an aim.

And I put in behind in that, the act, the act.

the process and aiming, which is the central lining, which is, we all know as the generative model given targeting with what, but there's still a question of what are we targeting with when we, when we put it all under one umbrella called active inference, a situational analysis tool.

This, this is, we've had lots and lots of people claim that that's what's that's what active inference is.

It's a range finder with a depth of filter or

is active inference and affordance generator, something that enables as selection given through framing and step stabilization or both.

Now, if you want to write an academic paper, it's way easier to just limit it to active inference as a stabilizer.

Now we have T0, T1, T2, and so on.

But it's also a way to delimit that temporal, spatial temporal field.

So do we just ignore that?

because it's easier to write papers if we do.

That's where the arrow of time, meaning we're kind of moving with the flow and temporal depth through the memorial and across the spectral range, whatever we arbitrarily pick as our projectional integration space.

must both be induced or included in whatever the representational is if we analyze the entanglement along with the entailment.

So what is the relationship?

I mean, is a relationship in the passing of rings?

No, of course it isn't.

But those symbols still reinforce what's going on.

So can we just say there's no representationalism in this?

It would be hard to do that on realistic scales.

That would be pragmatics in a nutshell to me.


SPEAKER_00:
Very interesting closure.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, especially if you're recently involved in a long-lasting, long-term relationship, right?


SPEAKER_00:
It's so true.

The part I'll point out is just the few highlighted words on the top with a lot of citations provided.

that are gonna be taking a pragmatic federation approach, broadly disparate interests and foci that are being used by these authors in their advancement of an anti-transmission view.

Distributed language hypothesis, constraint view of language, participatory sense-making framework.

Maybe those fields are or aren't connected in their citations or co-authorship, but then the authors are able to connect these as kind of three people pointing at the same process or thing.

And that's like a nice dense usage that could be really catching people up on a few ways to navigate these topics, because there's a lot of related topics.

It's like, aren't we just talking about how things are, including how modeling is?

um they begin in the introduction with a overview of the layout of their paper and they describe as dean mentioned the sketch it's a pragmatist account of communicative behavior grounded in ecological interpretation of the active inference framework

contrasted with a transmission view of communication according to which the function of communicative behavior is to convey information so a claim is that communication is about information transmission then they are contrasting that in light of ecological psychology and theory broadly and also giving an active inference twist slash theory integration

introduction of free energy minimization or uncertainty reduction as imperatives or modeling imperatives or existence imperatives whereas some of these previous threads like ecological psychology more neutrally wouldn't have necessarily a formal or a first principles way to connect to modern applications though they may have a first principles grounding in pragmatism

so many of the pieces have already been assembled in terms of the ecological and pragmatic and all of these areas coming together outside the paper and so that will be a theme what is linking out to other empirical and philosophical literature what is active inference doing in this

mediation as a framework something that makes it an organized principle organizing principle in a way that merely the literature corpus of these areas which in many respects have been connected like the pragmatics of linguistics so what is active inference doing anything to add on that well i again i don't think it's hard to argue that um


SPEAKER_01:
to focus only on the string and the two cups is probably reducing too far when we're talking about communication.

I mean, they're entangled, right?

Like they're now tied together.

But what the authors are trying to point out here is that there also are signalers and signal receivers in it.

And as soon as you add more layers to this of what's actually going on, suddenly an ecology emerges.

So

Let's step back and look at everything that is possibly participating in this, not just the hardware.

And so again, it would be hard to argue against that.

At the same time, if you and I don't have all of the things that we need to communicate from Davis, California to Calgary, Canada, no matter how much we screen, there's no communication.

There's no live stream 48 right now.

So again,

To dismiss a transmission view, I think, is also probably not the best idea in the world because without that, what do you got?


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Good point.

And they'll bring up that sort of enabling system perspective in the conclusion very clearly.

They set up the perspective of communication as transmitting information, symbolic information or other kinds of information, influencing

sculpting what is it influencing is it modifying cognitive dials is it modifying the field of affordances is it doing both is it any number of ways that people have been studying Nexus of communication intraspecies interpersonally everything

Anything else to say?


SPEAKER_01:
I was going to say, if you've read anything from Charles Saunders Pierce, you would have to say it's both.

I mean, if you're a purse follower, you're not left with much choice because there's a lot of influencing going on because there's a lot of interpreting happening.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Awesome.

All right.

Setting the context.

Do you want to mention it or do you want me to mention it?

All right, well, the first footnote is about the notion of information and they describe different information and uncertainty concepts, which we can address in later discussions.

They do not dedicate a lot of time and space to fleshing out the transmission view and different ways that people have formally, informally addressed it, causes and consequences, et cetera.

However, they have provided a lot of citations.

Then in footnote four, they are describing Frege, writing in the 1890s, which is a very interesting connection.

I don't know the details, but some information is provided in this section footnote.

It's an interesting path that'd be fun to kind of go down more because we've now brought back in Peirce to the discussion as others are.

And I think walking the fine line between not using last names for equations

while respecting the process and contributions of past researchers and practitioners in just different areas will be really part of what active inference brings together.

All right, anything else?


SPEAKER_01:
All I would say is that I think what this maybe points at, again, this is not what they wrote in their notes, but with every transmission, there are things like,

Conflict embedded in that or complexity embedded in that.

I mean, any good writer knows that you can't just transmit a bunch of information.

There are expectations around what are you moving towards and why would I continue to communicate?

And so you have to have a context around which that continuing regime of attention is held up.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Share attention, regimes of attention, joint action.

So setting the logic, here they are going to flesh out two primary reasons to explore theoretical alternatives to TV.

So not they're wrong, they thought bad, but there are two reasons to explore.

We're at camp and we're going to explore some theoretical alternatives.

Firstly, TV entails a commitment to an account

the putative contents conveyed via communication providing such an account is notoriously difficult especially if linguistic practices cannot be invoked as part of the explanation very deep points about what is linguistically accessible consciously accessible perceptible under different

situations through different kinds of memory and anticipation and all these features which we know do play roles in semiosis and then the second reason why to explore theoretical alternative is

how it's not clear that communication conceived of as the transmission of content could be relevant to the basic allostatic processes which drive the behavior of organisms so you might say biosemiotically the pancreas communicates with different cells in the body through hormone signaling

but in a transmission view would one be committed to the viewpoint insulin means do XYZ to whom under what conditions in what ways is that a communication so especially at scales and systems that aren't quite literally humans talking about language which is quite common then there's going to be an account that's non-linguistic

So to what extent are we going to privilege or center this type of linguistic discourse and communication in a broader ecology of communication?


SPEAKER_01:
So if the content by itself cannot help us derive meaning,

then what this essentially is saying is that we need more than that in order to get the equal sign or symbol to equate to meaning, right?

So that's all essentially what they're trying to talk about here is if we're going to go past TV, why?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it could be a supplement to TV or an extension of TV, which, as they'll point out later, can never be denied or rejected.

So then pragmatism, they trace a thread of scholarship in which language is viewed as a form of action.

And I'm reminded of Professor Deborah Gordon's paper, Wittgenstein and Antwatching,

seeing the behavioral ecologists as they're observing ant behavior

the multiple stages and steps and ways that knowing and acting and naming of different kinds, namings of activities and then association of activities as named with identities and that naming process that comes in very late in the game in terms of the actions taken to prepare the context for that observation.

So I thought that was a very interesting link.

And here are those green highlighted words from earlier.

So what else would you add about pragmatism?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I think what they were moving towards here, at least alerting us to, is that the fact that there are aspects of a pragmatist view, although it may sound a little strange to say it at first, I think is true.

At least with a pragmatist view, you can now conjure things.

that you can't do simply with content.

I mean, I can have a whole bunch of ingredients and not have a recipe.

But at least with a pragmatist view now, I can start experimenting.

And I think that's all they're basically asking us to contemplate.

It's the experimentation piece.

It's not just sort of leaving everything out on the bench and going, whoa, well, I can take an account of this or an inventory of it, but not really do anything with it.

So that's what I took away from this part of the paper.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

All right.

Here's a discussion around what signals mean.

Anything to add?

No, just read it.

It's pretty straightforward.

Yep.

Okay.

In this section, setting active inference framework, we've informally introduced the ecological interpretation of the active inference framework.

in the terms of which we will formulate a pragmatist conception of communication in section communication and active inference um when is it of the active inference framework the genitive case when is it in the active inference framework the locative case with the instrumental case there's so many routes to explore with linguistic and non-linguistic communication

even only keeping with active inference as the gripper and the gripped right they provide a description which is copied here and one key line that they'll bring back in service of communication is organisms can reduce free energy

either by adjusting the sensory input to the generative model, quote, active inference, or by adjusting the generative model to the sensory input, perceptual inference, which correspond respectively to action and perception.

So one could ask whether active inference only applies to adjusting sensory input

or whether action corresponds to active inference and perception to perceptual inference.

That's one way to think about it.

It certainly is one sense of active inference, which is inference about action, planning, decision-making, and also the consequences of action.

being able to introduce preference into future and current actions.

And we're talking about active inference also as a framework for considering this view.

So that was just the connection with active inference there, one connection.


SPEAKER_01:
So part of this, I'll ask you, because I may ask the authors when we do the dot one is,

Of this stuff that they just wrote out here, because we've seen this many, many times, people just want to make sure that they're following what the free energy principle up to this point has generally been agreed to mean.

My question from that last organisms can reduce free energy either by... So if I were to give you the metaphor of getting the toothpaste back into the tube,

how does communication serve that purpose, right?

Because it's really easy to squeeze it out, but how does communication serve to get it back in?

Because it can, but how does what they're describing here as an ecological view speak to that?


SPEAKER_00:
Let's explore.

They then go to the ecological interpretation of active inference.

So after introducing just purely in principle, using some active inference ontology terms and key ideas like embodiment of generative models and reduction of surprisal, bounding that through variational and expected free energy, they continue to add in ingredients to the recipe.

and contrast an abstract theory-neutral description of active inference which is their framing of vanilla or standalone or somehow perhaps archetypal active inference as being theory-neutral

and therefore compatible with many conceptions of cognition, pointing to a citation where it's described as a state theory compatible with many different process theories, which is why potentially someone could and probably has argued for a transmission view using active inference as symbolic communication or semantic communication.

There's probably so many angles on that we could explore.

bringing in the ecological papers, citing some of the earlier ecological psychology and perceptual work in predictive processing, and then just connecting it to more recent papers, for example, Brunberg, Kiverstein, Rittveld, Ramsted, many of these authors' collaborations in about the past six years.

Anything else to add?


SPEAKER_01:
Well,

I got some notes that I want to talk about in the dog one, but I think this is interesting because it would be at this point where if they wanted to introduce formalisms, which basically are just a bunch of symbols set up operationally, that they could, but they haven't.

So how do we explain or how do we take into account all of those formulas that we've looked at

through a number of live streams if we're talking about something that's ecological because they are there.

So are they floating around us or are they only something that we keep inside of a very contained, very constrained, very condition set aspect of this diverse, very complex environment?

situation that we find ourselves under.

So yeah, that when you, as soon as you say of, I would, I would assume that one of the products of an ecological interpretation would be a whole bunch of formalisms because you could derive those pretty, well, I can't, I'm not Carl or Thomas or one of those, you know, super math people that they can.

So, so what do we, how do we, how do we account for that?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, one note on that is some of the famous models of predator prey type dynamics are those dynamical equations are used in neuroimaging to model, for example, winner list competitions amongst brain regions or with different signaling regimes.

So in many ways, the SPM package specifically, as well as neuroscience more broadly,

Many threads and precursors are here, which is why I really appreciate that by interpreting the way you are about how active inference is being interpreted, there aren't just the bullet point or the visual abstract of active inference.

If that is the active inference that is the interpretation of the author's

using active inference like they're working through it and making a trace in a process versus just saying well this is the standalone author independent interpretation not sure if that makes sense but all right this uh here's some text on a slide to look at connecting uh spatial temporal structure of affordances in ecological settings

the concept known as field of affordances or the landscape of affordances and different affordances different kinds of action capacity introducing how salience and attention and proclivity towards an affordance is determined by its free energy by the free energy is expected to reduce by the system entity or by the modeler um

And there's a few more notes on ecological psychology and affordances.


SPEAKER_01:
Can I just read a sentence in the last bullet there?

I think it's really important too.

Again, to go back to the, I won't ask you to go back to the previous slide, but we don't carry around those formalisms and those operations with us, but humans become attuned to social affordances by being immersed in and participating in shared social cultural practices very early in their development.

That seems pretty obvious.

This immersion leads to the integration of a social physics.

Okay, well then there is math involved in this, which is the set of structured and systemic social contingencies available in an environment of development.

So even if we can't identify what those formalisms are, those formalisms must be present in order for this early, this thing that we call

early development and integration to exist.

We can't just say, oh, it's there, but we can't explain it.

There actually is something symbolic and representational.

Even if we can't conjure it ourselves, there are those aspects which we need to include, right?

Just because I don't think of it as math doesn't mean the math isn't present.

So I think that's a really important one here in terms of making their argument.

Even though it's an ecology, there's still a lot of formalism that would seem to be abstract, but presents as something real.

So, yeah, my little two cents.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's it.

interesting direction and made me think about attractors dynamics gravity in social settings and that puts quite a

spin on Bayesian mechanics as a social physics.

And sociophysics has been approached from the classical billiards case, from the statistical thermodynamic informational case, and probably more speculatively by some from the quantum case.

So it's those three mechanics, classical, statistical thermo info, and quantum.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.


SPEAKER_00:
three five however many there are um are what are being proposed in their integration by bayesian mechanics which we'll be discussing in uh that next live stream actually in 49 with uh

some really interesting formalisms to re-enter into so i think it's like seeing what's not there but seeing depth in what they're pointing to even just by discussing integration of social physics we don't need to provide a hundred citations to social crises or tragedies it is just what is gestured towards with what the domain of the work is

All right.

In the section communication as socially extended active inference, here's some quotes.

Anything you want to add?


SPEAKER_01:
I just want to read bullet three.

Communication is thus understood as what we might call socially extended active inference situations where the organism reduces free energy by influencing the behavior of another organism in such a way

that its sensory input will correspond to the predictions of its generative model, thereby regulating its own internal states by the behavior of the other organism.

Other than through formalism, how could we prove that?

Would be my question.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Great question.

And, uh,

What if there are many routes and one can ask somebody to stop writing on the sidewalk with chalk?

Or they could just wash it while they're gardening.

Or they could go in so many ways.

It's like the adjacent possible of the social physics is open in a way that contrived or designed settings aren't.

Which isn't to say they aren't useful or educational, but that's not the same.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

The only way you could prove it, though, I think is through representational, symbolic, operational.

Like, I don't know how, because every time you try to repeat it.

Someone like Dean comes along and says, oh, I think I know what the game is here.

I'm going to disrupt the game, right?

So there really is only one way to prove it.

And so, yeah, I like that they put this in here.

Now, one of our colleagues, Stephen, likes to talk about the prefixes added to active inference.

And so, again, do we need those prefixes added?

in order to be able to explain our argument?

Is it for the convenience of our argument, or do those things really happen?

And can we say they really happen because we can prove it?


SPEAKER_00:
All right, nice.

The following section is some cases of communication and three areas are highlighted, some cases of communication.

And for those cases, one could ask what is or could be a transmission view on that setting or how have people framed a certain case or instance or type of communication as transmission view?

and then how is an ecological active inference interpretation changing that challenging that going beyond it and three areas that they are looking at are aggressive behavior

mating or sexual reproductive signaling and alarm signaling and they write about in each of these cases how one might see the type of behavior exhibited there as kind of a canonical signaling case like when you look up signaling you'll find these keywords describing it as categories of signaling and communication

And one very excellent book to follow up on is Helen Longino's 2012 book, Studying Human Behavior, How Scientists Investigate Aggression and Sexuality.

They're two of the go-to areas in behavioral study.

Two of the go-to approaches and phenomena and framings of action and interaction.

and this is a very multi and transdisciplinary book that addresses in the context of some recent historical debates around the relevance of genetic inheritance ecological inheritance social structuring all these different topics approached in a really edifying way i think it speaks to the gripper and the being gripped which is kind of the role of what history and philosophy of science has been doing

in a disciplinary academic way with a certain approach and timeframe and feedback method.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Human cooperative communication.

Um, anything to add?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm always curious about, um, I put a little note on the, on the actual paper, my copy of the paper

about cooperation.

And I'm no expert on cooperation, so I'm sketching this out like the authors are sketching certain things out.

But I think this is what I wrote.

Let me see here.

Yes.

Neither the...

transmission version nor the ecological field of affordances model can say for certain how long the cooperative state will exist for which requires a different type of analysis over the one that confirms that communication lines are functioning regardless of function type so stepping back and saying that there is a type of communication which we'll call cooperative is great

we can say that there's a type here, but just naming it doesn't mean we've actually tamed or been able to explain why that type exists.

So that's one of those things, again, when we have the authors with us, I'd like to chat about that a little bit more.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, what that makes me think about is even non-communication can be considered part of the

perhaps shaping the landscape of affordances, perhaps being communication of non-linguistic type.

And so how could we have a model of communication where the special cases of which there are infinite, the special cases are communications in their embodied sense.

And we can also abstract to people who only communicate through social networks, through breathing the same air,

all these kinds of very loose only ecologically aligned if only on earth aligned views of communication seeing that as like the field from which different forms of communication of cognitive entities arises from rather than something symbolic and transmissive which could only be instantiated kind of from the top down by a symbolic subsystem or sub functionality

which isn't denied by a bottom-up view but it's contextualized as part of a process that includes the ecology and the shaping of the field of affordances and landscapes and the stigmergy as something fundamental


SPEAKER_01:
And that's where the ecology of the context does act as a constraint.

So, yeah.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Conclusion.

So, they introduced a pragmatist conception of communication grounded in an ecological interpretation of the active inference framework.

There's a lot more to develop.

So, where do papers end?

Where do projects begin?

And then they mentioned two different directions, which are relatively well-confirmed empirical results.

First is the work on joint attention and seeing joint attention as a relevant aspect in relationship to coordination on landscapes and relevant for language development.

And then the second point of empirical evidence that they want to bring in

is neuroimaging data showing co-activation or partnership in some way of different parts of the body and brain associated with certain actions that seem to be linked in a way that's best understood or coarse-grained as being ecological or embedded

then here is the uh part mentioned earlier to conclude it is trivially true that pretty much any episode of communication can be described as a transmission of information as suggested in the section some cases of communication so no bird call no bird call hard to get around that one in practice maybe there's some theoretical tricks but um what if communication is pre-planning

really hear a bird call in five minutes, really want that to happen or make that happen, and then what happens?

However, there'd be no communication if there was no information in some sense, that is some form of association between a signal and affordance, which constitute general ecological information.

Semiosis, Persean triad, abductive discussion we had in 47.

this is the biosemiotic ecological angle that we came from last time and this paper is going to really highlight the ecological and the free energy minimizing aspect via field of affordance modifying through stigmatic modifications or other types of communication maybe just making your body visible in a certain way

and using that as part of a joint socially co-enacted free energy minimization.

Pointing the way towards models that would do that, but not as the only endpoint.

But it's in a framing where models could conceivably do that, like through software packages and model design processes.


SPEAKER_01:
I sometimes choose words not carefully, and I don't think that the word trivially was placed in that last bullet as a

as a way of provoking but maybe it was I think basically it's basically true but saying it's trivially true is like saying okay well a math proof is trivial because it just is there I think it's sometimes hard to to

overstate how some of the basics matter.

That doesn't mean get locked in just and then stop because you got the basics, right?

I mean, there's a whole bunch of stuff that pops out of that and include that too if you're looking at something realistically.

However, I don't know.

I don't know if it's very trivial or not.

Like, I don't know that it's that common.

Some of these more interesting mathematical proofs.

We could say they are because they've already been proven, but that doesn't mean everybody has access to it or even understands the importance of it.

So that's just a little side comment because I know I catch myself regretting sometimes describing things in certain ways.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

To defend the trivial, I looked up the definition I really wanted to know.

It turns out it is originating from trivium.

is an introductory curriculum at a medieval university involving the study of grammar rhetoric and logic so maybe it's it's so trivial it's just the kind of trivial details that you end up spending quite a long time working on okay good good defense that would be that would be a funny interpretation you know bring back the trivium

Our hope is that the model describes inspires experimental designs that can lead to such theoretical or applied treatments.

Okay.

What are your thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, as I wrote here, I think that means keeping active inference on the bench and constrained to a control setting.

I mean, again, if you want to be able to compare to a control, this is,

This is your next step.

However, since when does setting a condition liberate communication to do what communication does, which is release understanding and not just aggregated for the sake of control?

And I wrote here, time to break out the meme launches.

Dan, you've got more direct experience with writing about active inference and memes than I have.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, that's the slide.

Here we go.

Yeah, well, just wanted to kind of explore this and leave some open space to go into it more.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Building on the work of our colleague Maridula, who is a professor in Monterey, California.

Yeah.

She had written about memes as quasi-arguments and about the kind of space that opens in...

between in enduring the meme and specifically image meme interpretation or interpolation process so in addition to or an alternative to the purely dynamical descriptive and uh evolutionary fitness oriented meme definition commonly used by dawkins and all since

this is a very media and cognitive interpretation of artifacts and through a paper in 2021 and in 2022 we used some previous work that had been done by Ekweha et al. 2020

on a three-tier model of how to frame complex ecosystems, the kinds that people are usually talking about when they mention ecosystems, like the non-metaphor.

If there were a non-metaphor and it wasn't just app ecosystems and social ecosystems, the one with the trees, but...

they all um three layers being an instrumental layer of pure observations basically mapping onto observed states then a contextual layer which can bring in some knowledge about how different measurements or inferences about measurements are linked like to common entities and

and then using this type of statistically inferred information and augmented information from the contextual layer to do inference on pure unobservables.

Those might be things that are observable, but you didn't observe, like the temperature at some point where there wasn't a thermometer, or the true unobservables could be like propensity of this mile square of land to be used for this purpose in the next five years.

But that's not something that could be measured.

There's no measuring device other than the modeling process, but it's an important modeling process.

And they did amazing work connecting complex systems and ecologies.

And on the rise in...

tournament in spirit is discussions of digital ecosystems and ecological approaches to communication as noted by the authors here and hence by extension ecological approaches to digital communication and so we were able to modify or to translate and respect the ecosystem integrity three-tier model provided by those authors

onto the kinds of digital discourse analysis platforms that would be aligned in that ecological interpretation and way so i think there'll be a lot to explore maybe now maybe next times go ahead yes quick just quickly so would you describe what you did from a and transition to b as an inaction

was an inaction in the slides software of one type and then it becomes a different inaction when it is shared as a asynchronous file or through live communication with a colleague it's a different inaction when the pre-print is open source and available immediately upon completion there are many levels of and types of inaction

All right, then it closes with a discourse from Skirms.

Skirms 2010 suggests that in any complex organization, different highlighting, information, transmission, and processing and coordination of action may not be entirely separate.

Gasp.

skirmish 1996 and skirmish 2010. these are actually really excellent books I hope that is not taken as dismissive but it goes to show what views are seen as and justified to be often needing support and what that means or why that behavior is that way what is that linguistic string for in this

quote from 2022 written originally in 2010 and then the authors write what fundamentally matters is the control of behavior and not the transmission of information even if the control of behavior may be described as a form of information transmission

so very much a syntax semantics question how many bits is the file what does the file mean syntax and semantics in the specific unfolding of the interpretation you can take a top-down overview like 55 of people who did this also did that

and then there's a bottom-up cognitive view which is the ecological embodied engagement with the image meme or with something like that with the animal signal or mark or smell and then to paraphrase skirmish the information transmission gloss

Footnote 35 with some Egan citations.

The information transmission gloss on communicative behavior, if it is to prove useful at all, might be thought of as an aspect of the control of behavior rather than the other way around.

Reversing primacy but not denying.

We propose that conceiving communication in such a way provides better insights into the pragmatic nature of communicative behavior and its evolution as a free energy minimizing activity.

End of paper.


SPEAKER_01:
do you want to add that's basically it we have a few things written down 48.1 but what would you like to add on that i mean what i like about the conclusion is that they say i'm i'm i'm taking and paraphrasing in my own thinking in my own words um

just because you transmit doesn't mean that you're actually sussing out or determining or confirming the difference between play as one kind of action, playing, and then played.

So they really want to incorporate that temporal piece, which I think is really smart, which again, I'm a big believer that there's a logic that supports that, which delimits

which direction you're necessarily asking to look at time.

Are you going with time?

And there's only one direction.

Are you enacting it?

Or are you delimiting and able to place some sort of gap between the memorial and the projectional?

And the other thing is, I think,

When we walk into these situations and see them as ecologies, we are going to miss things.

So I think we just have to accept that there will be laterals and collaterals on the margins that will sort of bleed into what our regime of attention is.

And so I think if you only focus on the transmission, my turn, your turn, my turn, your turn,

You don't have a hope of trying to bring those very important things that are essentially building up whatever you are taking away from this communication exercise.

So again, I think that's something important that they raise in sketching this out.

There's actually a benefit or a feature in not filling it in.

with too much detail, because how could they?

Every time there's a communication act going on or a dyad happening, the openness of that means there's going to be some scale-friendly fallout.

It can't be predicted with certainty.

So I really like their conclusion, actually.

So yeah, there's my thoughts in those last couple of slides.


SPEAKER_00:
a lot to think about i guess and discuss in the coming weeks i think a few last pieces here seeing transmission as enablement for semantics and connecting that to the persian triad and abductive logic and as a uh escaping the nosedive of descriptionism and reductionism

by holding space for the pragmatics, if nothing else, of higher order levels of analysis and core screening.

So whether you need to appeal to computational resources, we won't be able to finish the analysis or other kinds of pragmatics, including meaning as pragmatics in the socially extended cognitive space.

Then there's a very rich view in which we don't need to like reject digital signal processing in order to have an ecological interpretation.

I think there's a few other areas we can go into.

So with that, there's other relevant works to share.

Okay, any final, final thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
No, I mean, what I appreciate is how smoothly and quickly we're able to kind of go through this paper.

I think that's a testament to the author's

um being clear about what they wanted to ascribe and what they wanted people to be able and extend off of so it kind of reinforces their idea of this extended active inference instead of them having all the answers they just planted some seeds and let people kind of take it off in different directions which i think maybe was one of their goals i don't know


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice.

Totally agree.

Agreed that it's a very readable, clear paper that laid out a nice path with berries to pick from.

A lot of footnotes and paths to explore.

And it is going to be great to discuss it in the coming weeks.

So Dean, thanks so much for the preparation and for joining live.

And we'll see you very soon.

Same back, right back at you, buddy.

Take care.


SPEAKER_02:
Peace.

## nWFM5zrdmG8

SPEAKER_01:
all right welcome everyone it is september 7th 2022 we're here in actin live stream number 48.1 in the second discussion on the paper communication as socially extended active inference and ecological approach to communicative behavior welcome to the active inference institute

We are a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for livestream.

Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about getting involved in different learning groups and projects at the institute.

Well, we're here in stream number 48.1, continuing our discussion on communication, active inference, ecological approaches, and so on.

This is going to be a really exciting discussion and we're appreciative of the first author joining us.

We'll jump right in with some introductions and then onto the discussion.

So if you're watching live, feel free to write any questions in the live chat.

And I know that on our side, we have a lot of things to explore and also, of course, looking forward to learning more and seeing where it goes.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California, and I guess the ecosystem of today is Chaparral because it's very warm where I am.

And so I was thinking about how different ecosystems and eco tones might facilitate different kinds of communication in a regional way.

And I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, Tony.

I'm Dean.

I'm in the Rocky Mountains in Western Canada right now.

And it's, what would you in Fahrenheit?

It's about 45 Fahrenheit this morning, but it's going to warm up to about 90.

So yeah, there's a bit of an ecology going on around here too.

I think

It's going to be a really interesting day because I think what we're going to do is take this ecological approach and lens and with the background of everybody here, we're going to really be able to pull up a lot of different interesting things that otherwise we would not pay attention to if we only got stuck on the transmission piece and I'll pass it down to Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Blue.

I am a researcher in sunny, beautiful New Mexico at the other end of the Rocky Mountains from Dean.

Like literally, if you just go straight down, I'm in the Sangre de Cristos.

And we are recovering here from a like torrential summer of rain.

And I think I think like maybe we're finally getting back to some sun.

It's starting to get hot now, like finally.

So I think that the sun is here to stay.

We still have a hot month, I guess.

But the desert ecosystem and the Chihuahuan desert is special and fun and always excites me.

And I'm interested, too, in this paper in...

how it more applies broadly, the communication as compared to the Vassal paper.

Can we then apply to animals and also to maybe human-animal interactions and what those look like?

And maybe not only cooperative communication, but also competitive communication.

And I think extending this work into those avenues is interesting and exciting.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Thank you, Blue.

So Remy, welcome.

And please take it away.

Feel free to introduce yourself and give any context on the paper.


SPEAKER_05:
All right.

So thank you for having me.

I'm really pleased to see that we'll discuss our paper.

I'm Remy Tizan.

I'm a researcher based in Montreal at UCAM.

and uh yeah it's uh it's sunny it's a nice day here too and so yeah um the the paper was um an attempt to

to devise a view of communication that could be like a starting point for ecological and inactive approaches to language and communication.

The problem that we saw is that in most

language sciences like linguistics, in philosophy of language, in mainstream philosophical language and in biology of communication, most researchers, most people adopt automatically a view of communication in which communication is

essentially transmitting information or transmitting content or an idea to another being.

So usually, like in linguistic communication, that would be like, I have the belief that it's a sunny day outside.

I say it's a sunny day outside.

And then by doing this, I'm transmitting to you the belief that it's a sunny day outside.

So that's the...

basic view of communication the transmission view that is more or less adopted by everybody in in linguistics and in in cognitive science but a lot of people at least and that's a view of communication that is problematic from an inactive and ecological perspective because it relies on the notion of content on the notion of representation to transmit

content, I must have a representation in my head and then I can transmit it to you so that you can entertain this representation in your head.

But as is quite well known, inactive and ecological approaches to cognition reject the notion of representation, the notion of content as a basic building block of cognition.

So the transmission view is a problem from an inactive ecological view.

And so what we tried to do was to develop a view of communication from which ecological and inactive approaches could start to understand language and communication without having to rely on the notion of content or representation.

So that's like the basic motivation of the paper.

That's what we were trying to do.

And we thought that Active in France and especially its ecological interpretation could be useful for doing that.

And yeah, the thing that you mentioned, Blue,

The aim was to devise a view of communication that could be perfectly general.

So that could be applied to animal communication, maybe communication between cells at a more small scale level, and eventually maybe communication between groups at a larger scale.

So the view, the attempt was to

produce a view of communication that is perfectly general and that can be precise along the way so that we can for instance precise the conception of communication to apply it to a cooperative communication for instance which is the kind of communication that is characteristic of human communicative interaction and that was treated notably in the vessel paper to which you you alluded to

so that's the the aim of the paper and so because of its generality it's a paper that is really um in a way superficial because it really treats a lot of topics really quickly but that was like a big road map for a view of communication that could be used by ecological and inactive researchers so that was essentially what we tried to do in this paper awesome and just one more


SPEAKER_01:
Follow-up question we often ask would be, how did you come to use Active Inference?

What about the collaboration or your direction led to the fusion of these approaches?

Were you studying communication more broadly and came across Active Inference or vice versa?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

So earlier in my academic career, so to speak, I was really more in philosophy of mind.

So more of a philosophical background and not really in cognitive science.

So that's where I became acquainted with issues about content, about meaning, etc.,

And then I came at UCAM, worked with Pierre Poirier, which is really more centered in philosophy of cognitive science and was really interested in predictive processing theories and eventually in active inference framework because of its link with predictive processing.

So coming at UCAM with Pierre Poirier, I really became interested.

acquainted with these ideas, with these frameworks.

And that's where I linked these new frameworks with my earlier interest in language and communication that came from my background in philosophy of mine.

So that's kind of how it happened.

And talking with Pierre and the community of researchers at UCAM, who is really using the predictive processing and active inference frameworks,

That's how it all came together.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Well, many places to pick up.

Perhaps Dean first, if you'd like to.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, okay, I'll start with a question.

If we're going to take an activist approach to this, we're going to look at what communication is through that

philosophical approach and take all that active inference affords in terms of opening up what communication is.

Maybe, Remy, could you talk a little bit about how people who want to argue that there is no content, how could we then describe

our experiences, the things that we've played out, the things that we're going to play towards, but mostly what I'm curious about is the things that have been played, because we've got a record of that.

We don't have to call it content, but I've had a lot of conversations with a lot of people who live in an activist thinking community.

And they twist a whole bunch of things around, but they really have a hard time coming up with an argument that says, my experiences aren't something, something.

So maybe you could talk to us a little bit about that.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so that's a good question.

I think that one of the answers that I could provide is that from my perspective,

There are some people in ecological and inactive circles who refuse all reference to content.

They say content doesn't exist at all.

But that's not my perspective.

From my perspective, content is just not at the basic level of cognition.

It's like, it's kind of, I don't know if you're familiar with the work of Hutto and Mayen.

These are radical inactivists, and they claim that content is not at the fundamental level.

It's something that gets added up once there are a particular kind of social normative practices that can give rise to content.

So that's my view.

I think that we can describe the basic cognitive functioning of organisms and animals, and in many cases, humans,

without the use of the notion of content, of the notion of representation.

I think that we can do that.

But at some point,

in our social interactions, there are multiple things that can happen that will give rise to content, to representation.

And that's a complicated story.

That's something that I might come back to later on.

But the idea is that content is not

at the basic level it's not something that we can presuppose in a theory of communication it's something that can be explained by a theory of communication but it's not something that is that can be taken as something that can explain it's something that has to be explained so to speak i don't know if if i'm clear so we can i think use the notion of content to characterize the kind of experience the kind of

phenomena that you allude to, but this notion must not be taken as granted.

That's the view that I take.

And I think there are some ways to explain how content arrives on the scene, but

It's not something that can be taken as granted in a theory of communication.

And that's what I'm critiquing in this paper.

It's like in traditional transmission view of communication, people presuppose that there is content, that there is representation and communication is defined as the transmitting of this content, of this representation.

What I'm saying is that representation is not something that can be used as this basal explanatory notion.

It's something we have to describe communication without the use of this notion.

And then with various tools of social interaction and particularly social normative practices, we can explain how content can

then arise so that that's I I can if you want to give more detail on that front but that's my my my two cents so um content exists it's not just at the basic level of communication awesome that reminds me of um and to to stay on our philosophy


SPEAKER_01:
wavelength, the difference between the explanandum and the explanands.

So just quoting Wikipedia, an explanandum is a sentence describing a phenomena that is to be explained, and the explanands are the sentences adduced as explanations of that phenomena.

And so it's a very interesting difference amongst these theoretical views and framings, which I'm sure we'll be able to unpack a lot of implications of.

that content as a phenomena or descriptive category, sign or symbol, we could have many ways of even describing what that is.

However, under the transmission view, you're suggesting that content is seen as what is able to explain different phenomena like communication or cooperative communication.

No matter how far out you go in the sub discussions, content is doing something to explain.

Whereas in the radical and activist approach, radical meaning from the root, so with an activism at the root,

That doesn't mean that there couldn't be a branch that summarizes and reflects content, but it's something that is explained through inactive means rather than something that we're going to put like the cart before the horse and then use the semantic content representation view and the transmission associated with it to then try to explain inactivism.

Dean?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think I'm on the same page as both of you.

I take an example in 2019, I'm walking up the street rue Saint Denis and I'm heading to the patisserie and I don't have any first hand experience with that.

But once I arrived there,

and I taste one of those chocolate pastries, now all of a sudden I have content.

So it wasn't that I had content first.

Even when I was looking at the map and walking up from UQAM past all the bars and on a beautiful fall day, I had the content once I experienced something first.

But I also can't deny that there was an aspect of that that wasn't

limited just to the moment of all of the actions that I took walking up the street.

So if we're going to look at an ecology, and as I said, in my first question, if we're going to use active inference as the lens, as the situational analysis method, I don't know how we can drop content, but I do think the timing of when we see it as the important thing or the

the central aspect of what communication is, I don't think it, I don't think it destroys the fact that we still have it.

It's just, when does it matter in that, in that continuum piece?

So, yeah.

And by the way, thank you for just reminding me of that, that trip in to Montreal in 2019, before all the heck broke loose with all these viral things.

It was beautiful time.


SPEAKER_01:
I also went to Montreal in 2019.

Very cool.

Lou?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I am curious about the difference between, or maybe there's no difference, or how can we clarify the difference between content and context?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, great question.


SPEAKER_01:
What do you think for me?


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, so content is...

is essentially something that has accuracy conditions.

So the idea of content is it's something that can be false or true.

It's something that can be, or more generally, something that can be satisfied or not satisfied.

So for instance, usually we'll say that our propositional attitudes have content.

So for instance, when I have a belief, my belief has a content,

And this content can be true or false.

For instance, if I believe that it's sunny outside, I have the belief that it is sunny outside and the content, it is sunny outside.

It can be true or false.

And if it's sunny outside, then my belief is true.

So that's the basic idea of content.

It's something that is attached to our mental states.

It's usually associated with the notion of representation.

There are complex debates to be had there, but that's the idea of content.

It's something that has conditions of correction in which it can be correct or incorrect.

So that's content.

And context, I don't know if you mean in general or in the specific way in which we use it in the paper.

how you use it in the paper yeah so context is um a set of elements um that are relevant to the um to the the to a joint action so that's how we use it a context a context of action in particular in the paper we're talking about joint action so when two people or more people are performing a joint action they're doing something together there are going to be some elements

some events some objects of the environment that will be relevant on which some action has to be um done in order to advance the the joint action so the context is like the this structured special temporarily structured set of elements on which action has to be taken to progress the joint action so that's the notion of context that we use in the paper i don't know if if that clarifies some


SPEAKER_02:
Well, so it implies like the set of elements is therefore also content.


SPEAKER_05:
Is that true?

In the paper, we don't think that it is.

My describing it as a set of elements is a contentful description because I'm talking about it and there's a content to the sentence of me who's saying that there's a set of elements.

But the set itself, the thesis that we're pushing forward in the paper is that

It can be, it can appear in the field of affordances of an organism without it having to represent it.

So that's where, that's what we're going to in ecological psychology.

There's work on the notion of a field of affordance.

So it's like

the structured set of affordances to which an organism is sensible.

And it's like there are some elements that will drive its action differentially depending on various internal factors.

And this sensibility of an organism to its environment

doesn't have to be characterized in terms of content, if we believe the ecological psychologist to develop this notion.

So this set of elements appears in a field of affordances, and these organisms who are sensible to their field of affordances, don't have to entertain a representation of this set of elements, they're just sensible to their field of affordances, and that's how they respond to these sets of elements of their environment.


SPEAKER_02:
So maybe when you talk about content, maybe that is what needs to actually be clarified.

So content is specifically some kind of semantic representation or semiotic representation.

So it's something that is explicit.

But can you give me an example of what would be an element in a set of elements?

How is that also not content?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, these are obviously complex questions, but yeah.

Typically, an affordance is a relation between an element of the environment and an action capacity of an organism.

And the thesis that is taken by an ecological psychologist, not everybody will agree with that, but is that the perception of affordances does not need the mediation of a representation

you can directly be sensible to a certain pattern of energy for instance in the in the in the energy array around you and you respond to this pattern of energy by for instance taking the affordance that is specified by this pattern of energy and you don't have it's not necessary to have a representation of the affordance to which you're sensible it's something that you can

directly perceived.

And that's like a central idea of ecological psychology.

Some people will disagree with that, will say that you cannot be sensible to an affordance if you don't represent it.

So that's obviously something that you can argue for.

But there's a lot of ecological psychologists who believe that you can be directly sensible to affordances of your environment just by responding to the energy array that is in your environment.

without needing to represent this affordance so in doing that they say that we don't need the notion of content or representation to characterize the way in which an organism is responsive to the affordances of its environment and that's what we we presuppose in this paper but obviously there are disagreements to be had there there are people obviously you think that

If an organism is to act on its environment, it has to have a representation of its environment in order to act correctly.

So that's obviously something that can be defended too.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

Thank you so much.

No, that's super helpful.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

It makes me think of a tug of war game or just two people pulling on a rope.

They're engaged in joint action.

which is how action and activism are placed at the center of the account of context, one individual pulling the rope, they might be thinking or thinking that they think any number of things, but through the field of affordances being shaped, through the regularities and the, I think, arrays of energy that you described in the niche,

that is going to alter the field of affordances of someone on the other side of the rope and that could be mediated through their appropriate deception or maybe the rope is now not graspable but it was graspable previously none of that requires a symbolic or even necessarily semantic component to be transmitted along with the rope pole

Maybe they had a pre-play and they said two tugs means this and three means that.

And that can also reflect planning to communicate.

However, in the act of communication, as we're exploring, we're putting action and the embodiment in the environment as primacy, and then seeing certain types of cognitive agents as being able to develop representation like properties on top of some physical regularities in the niche.

Dean?


SPEAKER_04:
Remy, what would you think of this idea?

We haven't defined ecology here in this conversation, but if someone like me came along to you and said, can we define it as both a process, ecology as process and ecology as a product, would you push back on that idea?

ability to see it two ways.

And then I guess on top, on the general level to Blue's question, then can we see it as content and context, this idea, this placeholder of ecology?

If we keep it on that general level, can we have our cake and eat it too?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so ecology here really refers to something specific.

It's not ecology in general, like in the branch of biology.

In philosophy of cognitive science, when we talk about ecological psychology, it's a particular...

movement that began with the work of Gibson in the 50s, 60s and 70s.

And it's an approach to psychology that states that the cognition of animals is a matter of its direct relation with its environment and is a matter of the kind of skills that are exerted by this animal in its environment.

And the

The central notion of ecological psychology is the notion of affordances.

An affordance is a possibility of action.

It's a relation between an element of the environment and a skill that can be exercised on this element of the environment.

And the thesis of Gibson and all the ecological psychologists that followed after that is that organisms and animals primarily perceive affordances in their environment.

They don't perceive objects.

They don't perceive events or properties.

What they perceive first and foremost is possibilities for action.

And they are pushed and pulled by their environment in various ways and responsive to their environment.

uh to take some affordances and don't not take some other affordances and that's how that's like in a constant interaction with their environment organisms will respond to these affordances and do some do some things and will be attracted by some affordances will be pushed by some other affordances and that's how an organism

interacts with its environment.

So that's ecology here really refers to that body of ideas that came from the work of Gibson in ecological psychology.

There are obviously links with ecology more broadly as a branch of biology, but it's really specifically this set of ideas linked to ecological psychology and Gibson's work.


SPEAKER_04:
Do you think that what you just described, the possibility, could be for people like yourself, both a product and a process?

Is that possibility something that can be categorized two different ways at once?


SPEAKER_05:
That's a good question.

You mean like...


SPEAKER_04:
It's a category error to say it's only a process.

That would be another way of asking the same questions.


SPEAKER_05:
I think that ecological psychologists would more prefer the description of the interaction of an organism with its environment in terms of process because the organism is always changing through its interaction with its environment.

And obviously, the organism is also changing the environment culturally, as is described in active inference accounts of niche construction.

So there's always an evolving interaction in which the organisms gain skills and the environment is transformed.

So the field of affordances is like never static.

So it can never really be described as a product.

I don't know if that answers a bit your question.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, are there products within what you just described?

So for example, if I'm an organism and I've had experiences and I can now use those experiences to continue my process,

Are those things that I've experienced, do they just have to stay in the same category as now processed as in past?

Or have they solidified?

Because I can't go back and change my history per se.

I can build off of it.

But those are pretty absolute now.

This sentence that I'm getting out is going to have a record.

That I can't erase.

So are those things products now in the enacting of whatever I've decided I want to focus on in terms of possibility?


SPEAKER_05:
Maybe, I'll just say something quick.

Maybe when you take like a definite time slice of an evolving organism, you can say that at that point, there's a product that can be defined.

You can say, okay, at that point, there's this set of abilities, this set of skills, this set of experiences that can be attributed to this animal.

So there's a product at that point.

But if you take

the uh organisms uh evolution like it's in its entirety there is always changing so there it's content it's always a process in true the there's always a process but if you you you you freeze frame maybe you can say okay at that point there's this and that that is a product of the

of the interaction.

But I don't know if I answered correctly your question, but that would be my idea.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
You are answering, and it's great.

I'm just trying to get in my mind, if we're going to talk about relativity, and I know that I step into a river and step out and then step into it a second time, I'm not stepping into the same river.

So what gives me the affordance to realize that difference?

Is it a product?

Is that first time I went in now a product?

because I can't go back and change it.

I can move off of that and see the relative distance or the relative time, but I don't know how we do processing without product.

That's, I guess, what I'm asking.


SPEAKER_01:
One quick thought on that is that product doesn't necessarily mean singular, final, static.

There are working products that can be versioned, which digital files have helped us see.

And then also we could say that the past is produced.

but also it's reproduced when it's remembered, when it's brought back together, and even in the directions you point to towards the end of the paper with what kinds of empirical neurophysiological accounts are helping bolster the ecological claim.

The realization that memories are not being accessed as static files, but are recreated contextually and relived is an interesting angle.

Yes, Blu?


SPEAKER_02:
So the recreation of memories contextually, like in dreams is really like interesting because it's like the recreation and also like recombination in a different context.

And just before we leave context entirely, I guess, I think I have a hard time with

All of this, because even a field of affordances has content, right?

Like I can go fly a kite if it's windy outside.

Like I have a set of actions that I can choose from.

And I think because we have to talk about it in a way that's semantic, it's difficult to like experience my field of affordances.

because i'm a human and and not only that like i'm a very verbal human so so i think that there's there's like that but but wait even the field of affordances is content but but i realized that like it's the mental representation aspect that is not um that that is the distinction between content and context and i i just want to point to um

the quantum paper where we had the quantum reference frames and Chris Fields' paper on contextuality that like we did on the live stream, I think number 40 and live stream number 17.

And just it's...

it's not possible to have a full contextual alignment here and it makes me think of in the paper how you were describing like there's this person on one end of the of the tug of war and then there's another person on the other end of the tug of war and then there's actually the tug of war itself and I just wonder about like what is the so person A has their context

Person B has their context.

What is the context of the tug of war itself?

It's another entity.

Anytime you have this interaction, and this is something that I've said to Daniel before, you have a relationship with a person, you have a set of communication with a person, that's its own thing that has to be loved, protected, nurtured.

You have to keep it up.

It has to...

undergo like autopoiesis.

It has to self-assemble, right?

Like it's its own entity.

And I wonder about modeling in that way.

Like, like if I model my communication, like there's me and the person and then the interaction or the collective behavior or, or, or whatever it may be.

I don't know.

I just, it's, I've been thinking about it and yeah, that's all.


SPEAKER_01:
It's like a view from the bottom or inside or however of communication where there's two entities and a partially aligned reference frame.

And then there's also a view where it is just one thing, albeit maybe with partial information encapsulation, but it still becomes one thing.

And then is that one thing atomic, even though it contains divisions and partitions as well?

Remy on that or anywhere you want to go.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think, Blue, your interventions are really, really interesting.

So for the first thing that you said, I know that it's hard to

remove our habit of describing things in terms of content because we have language and we describe things in terms of content.

But it's something that has been remarked really early by phenomenologists like Merleau-Ponty and Heidegger that our primary...

contact with with the world is not some like a description it's not like a representation um it's not like a reflexive consciousness it's a pre-reflexive consciousness and in your day-to-day interaction with your environment you're not using this kind of language-like description to experience your environment like if you're playing a sport and like for instance with you're playing soccer and you you see like a pass that you can make you're not

reflexively thinking that, oh, you could make that pass.

It's like a push or a pull in a field, in an attractor field kind of thing.

And that's how we experience.

And at the second where us humans, especially, we begin to think about our experience, then we cannot help but describe it in terms of content, in terms of representation that we entertain in a linguistic way.

linguistic means but in our pre-reflexive engagement with the environment that's the thesis of the phenomenologists and the ecological psychology it's really just a push and a pull from the environment that drives us in different directions and we don't have this kind of

reflexive consciousness, this kind of representation on which we rely to describe and understand it with these linguistic means.

So I think that's really the difficulty that we have of

like getting to this pre-reflexive consciousness when we are so used to at the second that we describe something we are describing it in terms of content so we have it's hard to like say oh there's no content when we talk about it we are invoking content automatically so yeah there's a difficulty there

And about the autonomy of the dynamic of an interaction, that's something that's really, really interesting.

And there's been great work on this by Ezequiel DiPaolo.

I don't know if you're familiar.

He's an activist researcher.

He's working on language, too.

And I've been really inspired by his work.

And he's describing situations where there are two people interacting, and these two people have goals

that are aligned but because of the particular dynamic of the interaction these goals don't come to fruition for instance when you're walking in in a corridor in somewhere and you're facing somebody and both of you want to like fluidly like pass each other but you're both trying to go for on one side and then on one side and you're blocking each other that you're trying to

achieve the same goal, which is individually passing past each other.

But because of a dynamic that arrives from the interaction, you cannot achieve this goal.

So there's really like this autonomous dynamic

at the interaction that is really important and i don't think that obviously that's something that i that we wanted to put in the paper because we're talking about uh the interactive dynamic dynamical systems but i don't think that i've succeeded in um

translating this in the way we think of shared field of affordances because I define shared field of affordances as the subset that is common to both individual fields of affordances, but I think that neglects this autonomy of the field of affordances that is shared in the interaction.

I don't know if I'm being clear, but I define the shared field of affordances as a product of

the combination of the two individual fields of affordances, but it seems that there's a lack of autonomy in the Shell field that I don't know how to account for.


SPEAKER_01:
That makes me think of the ant case where one nestmate might be able to grab a single seed and carry it home.

So that would be compatible with a view on communication as shaping the field of affordances because it modifies the capacity for another nestmate to pick up that seed because it's been moved.

It doesn't need to have any representational content, although especially when we're linguistically describing, it does.

So I definitely want to come back to that.

Then there's this seed grabbing ability, which is predicated on a lower level affordance, like the ability to grasp with the mandibles.

that lower level affordance enables true joint action like multiple nest mates working together to drag something bigger home but dragging something bigger isn't an affordance that even exists at the single nestmate level so there's like shared affordances and joint action at the level of what we can both do

And then there's also this very interesting higher level view where perhaps novel affordances become accessible, but then whom or to what or when do these special affordances or maybe nested system affordances come into play?

and how will we mediate the the handoff or like the way that those different levels of affordances come into relevance or out of relevance blue


SPEAKER_02:
So in terms of that modeling the field of affordances, it changes through time.

And this is why I was thinking about a competition.

In a tug of war between two people, both of them have the affordance to win, or there could be a tie.

But it's a potential opportunity for either one to win, but only one can be the winner.

And so then one person winning,

by default makes the other person lose.

And so this field of affordances changing through time is really interesting and I think very broadly applicable for modeling all kinds of processes.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, that's true.

And the idea about the collective affordances, there's been some interesting work on that.

And clearly, some organisms like ants don't perceive collective affordances.

If they perceive something, they perceive their individual affordances.

And at the collective level, there's the...

the taking of this higher level affordances this collective affordances affordance but they don't perceive individually probably I don't think they do perceive individually the affordance but some organisms such as humans I think because we have maybe a deeper generative model or something we are able to perceive some collective affordances because we're

sensible to them for instance if where i'm moving with a friend i can perceive that a couch is unmovable by me but i can perceive it as movable by us and then i can say like oh we could move this couch together because i perceive it as something that can be acted upon not just by me but with somebody else and then i have a perception it appears in my individual field of affordance as

as a collective affordance, but that's different from the ants who achieve a collective action, but without having the perception in their individual field of affordances of this collective affordance.


SPEAKER_01:
That's awesome.

It makes me think of the human capacity to have counterfactuals and speculative realism on teams and projects like, hey,

everybody here, we could do X. So there's the ability to communicate semantically and representationally where needed.

Plausible

or little sub-niches, new things can be suggested and arise that are specifically about shared or collective affordances.

And then additionally, there are special names for when we take individual level affordances that have consequences on other levels of decision-making.

Like there might be a multi-sig

wallet in cryptography or a voting system in democracy where an individual's affordance is like to pull the lever or to fill in a box or to sign a transaction and then it's being engaged in specifically because there's knowledge if 100 people do this then this affordance is going to happen so it seems like there's many cases where we um do

our mandible closing, the kind of lower level individual task, also with an explicit knowledge and a communicated knowledge around how someone's individual actions will influence group outcomes that could be like weakly emergent, like merely summating the affordances taken by individuals, as well as

strongly emergent or more strongly emergent in the sense that there's, there's nothing different about anyone's pulling lever in voting, but there are phase transitions and dynamics that can be like top down.

Dean.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

So, so when we have these experiences and they are kind of absolute in the sense that they they've happened, they've occurred,

and whether we can recall them or not, they seem to have some kind of an effect on this relativity piece and the relationship piece.

I don't think it matters whether we see Newton on one side and then Chris Fields and Einstein on the other.

The bottom line is that, to what Daniel was just saying,

the possible happens when we don't get stuck on what's the gauge of the transmission line, but what does that now allow us to do?

So how do we move from the absolutes, the modeling piece, to the process piece, the things that are out there

that have not happened yet that are still in that possibility category.

And now we're going to use communication, not just to narrow down to the workbench, the ontology, which Daniel and I are fast friends, except when it comes to the specifics of ontology, the generalities of that and the potential and possibility of that.

Remy, maybe you can talk to us a little bit about that from the ecological lens.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, that's a really good question.

I think one interesting thing about collective and shared affordances is I think they are learned in the same way that we learned individual affordances.

So, for instance, how do we learn to perceive an affordance?

We learn to perceive an affordance when we gain a skill.

When we gain a particular skill, we then can perceive in the environment the situations where we can apply this skill.

So, for instance, when we're really young, we can, I guess, we can...

can maybe crawl a little bit so we know where surfaces can be crawled upon and we can grab things so we perceive where things can be grabbed and so we start from this like basic skills and then we explore environment we do some things that we

We're gaining some abilities.

And when we do that, probably a little bit by trial and error, we begin to perceive some higher level affordances because we can do some more complex things.

And so our field of affordances deepens and becomes more complex as our set of skills becomes more complex.

But I think that interacting with others,

um so sorry for my my accent it's not really good i think i didn't want to say interacting with the animal others so yeah um so when we interact with others we are also learning to do some particular things for instance

If I try to pick something up alone, I might not be strong enough to do it.

So I don't have the skill.

So I don't perceive the affordance.

But if in some cases I pick something up and I see somebody else picking it up with me and we succeed in lifting it.

And then I have gained the ability to see that.

With somebody else, I can lift the stick.

But it's not a different kind of learning in that case from the kind of learning that I apply when I'm learning individual skills.

It's just that interacting with your environment, you acquire skills, sometimes with somebody else, sometimes not.

And you understand how you can apply these skills in your environment.

And then you navigate your field affordances accordingly.

so how you perceive a possibility is about how you have learned to do some things in the in the past and then because of this learning you perceive situations as affording these kinds of actions they can be individual but in communication they are usually about what others can do and what we can do with others and that's how you perceive like the the possibilities that can be uh


SPEAKER_04:
that can be brought upon that can be done with with the person with which you're interacting but i don't know if that helped but that's how i see it from a from a modeling standpoint if you if you move away from the constraints and you look at the emancipation and the freedom piece it it obviously becomes combinatorially explosive very very quickly because it can go off in many many directions but as a for example as daniel

alluded to when we started today's live stream this could go down many different paths so he left it open

He left the freedom aspect in.

And so I was curious what you think about, so when we do leave that in, when we do move out of the laboratory or we do move away from the mechanics, which you were just describing, and give our attention over to the freedoms piece of it, without immediately assuming, oh, well, we're going to stop modeling now because this is just going to blow up on us.

I was wondering what you're thinking is,

around that in terms of communication as a platform for the possible.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes, so the idea of communication is that the role it plays in interaction is the constraint.

It's a constraint on the set of possible action that can be achieved.

So the idea is that what communication achieves, it helps to limit the scope of affordances that will be salient at a given moment.

it's like you will center like the the shared field of affordances around a certain set or certain affordances and this will limit this will restrict the the set of affordances that will be um considered or that that can be acted upon by the the individual participants so that's the the role that it plays i don't know if that that helps but that's how

communication works, I think, in interaction, that what it does, in dynamical systems terms, the idea was that it helps to create interpersonal synergies in order to achieve the joint goals of the interaction.

That was the suggestion in

in the paper so for instance two people being together in a room they can be a lot they can do a lot of things there's like an almost infinite set of affordances that are open to them but if one of the people in the room like goes to the couch and say like couch or manifestly tries to lift it then what is

what is conveyed to take the transmission view idiom, what is conveyed, the effect that it has, it will augment the salience of the affordance of taking the couch.

And then this will restrict the set of affordances that are open or that are salient in the shared field.

And then the other person will see, OK, that's what we're doing now.

And they're going to take the couch together and lift it and bring it

So the role of communication is like there's a whole set of affordances open at any moment.

And what communication does, it restricts, it constrains this set of affordances in order to better achieve the joint goals of the interaction.

That's what we tried to do in the paper to understand cooperative communication.


SPEAKER_04:
You touched on an important difference, though, between is and if.

So what is does actually put pretty strong, what do we call them, guardrails, constraints.

But if I ask what if, I haven't put a constraint on something.

I've looked now at the counterfactual and the possible, and I haven't said what

that the first person that answers back to me is going to necessarily be now the new constraint.

The whole point of if is the possible, right?

And it is the freeing up, and it's the whiteboard moment, and we know all of this.

So again, I understand in the context of this paper what the is part of it is,

in terms of joint action but is there a what is there a place in your research here for the if within the same arguments that you i believe that there is but you didn't speak as clearly to them as you did to the is parts the the constrained parts


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so I think what you're talking about here is the communication about future or counterfactual situation.

That's what you're talking about.

Okay, yeah.

So what we tried to do in the paper is we introduced the notion of a simulation of a field of affordances, and that's where we're dancing really closely with the notion of representation, because is it a representation of an affordance?

That's like a fine line to tread, but

So there's this notion of a simulation of an affordance field.

Some sufficiently cognitively complex organisms such as humans and probably some primates can produce a simulation of an affordance that will enter in this hierarchical affordance competition.

So you can activate an affordance that is not immediately present in order to affect your current field of affordance

to, for instance, go towards this simulation of affordance.

That's based on the work of Paul Chisek, which is at Montreal, and his work on affordance competition.

And he argues that

a lot of phenomena linked to cognitive control such as executive function and these kind of things and working memory can be understood as these effects of affordances at higher hierarchical levels that will constrain

the lower levels of the field of affordances in order, for instance, to act accordingly to this higher level affordance.

So the example that Csikszentmihalyi gives is, for instance, suppose that there's a monkey on a branch that sees a little berry just beside it.

So there's the affordance of eating the berry, but

Suppose that there's an apple, which is a bigger fruit, a bigger price, further down on the branch.

And the monkey has an understanding that there's this apple further there.

It can, with this simulation of the affordance of eating this apple at a higher level.

So like, if I do that, if I go there, I will get this apple.

This simulation of an affordance at a higher level will constrain, will diminish the salience of this immediate solicitation.

and it will help him to ignore this immediate berry and it will continue on the branch in order to get to the bigger, to the apple.

So there's the basic idea of how the simulation of affordances can play

like a cognitive control role in order to constrain our behavior according to further goals like in future situations.

So that's the idea on which we speak about it really really quickly in the paper because it's already a really big paper but that's an important point and that's

the key to understanding the communication about future and counterfactual situation.

We talk about it in the last section.

It's the displacement or the absent reference discussion.

So the idea of how can we talk about things that are not immediately present

in a special temporal sense.

And the idea is that we can activate shared simulations of affordances.

So I can speak about an affordance that is not immediately present, but it can affect our shared field of affordance.

And it can drive our behavior toward this affordance, for instance, even if it's not immediately present.

But yes, this poses the question of, are these simulations of affordances representations

I'm on defense on this question, but if they are, they are probably action-oriented representations that maybe would be acceptable to an activist and ecological psychologist.

Sorry for my really long answer.

That's something that I've really thought about a lot.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

Yeah.

Blue, want to add anything, or there's a few ways to go?


SPEAKER_02:
No, I'm good.

Go ahead.

Take it away.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Well, one interesting connection with active inference, you mentioned there's nested affordances, including ones that are plausible.

So that reminded me a lot of the attention and metacognition as mental action, which we explored in Livestream 25 with Sanved Smith et al.

's paper, where the same way that at the...

kernel layer of the partially observable markov decision process or however we're doing active modeling at the most basal or kernel layer those pies those policy selections and those ease those affordances have to do with the level of affordance that is embodied

like the actual actions that the eyes are taking in the oculomotor case, or the actual direction that's taken left or right in a T-Maze example.

And then nested modeling is using an analogous graphical structure where policies

of nested levels reflect attention being paid to various lower level lower levels of that hierarchical architecture so there could be uh one lever that can go left and right and one that can go up and down and then there's a higher level decision like which of these two levers

should I be paying attention to and how aware am I of which lever I'm paying attention to and so on.

So I think the paper itself does not present any formalisms, but there's extensive linking to work in active inference and also to really resonant ideas that are in a non slash pre active inference framing.

that are immediately compatible like nested levels of affordances the distinction between the primacy of the bodily affordances but also for certain cognitive systems the existence of what appear to be cognitive affordances and the desire to model those jointly

perhaps without taking on strong or specific baggage around how we are then constrained to think about the bodily or the cognitive aspects of that modeling blue oh um and then one other thought was on like

shared action, including shared planning.

So planning to act together and about how events or activity planning in the future is like an activity that one person can do or groups can do, but it's about preparing a context

so that a process can occur and sometimes all that's needed is to send the calendar event invite other times there might need to be a lot of work to be done before the event itself however what is the transmission view on planning

that might be able to describe.

And I think the paper does an excellent job of saying that the transmission view is not refuted by the ecological and inactive angle.

You said no transmission, no communication, no communication.

It's like, it's an enabling aspect of this action orientation and this focus.

Here's some other areas that we had written down from before.

One I'm really curious to follow up on is about like language and maybe the role of how we're talking about these issues.

What other media or formats have you found to be insightful

Do any inactivists do presentations with silent films or with objects that are mailed to you and you play with or do this?

I mean, how else can we point at the moon and not have it be confused that we're talking about finger anatomy?

Read me first, then look.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, yeah, I think that's hard to talk about academic subjects like this without having like an explicitly transmission view, like appearance of communication, because the

This kind of interactions are so far from the basic interactive activities that were like the context of the evolution of communication, which is what I'm trying to explain here.

It's not like...

You imagine a tribe somewhere in the Pleistocene, and they're not trying to explain academic subjects to each other.

They're trying to do things, concrete things together.

And that's really the context of where communication evolved and what purpose it served.

But I think that it's hard to envision the context

uh an academic discussion such as the one we're having now that would be uh um like that would be more evidence toward the ecological view than for the transmission view i i don't know if that uh that's here but clearly like uh moving a couch together

is a better instance of and the communication that takes place in this joint activity is probably a better example of our view than like speaking together about active inference and communication because this is really a specific and really highly complex form of social activity that is more readily described for instance in terms of the transmission view I think.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, nice.

A lot to say there, Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
So I think all of those things, like even silent films, are also representations, right?

So whether it's a communication, like a whisper communication, or even pointing to the moon would be like a... Well, maybe that would be different.

I don't know.

I like this idea of communication as an action that we take.

And I'm not leaving information transmission behind in the dirt.

I don't think it needs to go there, I think.

But I do think that all actions are in some way

some kind of information transmission.

So even like, and Remy, you've studied a theory of mine, so I assume you're familiar with integrated information theory and the emergent properties that information can help us to represent.

And so I think,

like in some way, even like eating food, like tells the environment that you're hungry and, and takes away the food.

And so there's, there's always some level of informational exchange, even if it's just trivial information exchange, even if it's not meaningful, it doesn't create some bigger emergent thing.

Right.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks blue Dean.


SPEAKER_04:
Um,

I think it's an easy, again, I think it's, well, I won't say it's easy.

Remy did a good job of explaining this and not making it too obtuse.

If you use an example of moving a couch, the physical manipulation, it's not hard to extend that to communication and symbolic manipulation.

The manipulation stays.

Then that sort of reinforces the idea that there is a process at hand, something that we can observe.

But I'm still kind of confused about, so once the chair has been lifted or the words have come out of my, I heard an expression because I was watching the John Vervaeke thing yesterday and something comes out of my mouth hole.

Now it's done.

It's a product.

I mean, we can resubmit it or reflect on it or whatever, but it's there.

It's now historical.

And so that transition from process to product, I think, is something that the manipulation by itself doesn't explain.

We have to kind of de-link and see the sort of timelessness aspect of this.

Carl talks about deep temporal models.

And so I don't know that, I'm not sure how communication manipulation, symbolic manipulation gets explained in these deep temporal senses.

And I'm not just talking about chiseling it into

The stones, the tablets, right?

Like, there's got to be another piece to this that you've looked into, Remy, and obviously much deeper than I have.

What is your sense of that once we get past the manipulation processing and start seeing the products pile up?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so, yeah, it's hard to answer this question.

But that's true of everything that is something that happens.

at some point it's there and you can't change it.

So any event, communicative or not, or like a rock that falls or something, that has that property too, no?

Once it's happened, it's something to which we can go back and I don't know if that's... So in the same sense, if you talk, you say something, this is something that has happened and you can...

it's now a product and something to which you can allude to.

It has influenced your cognitive system and then you can... I struggle to see what's the question exactly.


SPEAKER_04:
One of the things that you pointed to right at the very start of your paper was

what these symbols that have been manipulated and now set down in this paper is not the end it's the start of something this product this paper should be the start of a dialogue or a trial log or in this case a quadrilog and it has become something right so so it's the back and forth part that i find really interesting and it's something you

spoke to very clearly at the very start of your paper.

You didn't say, okay, so if we get stuck in the transmission view, when I stop talking...

That's it.

That's over.

And now we're going to start something else.

No, you basically said there's a continuum aspect to this.

It isn't strictly episodic that we have to look at something more than just what Remy says, which I think is a brilliant way to start a paper and an even better way to start a conversation.

So

So there is a product piece to this, and there's a process piece to this.

You put something down, and a child will start manipulating it.

And then they'll start manipulating the symbology that they're applying or affiliating or associating with that.

So again, you've looked at that far deeper than I have, obviously, because listen to how I ramble, right?

But...

I wondered how do you take that transition piece now and hold it up to other people who maybe take an inactivist approach or take more of an instrumentalist approach, right?

Because the bottom line is it's hard to deny that it's done or it's still happening.

But you focused on the it's still happening.

So what are your thoughts?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think that there's, with communication, there's a sedimentation.

Di Paolo talks about this too.

Like the symbol that we use, the words that we speak, there's like this... There's also talk about first order languaging and second order languaging.

So first order languaging is like the flow, the dynamic where every interaction is new.

Everything is always like on the fly and there's always a transformation of the linguistic forms that we use.

And the second order languaging is like the abstraction where we can say, oh, that's the same word that has been used.

That's the same sentence.

That's the same meaning.

And this second order languaging is like a...

uh something that's added up and that that's an abstraction that's um something a traditional linguistic has really focused on this second order languaging which is like the product of language which is like okay the the the language that the language that we speak is a set of sentences a set of words and that's something that that is identified at the level of the second order languaging but when we're speaking where we're talking it's not at this level that we're doing it when we're

acting, it's always new.

We're always reconfiguring.

We're always transforming.

And it's only when we abstract from this like basic interaction, some patterns that we see, okay, at the second order, at the second level, there is words, there's a syntax, there's some rules that are followed, but it's not

the real phenomenon of language is at the first order and that's the idea so maybe that's a way to see like the real activity is really a process but if we abstract if we look back on this process and we analyze it and we abstract some parts of it then we can see these forms emerging these languages these words

that are used repetitively, and then we can have the product of language.

But in truth, language is always a process, and that's the shift, the terminological shift of not talking about language, but languaging, which is something that an activist working on language tried to do.

That really brings forward this notion of language is always an activity, always a process, and not like a set of words, a set of

Symbols that are used and these these analysis in terms of repeatable symbols is something that we get when we analyze it like after the fact, and we see these patterns that are that are used.

that we get this second order, but when we're doing it and at the fundamental level, it's really just a process of continual interaction.

So that's maybe something to think about.

And there's something I want to say really quickly about what Blue said about the information and

the the way in which information is always present and that that's true that that's what i allude to at the end of the paper when i cite uh brian's curves when i say yeah there's always information transmission right just moving in my environment there's information that's transmitted but yeah that's exactly the point and that's uh the idea is that content is not information

information is everywhere always when we when anything happens in the environment in the universe there's information that is created doesn't transmitted but the idea is that information understood in this in these terms in uncertainty reduction notion of information is not sufficient to explain communication because there's information always everywhere that's that the point

that people who hold the transmission view think that they can rely on this notion of information to explain communication, but it's not a strong enough notion of information.

They need the notion of content to explain what they want to explain.

Because, for instance, the information that you think about when I eat, when I wave my arms like that, there's information because there's an exchange with my environment.

But that's not sufficient to explain communication because this information is everywhere and communication is not everywhere.

It's a property of certain behaviors that we have to be more specific to analyze.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
So the information has to have context, right?

It has to have relevance for the communication, for the collective action, for the collaboration or something.

So there's no, like in order for communication, like that contextual, I don't know, imposition needs to exist, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, nice.

So just a few notes.

I really like this sedimentation of communication.

It's a really rich riverbed or rock formation, natural analogy that's very concordant with ecological perspective to reflect how the products of communication are indeed sequentially layered.

The pen marks on the page can't be erased.

We can't undo what was said.

We can't un-record.

We can't un-transact on a blockchain.

All these different aspects and even including the scientific literature being appended to continually.

So there's a sedimented aspect.

yet also there is something that is a process like the river that is depositing the sediment and then that made me think about how sometimes communication is descriptive around what was or is and this may map on to the variational free energy inference which is uh kind of like now casting or even retro casting

But once we enter into action and anticipatory or prospective informing and communicating, looking forward to reduce uncertainty about action selection is vital for systems to persist and thrive.

However, as we've explored in many discussions, sometimes from a really technical angle, the introduction of action

into model selection and just modeling in general introduces several complexities.

How the space of possible actions is enumerated and scanned over, it's a simpler and a different question to do purely receptive inference on something about the past.

But to inject one into the present and embody that presencing,

requires one to act amidst uncertainty about what the future of the generative process will be and the consequences of action, which are either slightly or almost entirely unknown.

So the introduction of action puts us into that realm of expected free energy and highlights all these really interesting dynamics and how the future is not the past, but it becomes that way, like it gets sedimented, but

this is the pre-sedimentation there's some dust molecules they're right next to each other in the river one of them is going to sediment the other one's going to go out to the pacific ocean it may not even be clear in that river which way the different particles are going to go and so that's like where like all the complexity and turbulence can be happening um and so it's a very rich distinction and um

something to really bring back about how the past is sedimented, but there's an openness in the action consideration.

And that's where planning as inference and joint action and shared attention, all these features come into play.

Dean?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, Daniel, I don't know if you're

if indirectly referring back to the 47 series of the live stream, but there it was, what we talked about was that people who have looked through an inactivist lens really make fantastic arguments about let's focus on process.

Let's focus on the process.

Apologies.

If you're talking about people who work in the instrumentalist, hopefully that'll get answered.

If you're talking about people who are looking through the instrumentalist lens, they really want to talk about product.

They really want to say, this is a tool.

And they argue fantastically for that.

And I think what we tried to do in the 47 was say, you're both right.

You both have fantastic arguments.

As an agent who's trying to communicate, why would we say one communication?

Like if we're active in FERS, why if we're active in FERS, first and foremost, if we're always trying to scan and survey that field of affordances, why would we drop one for the other unless that was necessary?

Even part of affordance, the ability to option and be able to recognize the tool product and recognize the action in that moment, carrying out that data thread.

which we can now act further on, as Daniel said, downstream, right?

So again, I don't think anybody would argue that inactivism and that ecological approach is hugely important in order to be able to generate those affordances.

But maybe there's still people who want to argue, no, if you just bring your toolkit, all of your problems will suddenly dissolve.

Or if you just walk into the room, you'll know how to talk to all of these people without really developing that sense of, okay, so as you said, first order and second order communication, right?

You've just walked into the room.

And then you reflect later on so that the next time you walk into a room, maybe you come at it a little differently each time, right?

So again, Daniel, I don't know if you were consciously or subconsciously referring back to the last live stream set, but that's essentially where I'm kind of at.

Well, I've been there for a bit now, but I wonder how you can argue that it could only be one

And if we're talking about affordances.

If we're not talking about affordances, fine.

It can be one.

But if we're talking about affordances and we're optioning out, how can it be less than two?


SPEAKER_01:
The menu is not diminished by selecting what you want for that meal.

you don't rip the rest of the menu out.

And then also, Remi, one just insight, I've never heard it phrased this way, but it's so interesting and hopefully gives many people, including us, some directions, is you said it's hard to discuss academic subjects without the transmission view.

And that's just such a fundamental point.

one could take a sort of sociological critique of academic discourse.

And while the practices and the networks of academics and the genres that they write in, the venues and the paywalls and all of these different sociological features structure academic discourse to be such and such a way that can feel lifted from our first order experience.

and this actually takes an even more fundamental angle which is yes those sociological features may be what is explained but fundamentally on on that topic or anything what is it about this conceptual or academic mode of synchronous and asynchronous discourse just what is it about what is it on

And how can we evolve this and develop this to create an ecology of communication to integrate in a new way?

For Remy first, and then anyone.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think that not just the academic discussions, but all our conceptions of education and learning are influenced by this transmission view also, because all the traditional views of education is the notion that you transmit a certain knowledge, a certain view, a certain content to the student.

you're the teacher and you have this content and you're giving it to the, that's like the traditional view of education and there's been pushback in recent years in philosophy of education and trying to understand education and apply more participative methods of learning

that go against that, but really the view of education as transmitting knowledge, I think is really closely connected to this transmission view of communication.

And I think that's not a particularly good view of applying pedagogic practices.

I think that's really limited.

And they haven't waited for our paper in 2021 to do that.

But yeah, there's been in recent years a lot of work in philosophy of education and trying to push back against this transmission view of education and trying to put like having classrooms that are more interactive and in which there's

active learning from the students, and they're not just receiving knowledge, but they're gaining skills by acting in a learning environment in which they're agents and not just patients.

So I think that's something that's also useful to discuss.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, we had some great times discussing instructionism and interactionism in the context of skillful performance and motor commands.

And the discussion was, are descending motor commands representational?

Are they instructions to be carried out?

Or are they interactions that are being engaged in that might not necessitate taking a representationalist view?

And in this same spirit and strength of the active inference framework that we can talk about patterns across systems, here is instructionism and interactionism in a very natural setting of the ecological experience of learning.

And one can take various

critiques or angles on like tabula rasa or blank slate we don't need to endorse the view however what it implies quite directly is that there's a canvas and things are added sedimented on the canvas and one can say that some writing is on the canvas or it's a different shape or

those are specifying the metaphor, but fundamentally the knowledge accretion model of education, the opt-in model, as well as the ignorance destructive model of education, which is a kind of counterpoint to we're going to add good knowledge.

And then the shadow of that is we're going to destroy bad knowledge and unlearn.

Both of those are like working in the riverbed.

we going to sediment this way or let's modify these sediments it's still seeing the product of education which is a totally reasonable focus for industries and sectors that are focused on the products of education the products of education for the student the certificate

and the social recognition and status thereof, or just the outcomes of education for the system, like amount of people with a certain professional training and what is the river that is sedimenting or de-sedimenting that can get dropped?

And that's the active turn in education, learning by doing, as if even a lecture is doing something.

You're looking, you're hearing, you're touching.

So it is quite an exciting area to explore how interactionism in settings that have been considered educational, conventionally or unconventionally, what the implications are.

And I'm sure that next week we'll be able to explore many more implications as we kind of have crested one hill and look towards some implications.

But how do you communicate differently with what you know and have done in philosophy and science of communication?

Remy.


SPEAKER_05:
I think I'm really bad at applying my own theory of communication.

I think I give a class at UCAM and I always like I'm angry at myself because I really like just automatically applies this really

classical way of transmitting knowledge.

And I'm always angry at myself because I don't apply enough, I think, my own ideas about communication.

But I think I should do more to provide better evidence for my own theory of communication.


SPEAKER_01:
It's funny, I'm sure it'll be a lifelong process for all of us because we have priors that are templated on the forms that we know.

That's what was and what is and what may be.

And then there's that expected free energy, like active communication perspective that

And are we going to select only from yesterday's menu or can new dishes and new approaches be added in that we may want to select from?

Are there new modalities or approaches to communication in educational settings or otherwise that are now

authorized or um enabled by this perspective i'm sure we'll continue to discuss it but let's just say this paper becomes a fundamental reading for a communications department or for a early life learning group like a public school what is different

in the short term with the structural constraints and opportunities that exist with someone thinking and acting differently and then over slower time scales the co-evolution of those individual affordances cognitive and bodily affordances and the kinds of systemic alterations to the education architecture dean i know you'll have a thought on that


SPEAKER_04:
part of what you were speaking to is simply asking as Remy did at the beginning of his paper, and then what happens, but then not racing to provide the answers.

It's essentially,

opening, opening up the space.

And then, and then what happens might mean that you, you move out of the classroom and you, and you take the classroom migrates to, to the lookout on Mount Royal or you, or you, you simply don't intervene.

You, you kind of let the ecology work itself through.

Now that can be very scary at first, because of course you're supposed to be the one herding the cats, but if you let the herd piece of it off,

and see what cats do when allowed to sort of free think.

I think, I don't know that it provides the absolute specific answer, but it will provide you that joint action opportunity if you're really truly looking for affordances as opposed to specifics.

And again, I think even in an academic setting,

I don't think it's too far of a stretch to say affordances matter, and we would like to see if people can exercise those things.

We just don't want to get too crazy, right?


SPEAKER_01:
Norms and guidelines for affordances matter.

I don't know what else to say, but certainly there are things that one would prefer not to see occur in a learning setting.

Right.

Easy to enumerate.

And then there are the known beneficial affordances or phenomena, and then part of interactionism seems to leave that unknown unknown quadrant open and to allow for

individual or for collective outcomes that are surprising and maybe not explicitly navigated towards or planned for, but how to leave the unknown unknowns open while de-risking unknowns and knowns

is a challenge and so again it's natural to see where in the de-risking imperative we de-risk everything and that introduces like second order risks and it closes the door on what may have even been the purpose i mean what's the safest car the one that doesn't move

in that one limited local optimization of like reducing the number of high speed collisions or something like that.

Yes, Remy?


SPEAKER_05:
So on that topic, I think there's Brunberg and Rydveld and Keverstein talk about an optimal grip on the field of affordance.

I didn't say it, I think, but their work was a great inspiration for my own work.

uh so they talk about an optimal grip on a field of affordances and there's like you're always trying to stay in the point where you're there's like the relevant affordances are open to you but you stay you stay at the same time open to switching to other affordances and you're trying to

in that process of interaction with your field of affordances, continually minimize your own free energy, but there's risk in that.

So there's the idea, the example that they give is the boxer who's trying to maintain a certain distance to its opponent, because at that distance, if the boxer is farther, it cannot reach with its punches.

If it's too close, maybe there's less impact and maybe it's more open to being hit.

So there's like this optimal distance to which the boxer has flexible, multiple opportunities that the boxer can take.

And I think that's what we're always trying to do.

We're trying to get to this optimal grip of the field of affordances in which there's multiple affordances that

afford the free energy minimization and that we want to take that and that's obviously something that can be hard to do but we have through our skillful interaction with the environment we learn these kinds of gradients where should we go

in in our environment in order to find these optimal grips and like you're speaking about car i guess depending on your skill you might want a different car to get this optimal grip on the on the on the road if you're like a fast driver who likes to go to go really fast you might want a faster car but if you go too fast then you're getting an accident so there's depending on our skills there's different

optimal grips on our field of affordance and something was really afraid to go fast might go with like really slow car and that would be it's that person's optimal grip on the road that would be the this car would provide it for this person so that made me think about that


SPEAKER_01:
So some comments on optimal grip.

Thanks for bringing in Jelle et al's work.

It's really nice that that was brought in even several years ago into the active inference literature.

And if we're imagining a tactile grip, actual prehension, if we're not in a grip strength competition,

where one might just monotonically prefer more grip.

If we were like on a playground and we're going to be swinging amongst bars, then the optimal grip has to satisfy us being able to keep us off the hot lava, but also it's not permanent.

And there's a level of engagement that is not as strong as we could possibly grasp, but gets the job done, keeps us in the air, and lets us easily and without repetitive stress grab the next bar.

So...

How might that be reflected in some of the formalisms of active inference?

Well, for expected and variational free energy, there are two terms.

One is reflecting a divergence minimization, and one is keeping the door open with uncertainty about future outcomes.

So in that balance is like the divergence minimization of the boxer,

but then also there's something about keeping it open.

And then it makes me wonder about optimal grip with some of these educational and academic ideas.

What is the optimal grip in a given context of thermodynamics?

Could it be the optimal grip in a easygoing, chill, qualitative conversation to know that thermodynamics has to do with things like temperature,

And now we're going to talk about something adjacent to it.

That was just one bar on the playground to jump amongst.

And so what does optimal grip look and feel like, and what are the ecologies that support different individuals' optimal grip on different concepts so that

people can be engaging and interacting in a way that is natural and seamless for them.

Yeah, Remy?


SPEAKER_05:
I think there's a case where you're talking about the tactile grips.

There can be an optimal grip in that sense.

And I think in the communicative context, we can also see, for instance, the case that we talked about, the example of moving furniture together.

There's this optimal grip where, okay, you're holding the couch.

And you can feel it slipping sometimes and you're like, oh, damn, I must get a better grip.

But in that case, you have an interactive component and you have a communicative component because you can say when you're feeling your grip slip, you can say stop to the other person to, okay, so the other person can stop moving and then you can get a better grip on the couch.

So this aspect is that the idea that we tried to put in the paper when we're talking about cooperative communication is that

there can be an optimal grip from a collective, from an interactive perspective, and communication is a way of achieving that, of achieving an optimal grip by a group of individuals on the context of their joint action.

And so, for example, if I...

moving a couch with somebody and i feel my grip slipping i can say oh stop because it will help it will stop the the couch from moving and then it will help me get a better grip in a literal and a figurative sense on the couch so that we can further advance our joint action of moving the couch thank you blue


SPEAKER_02:
So something else like where is an interesting place where we have grip, where we don't always think about it is in the mental capacity.

So like when you, they talk about overthinking.

So like you think something you can underthink, underprepare, and then you can also overthink.

So there's like also this optimal space and just as a practitioner of meditation for a long time,

um when you're meditating on something it's the same so like it's like this over focus like you have to hold it there the object of your meditation but like if you squeeze too tight like if you focus on it too intently it goes away it pops out um and lots of things are like i mean even if you literally grip something if you squeeze it too tight it will pop out of your hand just the force and and um the the laws of physics make it that way so i just wanted to bring that up


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Blue.

One note on the couch moving example.

It's quickly become our favorite example.

We should definitely do some visuals next time.

It's an interesting example because the communication can be representational and linguistic.

Wait, I don't have enough room for my right hand to come through this doorway.

It's very transmission view compatible.

But also, there's a direct...

continuous time communication through the mechanics of the couch that are synchronously being experienced in real time and mediated through artifacts and through the niche itself.

Linguistic communication has a linear, sequential, and turn-taking aspect.

Active listening is a practice that

from the point of view of the active listener whether they speak or not brings that real time and continuous engagement to the discourse even if they're listening to a recording or whether they're participating or listening in a conversation

However, it feels like something really important to unpack as we look towards the linguistic direction to differentiate settings where like through digital stigmergy and note-taking or through physical objects like a rowing team or the moving the couch, there's a mediation

through the environment continuously, as opposed to something like a correspondence chess game or a phone call where there's a linear turn-taking sedimentation, even though there may still be a continuous unfolding of experience for the agents.

So that is a very rich area to look at.

Dean?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, you're jumping in and saying things that I want to say.

So we're obviously some sort of simpaticos going on communication-wise.

What I was going to say is I was going to kind of, now I'm going to build off what you said and what Blue said.

One of the things that we used to always bring to people's attention in terms of their field of importance is that when you're having to explain something, you have to take your time.

You have to slow down.

I was working with younger people.

You have to slow down.

But the other part of it is you have to know when to hit the hand up reaction button in the Zoom call.

You have to time your take for full effect.

So you have to know both of those relativities when we're talking about communication, because if you are, you can show your passion by constantly interrupting another person and actually do yourself a disfavor.

So the first thing was always slow down.

The second thing was always think about when you're putting up your hand.

Think about when it's your turn.

Allow sometimes for there to be a pregnant pause.

I know Daniel's very gifted at this.

There's lots and lots of times as the moderator, he could just fill in the space.

But he's really, really good at sometimes letting the communication happen when nothing is said.

So I'm going back to what he was asking earlier is, can we signal something by not saying something?

And I didn't jump in then, but...

I was kind of hoping to be able to explain that before we have to sign off today, because that's a perfect example of actually doing the signaling without manipulating the symbols per se.


SPEAKER_01:
Interesting stuff.

Does anyone have any final thoughts in this dot one?

Yes, please, Remy.


SPEAKER_05:
Just quickly, the idea that there's like a skill in when to intervene, speak too much, speak not enough.

It's like all this dimension, what is called pragmatics in linguistics.

And there's a really clear example of the notion of an optimal grip.

Again, in terms of distance, there's an appropriate distance to which you must stand to your interlocutor.

And that varies in function of culture.

So if you're really in some culture and some for some person, they can be like really close to you and you're you're uncomfortable for.

But for them, it might be their their optimal grip in this communicative interaction for their for others.

Maybe you're you're you must be farther.

But then if you're too far, then you might hear bad though.

have a less good understanding of what this person is saying.

So there's this optimal grip also in the pragmatics of the interaction that, yes, I think that was a good point.


SPEAKER_01:
Optimal grip in space and time and meaning, many spaces for a conversation.

Are you intimately familiar and perturbing and six inches away?

Or are you yelling purely strategic, impersonal information from across the field?

A lot of different ecologies, a lot of different agents, so a lot of different communications.

Blue or Dean, if you have any other thoughts.

Otherwise, that brings us to a very nice end of 48.1.

And I'm sure it'll be a great discussion to continue next week.


SPEAKER_02:
Just thanks for providing us with such beefy, juicy stuff to talk about.

I really enjoyed the paper and having you here.


SPEAKER_04:
It's great.

I completely concur, Remy.

It was a fantastic paper.

And as I said, there's nothing that I find more intriguing when somebody writes something down, not as providing all the answers, but as opening up all these questions that we've been able to share today.

So I'm very happy that you were able to join us.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Thank you all.


SPEAKER_03:
See you next week.

## hIIyYu2C-SI

SPEAKER_02:
hello welcome it is september 14 2022 and we're in actin live stream number 48.2 welcome to the active inference institute we're a participatory online institute that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at some of the links on the slide this is a recorded and an archived live stream so please provide feedback so we can improve our work

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and will follow video etiquette for live streams.

Head over to ActiveInference.org to learn more about how to participate in learning groups and projects such as the live streams and others.

Well, we are in our third discussion around this paper, Communication as Socially Extended Active Inference and Ecological Approach to Communicative Behavior from 2021 by Remy Tisson and Pierre Poirier.

And last week in 48.1 with the very same fellows in the conversation,

We had some explorations into different aspects of the paper.

Perhaps we can each say hello again and something, if we want to, that we remembered from last week or that we'd like to explore today, and then we can just be right in it.

So I'm Daniel, I'm in California, and I'm interested to look towards the latter half, the back nine,

of the paper and see where we go which is kind of what we do in dot twos usually and i just have a feeling that the exit from the slide on this one may put our communication and situatedness in a different place than where we were before and i'll pass it to blue

I heard the initial part and then lost it, Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
Can you hear me now?

How about that?

I am Blue and I'm a researcher in New Mexico and I am excited to dig back into this paper.

I think we left a lot of things to wonder about last week and yeah, excited to get to maybe more into the meat of the paper itself as opposed to just discussing tangential ideas.

And I'll pass to Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Blue.

I'm Dean.

I'm here in Calgary.

I'm interested in seeing whether or not the big roadmap that I think that this paper provides also can be explained as a big score, as in a kind of a musical analogy, because I'm really interested in the interplay or the interaction between orchestration and arrangements.

Yesterday, there was a math stream where our guest was really good at sort of

describing the arrangement part of what's going on in active inference potentially.

And so I'm really kind of interested in looking at that because I think from a transmission versus ecological standpoint, we're kind of looking at the difference between mono and stereo.

So I'm wondering if we should maybe look at that through that lens as well.

I'll pass it to Remy.


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, I'm Rémy Tizan.

I'm a researcher at UCAM in Montreal and I'm the author of the paper.

And I'm looking forward to discussing the paper more in detail and maybe go to

towards the later parts of the paper and maybe talk a bit about language and linguistic communication, which is a big piece that is looming behind the paper, but it's not really that much discussed in it.

But I think that's what any account of communication aims to go towards.

So I hope we'll have the chance to discuss it a little bit.


SPEAKER_02:
let's go to language it's what we're using among other modalities but we are using language and so that sounds like a great place to start so what was in the paper regarding language and what was not in the paper regarding language


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, so the idea was to open a window at the end of the paper towards language, so we talked a bit about conventional forms of communication and we know that most people believe that language is conventional, so we tried to tie

are the ideas that we put forward in the paper with work by Ramsted in the paper of 2016 about conventional affordances.

So we tried to say that

the conventional nature of the language comes from the conventional affordances that are generated in the communicative interaction.

So that's a way to point towards language in our account.

We talked a bit about different types of acts of language, so informative or declarative and interrogative, imperative.

So these kinds of distinctions, we try to account for them in our framework.

These are various parts of what we consider to be language that we tried to treat in the paper, but there's a lot of things that we couldn't discuss, obviously, because it was like in a small section and at the end, we cannot explain all of language, even in a paper or in a book.

So in a small section, that would be obviously way too ambitious.


SPEAKER_02:
what are we looking to explain or what is needed for language to be encompassed or at home or native to the ecological view rather than the transmission view or in addition to the transmission view read me first then others


SPEAKER_00:
A point that is interesting is that the transmission view comes with a presupposition about what has to be explained by a theory of

of language, it comes with the idea that we have to account for the meaning of the expressions that are used first.

So we have to understand what are the meanings of the words that we use and how these meanings are encoded in the brains and the heads of the

of the speakers of a language but that that's uh misleading from the point of view that we adapt in the paper so this it's kind of hard to say uh what we have to explain in order to explain language because for so long uh we have bait in the we have been in the the

the transmission view.

And so we are used to believe that in order to explain language, we have to explain these kinds of contents that language transmits.

But if we do away with these contents, it's kind of open the question of how do we account for language becomes kind of open in a new way.

And I don't really know exactly what we have to account for in order to account for language because it kind of changes our view of what language is.

So I think there's a lot of open space in this question of how do we account for language if we do away with the transmission view.


SPEAKER_02:
Dean or Blu?


SPEAKER_01:
What do you got, Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
So I just was looking back over the paper.

I think it might be useful to maybe delineate the specific types of language, interrogative versus imperative, and the specificities underlying each one of those right now.

That would be maybe a good place to just dive into the meat of the paper.


SPEAKER_02:
how can we see these different types of speech speech acts as shaping the field of affordances what is being done ecologically with these different speech behaviors as opposed to the

enabling aspect of the transmission view.

I think they're fairly clear within the transmission view what these statements are about.

And as you pointed out, it's almost like hard to escape viewing what these speech behaviors are by the content.

Like if not their content, quite literally, then what would they be about?

Even talking about what they're about.

But informative would be sharing a proposition or some...

reducing someone's uncertainty about the state of something in the world I'm feeling this way or that weighs this much um and so on or other statements because indeed they're defined by the content and their structure so ecologically Remy what might these types of speech behaviors be doing


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, these types of acts of language are well accounted for in the transmission view, but there are some questions that remain about the imperative form of communication because it's

it's not clear that imperative communication can be understood as a form of transmission of content because we have the feeling that when we comment something or we request something we are not transmitting information or we are not

aiming at changing the mental states of the person that we are talking to.

We are aiming at making them do something in the world directly.

So there's kind of a mismatch there, it seems.

So obviously,

the the the people in the transmission view will have an answer they will say that like uh when i have some for instance the desire or the intention that something is the case i then my an imperative act of communication is my transmitting this intention or this desire to the person who then has this desire or this intention and then can

bring about the state of affairs that I intend to achieve but it's not I'm not sure obviously you can delve in the details but I'm not sure that's exactly what we want to do when we state when we produce an imperative act of language obviously we won't

We don't just want that the person has the intention of doing something.

We want the thing done in the world.

So I believe that the imperative kind of communication is not really well accounted for in the transmission view.

And what's interesting is that, in a way, the imperative form of communication is like the basic form of communication in our framework, because what communication is, is acting through the behavior of somebody else by affecting its field of affordance.

we can go back to the forms of animal communication that we described earlier in the paper, and these can all be considered to be imperative forms of communication, or proto-imperative forms of communication.

So that's the starting point.

And we achieve these acts on the behavior of somebody else by altering their field of affordances to make them do something.

But how do we account for informative acts of communication?

And an idea that we put forward in the paper is that

The kind of acts of communication that we consider to be informative will be acts that aim to construct or alter a shared field of affordances in a way that is more durable than just an immediate imperative act of language.

So what we are doing, we are changing the layout of the context that we take to be relevant to our joint action.

And these changing of affordances do not have to be immediately acted upon.

I can say, oh, there's something in the context that's relevant.

It does not necessarily call for action immediately, but it's something that is like in the background of our context of action.

And so it changes the shared field of affordance, but it's not directly applied.

soliciting an action from the interlocutor, as would be the case for the imperative active language.

So in a way, it's like as if in the beginning, an informative active language is like a long term imperative or a dispositional imperative.

We put something in the context, we say, oh, that's relevant.

We can act on it at some point, but it's not necessarily immediately to be acted upon.

So that's how we can

like put the the the idea that okay we can change our context of action what we take to be relevant in the context of action and we can come back to it later when when it's relevant and act on it but it's not something that is to be acted upon immediately and so that's like the the the the the difference uh between imperative and informative begins to to to be uh

discerned there where an imperative is like i'm i'm saying that this so this affordance should be acted upon immediately and informative is like i'm putting this in the context it changes the layout of affordances for instance uh there would be i i don't know how to how to come up with an example but if i inform you of something i'm putting i'm changing the layout of the affordance that we take for for granted in our in the context of our interaction and it changes

uh in the long term the interaction and it can like drive the interaction in various ways but it's not something to be acted uh directly immediately so that's the the the basic distinction and that's like the the beginning of a distinction between informative and imperative and i i can say a few words about interrogative too

So as we said, communication is typically acting through the behavior of somebody else by altering its field of affordance.

And interrogative, it's interesting because it's exactly the distinction between imperative and interrogative is

really similar to the distinction between pragmatic value and epistemic value in active inference.

So for instance, when we produce an action that aims to maximize pragmatic value, we are trying to, for instance,

to make the state of the world correspond to a prediction of our directive model.

And when we make something which is guided by epistemic value, what we try to do is we're trying to reduce uncertainty about our niche, for instance.

But so in a way, so for instance, when I'm eating something, I'm maximizing my

my pragmatic value because I'm, for instance, reducing a prediction error that I'm hungry and I want to.

So that's like a basic example.

But when I'm exploring my environment, when I'm making a visual saccade to explore my niche, so that would be an epistemic

action, so to speak.

So interrogative acts of language are exactly analog to epistemic actions, but they are epistemic actions through the behavior of somebody else.

So instead of, for instance, by myself exploring the niche, exploring the field of affordance, I can produce this act that will make the other person disclose to me an element of the field of affordance that

can then reduce my uncertainty about what is the context of our action so that's really the distinction between imperative and interrogative is really to be understood along the line of the distinction between pragmatic value and epistemic value so that's a beginning to an introduction to these these distinctions in the in in the types of acts of language


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Jeremy.

You totally read my mind there about what I wanted to elaborate on, even though my question was very poorly framed.

Yeah, I think that that's very useful for, especially in the goal-directed aspect of imperative versus interrogative or informative.

Like, what

how they interact with our, maybe we don't have a joint goal versus we do have a joint goal, or the goal is to develop some shared state of a shared mental state.

So that was really helpful.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Another note is that the informative behavior

is like the the base class of the transmission view because it seems to be like it's updating one on the details like what if i'm saying there is a gallon of milk in the fridge truly what else could be conveyed other than the content so it seems like the most natural and then there are specific kinds of content like um

sharing the content that you have a question or sharing the content that you would like somebody to act and so in that way as you described many forms of speech behavior are well accounted for in the transmission view and that accounting is actually kind of a call back to that math stream four with david spivak about accounting systems so these are like accounting models um and then you highlighted that the imperative

in the inactive and ecological view on communication that the imperative is perhaps the basic form of communication.

And that can be seen developmentally through a child and the kinds of communications that they might engage in.

as well as from an evolutionary perspective with the kinds of audio or chemical or physical stigmergy and marks that different kinds of creatures use to communicate within and across species.

So those are action-oriented communications as we can then say all action-oriented communication or all communication we can say is action-oriented in an analogous way.

So then imperative becomes the base class.

shaping the field of affordances if that's what the ecological view on communication is is going to be most natural with kinds of expressions that we can say are imperative and then informative updates are like one step removed from direct action requests so saying turn the handle to the left is an imperative if you said

I'm going to inform you about two things.

The handle can be turned to the left.

And if this happens, you may want to turn the handle.

Those are breaking down a capacity for action into sequential or modular or recomposable statements.

But those statements are like hiding the consequences of action.

And so in that way, we can have an action-oriented view on communication

and then see different kinds of other behavior as like modified or truncated or censored or hidden action modification.

And that may or may not entail needing to even explain how meaning is represented, transmitted, or received.

Yes, Remy?


SPEAKER_00:
That's exactly it.

That's really the idea.

You explained it very well.

Another example that we often use with Pierre is the joint action of cooking a meal.

with various people so like we an example we used in the last discussion the example of moving a couch so another example maybe to to change a bit our intuitions about communication so with people cooking a meal together we can suppose that some people uh some of the suppose that we're in the kitchen of one of the the person and the other doesn't know exactly where all the things are and so a person the person could say there's flour in the in the

in the cupboard or in the pantry and saying that that's an informative act of language but that could that's like that might be a hidden imperative in so far as at some point in the interaction in the cooking of the meal the the flour might be needed and at this point

this alteration of the field of affordances, this appearance of the flower as an affordance in the context might drive the action of the person when the flower is needed at a certain point, the person will have this affordance in its field and will go to seek it if it's necessary at that point.

So the informative is, as I said, something like a dispositional or long-term imperative, something of a hidden imperative

uh that can drive behavior in the long term so so it's like at the beginning this distinction is more this a distinction of like is this affordance to be acted upon uh immediately by you or is it posed in the context and can like alter the dynamic without being directly acted upon immediately so that's how the the basic distinction is drawn and yeah i i

I think that's how we try to account for informative without describing it as transmitting a content or an information.

So that's the idea.

And I think that you explained it very well in your explanation.


SPEAKER_02:
Good.

Yeah, it's very interesting.

It's just another...

consequence of centering action so many things that the pragmatic turn pragmatism earlier than the so-called pragmatic turn in the neurosciences and all of the developments in cognitive science in many cases it's been like an information or an inference view yielding to an action view and that has just played out differently on different frontiers

and it feels like in a way language is like the stronghold of information views because it's like so amenable to syntactic and discourse analysis and compositionality and all these features that we see in formal models and in computer systems

that it feels like, oh, maybe all the funny stuff that people do and say, we'll figure that one out too.

Blue and then Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
So I just wonder about like mimicry, which is something that we see like in the animal kingdom a lot and like whether that is imperative.

I mean, sometimes I guess it can be imperative, like watch me do this and then you do it, but not always.

So sometimes it's like, you know, an animal will see another animal do something and then they try it too, right?

And so what, I don't know, I just don't know how to like,

in the terms of teaching and learning and like shared goal directedness, like what is maybe the role of mimicry and how does that, like, what is the effect on the field of affordances?

Does it just open up?

Like you see someone do something and then your field of affordances opens to that is also possible for me, or does that not have maybe like a semantic analog?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
that's a really good question and often people who adopt the transmission view will adopt the view that the main driver of the evolution of language in human societies was the transmitting of of knowledge and of skills for instance and of various types of activities so that's like a

a clear example where it seems that the transmission view has a story to say if we take for granted that imitating somebody or

or learning something to somebody is in effect transmitting a knowledge or a certain kind of mental state or cognitive state so that there's clearly something interesting there for the transmission view but I think that an alternative possible analysis you just heard

at it is the idea that when you're interacting with somebody, specifically somebody of your own species, seeing this person do something can open new affordances for yourself.

For instance, if I see somebody that looks like me do something, I have learned that when somebody that looks like me does something, usually maybe with a little bit of effort, I can do it too.

Somebody doing something is a way of opening up new affordances for me and trying to achieve it.

So in many cases, mimicry will not necessarily be communicative.

That is because an organism can do something without having no communication.

is not communicating nothing to anybody, but it happens that somebody else watches it and imitates it.

So in that case, there's not necessarily communication.

But in cases where there is communication involved, I think we can analyze it just as you said, that is saying that

uh the the action of the organism opens up a new affordance for the the the person who's watching it doing it and usually in cases of explicit uh skill learning for instance the the the expert will like do the thing more deliberately more slowly more explicitly

to show what are the relevant movements that have to be made in order to achieve.

So that's like making more salient the kind of movement that has to be made to succeed in performing the skill.

So I think that's a way that we can understand this kind of skill learning in the transformation of the affordances that are available to the person that's receiving the communication.


SPEAKER_02:
that's how i would i i think i would analyze it one simple uh example kind of building on this making certain actions deliberate then dean interested for your thoughts even showing something deliberately

verbally calling attention or just the position of the body for a physical skill it shapes the field of affordances specifically where somebody can look so if you're like okay I'm gonna swing the bat and then now I'm going to show you what my hand you know this isn't usually how I do it but I'm going to show you how I was holding it at that time you have shaped their field of oculomotor affordances in and that is what enables their generative model to update

and so nowhere in that account is I'm transmitting that this is to be held between these two fingers let alone counterfactuals like here's what you do if your hand is slippery but by bodily posture including vocal box bodily posture we can have an integrated account of

mimicry, skill transfer, again, transfers playing way too strongly into a transmission view, but skill resonance or something similar that helps recognize the cognitive entities learning process.


SPEAKER_01:
Dean?

Okay, well, I want to take what you're saying, but I'm going to put a little bit of a weird flex on it because I want to try to combine

Blue's pin and Remy's pin and Daniel's pin into one kind of question that comes back to the paper.

So like the last five minutes of the conversation has been focused on the act of and as typing when it pertains to language and communication.

And Blue bringing mimicry in is a form of as versus a lot of the emphasis in the paper, which is on the of.

of communication and language.

So here's my question.

I went back and read the paper again, and I caught myself asking, what do I hear when I'm reading something or I'm listening to someone?

What do I hear as both processor and the producer, as we mentioned off camera, an arranger of something being signaled, which I'm picking up on and decoding.

So rather than just leave it there, I'll park that for a second, because I think that's the nut of what I want to ask.

As a processor and a producer, as an arranger, I can hear things in mono.

I can hear things in stereo.

I can even hear things, if I go to my Apple Music, in spatial audio.

So that is a field of affordances question as opposed to a source.

of affordances question.

And if I only limit myself to the source, I'm going to be asking only of type questions.

Right?

So if I want to stay in the as of, if I want to be able to hold up two things at once at a minimum, the stereo or the spatial, that's when I get into the ecological, even if it's specific ecological, because I'm not collapsing down to a single source as my

point of contact, which then leads me to ask the fact that communication can be formed as an of types, meaning mono, stereo, spatial, mimicry, interrogation.

The fact that it can be broken out into those things, does that introduce self-production into the self-processing in your paper?

Because I know there's a heavy emphasis on the of,

on the processing, but I wonder if you keep the as, when Blue brings it up or when Daniel brings it up, if we're keeping it on that, even a specific ecological level, are we not, when we hear something, producers as well?


SPEAKER_02:
What are we producing?


SPEAKER_01:
I have no idea, but I know I hear something even when I read what you're typing.

I'm not just hearing the tappity-tap.

I'm hearing something.

We are produce.

It's changing.

I'm hearing that, not reading that.

If I incorporate that, what am I doing?

I'm not the expert on communication, so I wonder what the expert can tell me about that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's a good question.

Yeah, I'm not sure what to say about that.


SPEAKER_02:
We'll go first, and then we'll continue.


SPEAKER_03:
So I wonder if what you're hearing, Dean, has anything to do with the internal monologue, right?

So like, as you are reading something, then you are also hearing something, right?

And so it's like, there's this internal, I mean, like, I have a very, I'm a talker person.

And so I like, I have a strong internal monologue, like all the time running, like even getting ready in the morning, okay, I need to get my shoes and

get my purse and my keys and I have to pack my lunch and like all these things, right?

Like that happens.

So I'm constantly hearing that, like as if I'm saying it maybe to myself, even though I'm not speaking.

But I wonder what, you know, so I definitely am a producer of whatever I'm reading.

Like I reproduce it.

I reproduce it though, right?

So I reproduce it in my own mind, in my own internal monologue.

But I wonder, like, I know not everyone has this internal monologue.

And so what, is it then the same?

For the people that don't perhaps have this internal monologue.

I mean, maybe they carry around a picture of all the things that they need to get ready in the morning.

So yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And I think you bring up a good point.

Is it a monologue?

Is it a stereo log?

Is it a quadraphonic log for some people?

I mean, I mean, there was an availability way back when, maybe even before some of you were born.

there was quadraphonic sound.

I remember the Who album in quadraphonic sound.

And like to my simple ears, I didn't understand what that even meant.

Just because they were able to break it out into four parts didn't change what I was both producing and processing.

So, but the fact that we can type it, like not type it out, but literally turn it into types,

is the part where I don't really have the background to be able to explain how that ability, that field of affordances as opposed to examining this as a single source of affordance changes the communication game.

Because it certainly does speak to mimicry and what we can and cannot pick up.

It certainly speaks to Daniel's point about what happens when layers

appear and disappear because we narrow down what we're picking up on versus have both of our ears working even though we think it's our eyes that are doing all the circadian, right?

So again, I'm not trying to ask the impossible question.

I'm just curious in the sense of producer and processor and what that arrangement is

dependent upon what the, because Daniel brought it up in the last live stream, circumstances matter.

So, but as a hearer, I wonder if we know enough about ourselves to really be able to give this anything more than, as Remy kindly pointed out in the paper, give this more than sort of a big road map

view if we are taking context into consideration.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

Rami?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think the discussion about internal monologue is really interesting.

There's a lot of things that you said, Dean, that are, I think, really interesting.

But I want to go back to the idea of the monologue.

And there are some people who believe that, like Chomsky, who believe that language is not even for communication.

It's about structuring thought.

And so there are people who believe that

the language is first and foremost something that is a property of the structure of our thoughts and not a property of systems of communication and so there's this idea that like the

the the the inner monologue comes first and then comes the communication of this inner monologue in the in in communication so we have this basic a that is once uh once more inherent in the the transmission view that we have our train of thought we are we have our our uh

the inner speech that we have in our heads and then we translate this inner speech in overt speech that is then taken by somebody else.

And I think that this gets the priority wrong.

between outer speech and inner speech.

And there's been a lot of work in philosophy by, notably, Wilfrid Sellars and by others in psychology, like Vygotsky, who say that the first form of speech is overt speech that is then internalized

in in that becomes like um that becomes inner but first in the beginning there's only overt speech a child that learns language does not have an inner speech there's only outer speech that is expressed directly the child speaks the child do things with his words in its environment and does not directly automatically as the uh corresponding inner monologue in its head and there's a process that's really interesting i think

that is uh that where the we see that beginning to happen where the child speaks to itself alone when there's nobody else around and so there's this transition where language is used in communicative interaction and at some point the child use a language alone and there's a question of why why does it do and and i think that our view of communication is really um

interestingly linked with views of inner monologue as self-queuing or self-regulation.

And so the child can auto-regulate its field of affordance when it's alone, when there's nobody else around.

and in time this inner the outer uh uh for this outer monologue but alone monologue uh becomes overt because the the child learns to not necessarily produce the the the sound that correspond to the producing of these acts and there's there's this integration that's there's this internalization of

outer discourse that becomes inner discourse and there's a lot of cute anecdotes about that my nephew is uh i i have a nephew the son of my my sister and he's like when he's uh he's uh about to go to sleep he's in his bed and uh every night he's like rehearsing the events that happen in the day and he's saying like the the the

the comments that that he the the rules the norms that he heard in the day oh i don't have to do that i must do that and so it's like we are saying what happened in the day so that this outer monologue when he's alone in his bed is like the beginning of inner thought we're seeing his thoughts

uh out in the open and at some point this inner this outer monologue will become internalized and we we won't hear the his his thoughts uh out in the open but i think that's like the process that it takes and there's also the idea another point that we we for instance when we read usually we read

uh silently so we we read what's written and we have the the corresponding inner monologue but it's known that in ancient times when people were reading usually they were reading automatically allow loud loudly and they it's it took a training

in order to be able to read without speaking the words.

So like in middle age, and I'm not perfectly sure if it's strictly accurate, we should verify it.

But I believe that's true.

It seems that I heard that.

So it seems that first there's the outer monologue, the outer dialogue, and then there's the outer monologue, and then there's the

inner monologue that comes after that and I think that's more the true direction of priority between inner monologue and outer monologue.


SPEAKER_02:
Luke?


SPEAKER_03:
So I just have a cute anecdote about learning to talk.

So I have two kids and they're super different.

My son did as your nephew did, Remy, like would be in his crib talking to himself, talking to his stuffed animals and kind of recreating events, right?

In a similar way.

He also babbled too.

a lot, like a lot, like just saying nothing from the time he was tiny and has an incredible vocabulary.

I mean, now he's six, but people are like, wow, how old is this kid?

I mean, he's reading at three and just is like very, very verbal.

And my daughter is super different.

So she did not really babble, but she signed like crazy.

And they both went to the same school.

They both teach them

the same signs like to have say milk and cracker and cheese and you know bathroom and all the things right so so like they both went to the same daycare same niche environment and she picked up the signing much more than my son ever did he used maybe one or two signs she's like 20 like i had to go learn the signs and before she could sign she would just like stand in the kitchen and scream like just unable to communicate whatever it was that she wanted

And it's so odd.

Like they're, they're, they're just like two totally different kids, but she, when she was learning Chinese, I had a parent teacher conference with the T and like, they've both been learning Chinese now they're in private school and they've been learning for like eight years.

So when she was first starting to learn, she wouldn't speak in class and the teacher and I had a conference and the teacher said like, I am, am concerned about your daughter.

She doesn't participate in class.

Like she doesn't have to take Chinese.

It's not mandatory.

If you wanted to put her in a different class or she could have a silent reading period.

And I was like,

Oh, so it occurred to me, like, and I knew that she, and because she didn't babble and like, I would, somebody handed her a lollipop.

She was like two and she, I said, say thank you.

And she did the sign for it.

But, but I mean, she really did not speak, like would not form clear words unless she knew she could say them perfectly.

And so I sent her to tutoring with the Chinese tutor, like just twice, three times.

And then it began, like, so she was like listening.

Can I repeat this?

Can I engage with this word?

correctly and and she just was very more much more careful in that but both kids as soon as they could talk talked in their sleep like crazy anyway there's my cute story nice stories


SPEAKER_02:
The development of the self-cueing and self-speaking is very interesting.

Even earlier on in behavioral analysis and behaviorism, like in B.F.

Skinner's work, there's extensive exploration of how covert behavior

monologues and covert speech and societies of mind and then I guess more recently it's become better understood how electrical activity in the body and in the brain are still initiated during covert speech like it's not an audible speech but actually in various ways it still is embodied and then

this question of reading perhaps is another area where we're talking about in this language area what is similar or different with listening to speech participating in speech audibly is it different if it's read or Braille how does the modality and the media influence some of these things Dean


SPEAKER_01:
Again, I think the proportions of two ears to one mouth is something that we need to kind of really hold on to in this idea of single source and monologue versus what potentially is a stereologue in a field of affordances as opposed to a single source.

I don't know why we've been given, I don't know what advantages are given by having an ability to hear in stereo, but they must be better than having a single ear or a single reception site.

And yet we don't have two mouths.

So again, I think it's understandable why from a transmission point of view, the deliverer standpoint, we always collapse back to

a source, a single source.

But if we flip that and now think about it from the receiving standpoint, how does that change our sense of what communication is?

Because it doesn't change if I cover one of my ears or if I have an earbud in and it cancels.

And yet something fundamentally must change in terms of communication and the joint action.

Even if it's monologue in my own head versus dialogue,

or trialogue or quadrilogue.

Now, again, I haven't done any research to try to figure out what other people have done in terms of looking at that.

But to your point, though, Renee, in terms of let's even get past transmission, we're trying to get past the idea of what is being delivered and trying to gain a deeper appreciation of what is being heard.

So, Blue, I'll tell you a little story.

I have a loquacious son.

He's in his 30s now.

But he's actually, as he's gotten smarter and wiser, speaks less.

Like occasionally, he gets out of developing word salads that could serve an entire community.

And I find that really fascinating.

I don't have to comment on it.

It's just you notice that as people know more, maybe they sign more.

Maybe they find other ways to communicate.

to make their point and it goes back to that timing your take thing.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

There's so many references like the true way is the one that can't be spoken of or those who do, do and those who can't teach all these kinds of funny, you know, poking fun at different archetypes and so on and how that's related to wisdom.

The two ears and one mouth is

which you've been referencing throughout the conversations and the quadraphonic sound, quadrophenia, I'm sure it was amazing.

It is true that the enrichment and the spatial nature of heard sounds, soundscapes, it's like something that can't be turned off

Like the receiver, all of our receiving is bilateral.

Visual, nostrils and smell, proprioceptive is heavily multilateral, but it has a coarse bilateral symmetry.

But the mouth, as our action states, needs generative cohesion, right?

Perhaps.

Just a just-so story, but I don't know of any cases where there are... Now, there are some bodily sounds that are bilateral, like perhaps the vibration of a cricket.

So it's not that sound production can't be bilateral.

It's just that wherever sound production is localized on the sender,

When we highlight content and its transmission, where does that account begin?

It has to begin with the content and the representation in the sender.

And then you could ask whether it was fully or partially or deceptively recognized by the recipients, potentially.

when we censor the recipient's action but even calling them a recipient kind of puts them onto a back foot we're just centering the agent's engagement ecologically and they're interfacing with fields of affordances then we we do see that stereophonic enrichment of everything

And no matter how narrow or how many Shannon bits or Kolmogorov bits, it doesn't really matter because it's going to be unpacked in a generative model that brings in aspects that aren't and don't need to be in the signal and hence aren't or don't need to be in our account of the signaling.


SPEAKER_01:
Just think I'm trying to bring back the inference into the active inference here, because the active part is definitely the transmission piece.

So, you know, thank you for reinforcing that.

But I do wonder when we do bring the inference back, why are our sensing affordances, are those bilateral forms?

There must be some advantage to that.

And so is it, as Blue pointed out,

because of as, not just the heavy emphasis on the of.

What was the product of my transmission?

How am I pulling in this communication and what advantages are there to not getting strung out or hung up on the mono log, the single source?


SPEAKER_02:
One thing that makes me think about is in caricature disinfo representations of bug vision, insect vision, it will look like they're seeing many separate cells.

Whereas if one were just to take a breath and think about their own visual experience, we don't see two fields of view.

So it's like not really making sense why an insect would see multiple.

So the visual field,

because there's quote objects out there, we have all these different ways that we can talk about how we know that we're experiencing an integrated generative model, like the blind spot, the differences in visual acuity in the peripheral vision, color vision in the periphery, ocular motor saccades, and the way that attention is suppressed during saccading so that it's not causing us nausea.

All these features are really important and they point

beyond a photon transmission view a vision into this generative stereophonic vision and then in the audio setting having multiple oral uh orifices and also even covering them up like there's still transduction through the skull and so on um

We are also seeking to flesh out a generative model of sounds in our environment.

So if we cover our ears, that proprioception will help us understand that even if something sounds kind of quiet, we can recognize that it's still a loud noise.

Or if we have one ear in a pillow, we could recognize that something is happening even though if it is being heard differently on both sides.

So having multiple sensors is very compatible with a unified generative model experience because it forces one to abstract beyond any sensor reading.

you have one midline thermometer then that's your point estimate for temperature or you could have like a gaussian blur like i'm just less confident about the temperature further from my one central sensor but maybe i'm maybe it's a tight gaussian maybe it's very broad but this is the best estimate why would i have any other estimate centered anywhere else when you have two thermometers

now there's a generative modeling question about whether it's going to be a gaussian with a peak in the middle or whether you're going to have a peak more on one side and have it just go through the other depending on those sensor readings but at that point you're ending up with some distributions which if we think of that distribution as like what is experienced as like maybe the product of the sensing process that distributions enrichment is of a different type

And yet of a different simplicity than any number of sensor readings in terms of what their raw information are.

So it seems very relevant, this two ears, one mouth, not just for listening twice as much as we speak, but for listening twice as actively as we speak or something like that.

What do you think about census, Remy?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think that you explained it well.

Yeah, I think it's useful, as you said, to have multiple sensory channels that can be active because I think that's an argument from Howie in its book, in 2013 book on the predictive mind, I think.

He says that if you have a tribunal and you're trying to establish, for instance, the culpability of the

of a convict you you you hope that you have multiple independent sources of information because if these sources of information are influence each other you have a less reliable uh how do you say uh i i forget the world uh timo in english so i i forget the word but you have a less reliable um

information about the case.

So like it's useful from a reliability standpoint to have multiple independent source of information.

So that may be an explanation of why we have, that may be an explanation of also the relative modularity of perception.

So there are, we know that there are great limits to that modularity, but there is a certain degree of

independence in the different sensory modalities that we have.

So yeah, about the two here, obviously, I think maybe if we had, if our auditory sensory system was only devised to communicative interaction, maybe it would be okay to just have one here, one here, because we could like, we know who's talking to us.

And so we can direct our,

our sensory apparatus toward this communicative signal, but because we use our ears not just to attune to a communicative interaction, but also to know what's in our surrounding, it's clearly more useful to have a great

reception from information from anywhere around us.

So maybe if the audition was only about communication, it would be okay to have just one ear, but because we want to know as precisely what's happening there and at the same time know what's happening there, maybe it has been more useful to have these two ears on both sides.

So maybe there's something about that.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, one short note, and then Dean, is there are also animals with anatomy so that they can direct their ears, which is seemingly very analogous to the ocular motor saccading.

It's like an audio saccade, and it just, the human form,

outside of the ear wiggling which is maybe slightly vestigial representation of that but we have opted for a strategy with fixed ear positioning but a mobile neck which also makes cicades so that's kind of our low speed audio um cicading dean yeah i think the only advantage i could see to having two mouths is that i could eat the french fries and drink the milkshake at the same time


SPEAKER_01:
And I don't know what that would be like.

It was just overpowering.

But what I think is interesting in the dot one, Baloo brought up the idea of, so how do we make sure that there's a difference between content and context?

And I think whether it's two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, whatever, there must be some advantage to the form.

Because as I said, even if you cover one of those intakes,

It's not just a redundancy issue.

It's a recursion issue.

It creates that ability to see context, hear context, and smell context.

I don't believe we would have those things.

And as I said, I think I'd get overwhelmed with context of having both French fries and milkshake.

It would just blow me up.

So, but that's just...

That's it, that little self thing.

Do not give people too much, it can be overpowering.


SPEAKER_02:
One aspect might return us to the question of compositionality.

It seems like visual composition and temporal composition in music and in heard speech has...

speaking in terms of generative models, have highly factorizable or sparsely connected generative models.

famously connected to like the where and the what streams in visual neuroanatomy.

And that's been explored in some active inference papers with where-ness and what-ness as being factorizable in the generative model, because it really is the case that different where's can host different what's.

And so it makes sense to like have those two totally separate.

Taste and smell, which are,

they're more mid-lined though there are two nostrils i'm not totally sure on on whether there's like you know one or two smell chambers or anything composition of chemical bouquets seems quite different like two paintings that you like next to each other or two songs in succession that you like

or it's a little bit different than two smells or tastes sequentially or composed um and so maybe these more uh sometimes called basal sensory or cognitive features are less effable and this kind of relates to a a a cognitive

stack where verbal and symbolic communication is like the tip of the iceberg supported by biological processes that are differently or less effable and at first only pointed towards like through metaphors and speech butterflies in my stomach and so on but then ultimately entirely inexpressible

maybe with some stop in between like being able to express through the body, like what it's like to do a certain bodily position or have a certain experience or be in a certain physiological state.

And this kind of casts a light on the transmission view, complimenting the ecological view.

The transmission view is like down propagating the,

symbolic communication and seeking for that to apply all the way on down whereas a more bottom-up and arguably eco evo devo informed perspective is grounded in the ecological setting and then allows for the crystallization of symbolic processes

including communicated symbolic processes, which aren't they supposed to be the stronghold of the transmission view?

But then if even that phenomena can be captured within an ecological frame, then there's an extremely strong basis

for the the integrative cohesion of an ecological view as opposed to a extremely piecemeal and um question begging transmission view like we talked about semiosis and biosemiosis in livestream 47 so will we see um verbal communication and behavior

as something that is enabled and with analogy but not the same as cellular transduction or are we going to seek a cellular transduction explanation based on verbal behavior let's return to some of our topics all right few areas to go blue any thoughts just anywhere you want


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so I just wanted to follow up on what you said, and I just think that the beauty of the ecological approach to understanding communication is that communication between cells, be it semiotic representation or other, and between animals, maybe with gestures, maybe interspecies communication, like, you know, you tell your cat, come here, and the cat comes, or dog or whatever.

So I think that the ability to model systems like all systems is very important.

Like if the transmission view is not capable of representing all of the situations from cell to cell communication to human to dog communication and all along the line, I think that maybe it's,

In the way that the FEP and active inference is scale-free and doesn't have, I mean, it's across any hierarchical, temporal, cognitive scale.

I think that the way that we view communication also needs to be broadly applicable.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, Remy.


SPEAKER_00:
So yeah, that's the aim.

But clearly, some people will say that sophisticated linguistic communication cannot be accounted for in terms of ecological communication because, as Daniel said, the symbolic communication characteristic of language

seems to be too removed from the kind of basic interaction described by the ecological approach.

So there's a lot of work to be done still to really explain the high-level linguistic interactions that we have in terms of

of ecological inactive communication.

But yeah, there's another example of communication.

As you said, we can account maybe for communicative interaction between cells, but there's also, there's been work on communication between plants

and how plants perceive their environment in terms of aphrodenses.

There's been work on that.

And so I think that it's just to say that it's another way in which we can develop the ecological approach.

It seems that if we... Any...

any organism that behaves, so any organism will have a field of affordance and it seems that if it wants to act on other organisms in its environment, it will act in affecting its field of affordance and

it looks like the kind of communication that is at play between trees, for instance, which alerts each other about, for instance, the threats in the forest or sources of useful resources in the ground.

So these kinds of modifications of the

I don't know exactly the mechanisms by which these communications take place, but we can also see them as modifications of the field of affordances of trees.

So I think that when I saw that, I was really

I thought it was really cool that the trees behaved at a really, really slower timescale, obviously, but like behave when they go and they send like their roots in certain directions and things like that.

We can see it as them exploring their environment and reacting to a field of affordance that

So obviously that's also controversial because there's all this debate about the cognitive states of plants and do they have consciousness or all that thing.

But I think that we can say that they probably have something like a field of affordance and it seems that they can

communicate with each other via these modifications of their field of affordance without us having to say that they are transmitting content, which would be really weird from the standpoint of a plant.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
So just like if you haven't seen the plant robot created by the MIT Media Lab, like check it out because the plant, like they connected it to a set of wheels and a motor and literally will wheel itself back and forth from window to window, like searching for sunlight.

So, I mean, when you modify the field of affordances of a plant, it will take advantage of those affordances for movement or any other kind of thing.

And as to the complexity of...

linguistic communication, okay.

But also, the complexity of cellular communication, especially in developmental biology and all of the growth factors and signaling cues, and I mean, it's highly complex.

And the recombinatorial aspect is also incredibly crazy.

I think it would take a lot to convince me that linguistic communication is

more sophisticated or more advanced than biological communication in a developing organism.

I'm not sold on that.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
Ruby, can you help me understand a little bit more about the influence piece in the joint action?

If I'm in Madrid, a lot of people who are trying to get my attention, I'm not very, I'm not

I don't speak Spanish very well, just barely get by.

And so a lot of times things are spoken to me and there seems to be a break in terms of the amount of sensing I get.

And so that joint action, could you maybe, especially in the light of that earlier part where you talked about young kids, it appears they're talking to themselves, but they're talking to the world and maybe they're not influencing the world, but they would

like to?

Could you maybe talk about that sort of sensing side of that joint action?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so I think that what kids that talk alone are doing, they're not, they learn to talk by talking to each other and affecting other persons.

But when they learn to talk to each other, what they're doing, they're influencing themselves.

I think that's the part about self-cuing.

So what they're doing, they're

they're modifying their own field of affordances with this inner speech.

And that's how they learn to self-cue and self-regulate themselves by bringing some images in mind or things like that.

So I think that's what happens when a child learns to speak alone.

There's obviously a lot more to say about that.

So the question of different languages when you're in another country and you're spoken to and you're not understanding correctly, but you pick up some parts of what's said.

So I think that

I think that the learning of a language is often understood as learning a code, so learning a set of associations between meanings and between forms that can be either written or spoken.

But I think that in the approach that we're advancing here, learning a language is really more like learning a skill.

So you're learning to speak and learning to understand and interact correctly in a given language as you're learning to do anything else.

You're learning to play a game.

You're learning to play hockey or play soccer or whatever.

It's the same kind of learning and you're learning to interact in that kind of game.

And probably there's a similarity between various languages because there's a similarity.

I could talk about Wittgenstein once again, but various languages resemble each other because they have this family resemblance.

So because you have this familiarity with

speaking in a language even when you're in another place where you don't understand the language you have a basic grasp of some of the structures of the game that is being played and so from the context you can get understand some of the things that are said understand some of the things that are expected of you because you have this grasp of what a kind of game is played when we speak a language and so even if you're in

in another country when you don't speak the language from the context in which you find yourself, you may be able to piece some things together.

Obviously, if you're like just in a place with absolutely no context, you're in a white room, completely empty, and somebody is talking to you, you have no context, probably you won't understand anything.

But if you're in a context where you can understand that some kinds of

of there's some some goals that are uh that are in place and some peoples around you are trying to achieve some goal you can apply your understanding of the game that you play in your own language to this new language and so you can get some things you can understand some things about what what's what you have to do and uh how you should behave and how you can respond

but i think that that's a better way of understanding the kind of limited understanding that you have in these kind of of interactions rather than in you having a code of your language and then you try to apply this code in this you i think that that the

The idea of learning a skill, learning how to play a game is a better analogy to understanding how you come to learn a language and how you come to apply this knowledge in other contexts where the language that is spoken is not the same that you're mastering.


SPEAKER_01:
Does that kind of confirm that it couldn't be content first?

That it would have to be context bound?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah in my view the the the context is a central element in uh in in any communicative interaction in any cooperative communicative interaction i think it's the in the context what what i i call the context in the paper appears as a shared field of affordance so that that's the the affordance that are present in the in the the the

in the the environmental context in which you find yourself in with the other person and that that's that's this element that often pre-exists the communicative interaction is a great great source of constraint on the the communicative interaction

so yeah when you when you're you you come to speak with somebody you're almost never like in a absolutely context-free uh place you're always in a restaurant in uh in i don't know in the bus in in uh in at the grocery store you're somewhere and there's this basic set of affordances that are shared that you understand that you can do this you cannot do that and this this set of constraint offered by this shared field of affordances really drives and constrains how

the communicative interaction will unfold.

So I think that even if you're in another country, often the context will be hard to pick up, but sometimes there will be shared context that you can get a grasp on and that you can, that can favor, that can lead to a, sorry, I'm losing my words, that can lead to an interaction that is optimal.


SPEAKER_02:
i i brought it in the uh physical rosetta stone as a special case of of low context asynchronous communication

One can imagine there would be a million different contexts by which the analysis of the stone could have been accelerated, such as a person reading any of them, the rules or descriptions being enacted, or a labeled image, or any number of contexts that we would use to interpret and act upon the texts that we read

in this setting where we were historically removed from the creation then there still was residual context and it turned out that that was enough to interpret the symbolic materials

But this is not like the base communication case that we then need to see all communication and all learning and education of languages and active inference ontology as being like a Rosetta Stone.

Like the definitions of words are not codes to crack.

They're like inside jokes or ways of communicating on a sports team

that have to do with the context of the setting.

And asynchronous modifications in the environment, especially symbolic asynchronous modifications, which are relatively new, potentially existing in their modern form for several hundreds to several thousands of years, depending on how we think about it, symbolic asynchronous modification

is a low context communication whereas even the interpretant of asynchronous symbolic communication still uses and embodies their context in the perception so we know that we have stereophonic communication just because we're stereophonic even if we are getting just a morse code symbol um but

It is a non-controversial here, but interestingly, it sounds like elsewhere that we would want to think about communication broadly as being action-oriented and embedded rather than kind of like reverse-engineered from the kinds of artifacts that we have today with quite literally computer codes and other kinds of

you know, Turing computers and so on.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
I think that you often explain the ideas that I'm trying to convey really better than me.

Daniel, I'm not really fluent in English, so thank you for explaining better than me the ideas that I'm trying to say.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

I appreciate it, and

You wrote the paper, and so it's unsurprising.

It seems novel, and I couldn't say it in any other way.


SPEAKER_03:
Even when you speak English, Daniel can still speak better than you.

Communicate more effectively the ideas that you're trying to convey, even when English is your first language.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, context is non-fungible, so I don't think that there can be a best or a final communication.

it's just like a best or a final species or state for an ecosystem to be in and i guess in the last 25 minutes or however now that our ecosystem has been modified however it has been in these conversations and through reading and opening up threads uh how will it

shape our field of affordances and how will we stream and play differently?

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
So I'm curious from all, from all three of you, um, as a strategy, um, if you want to get past monologue, what do you do?

How many times do you play playing played?

So as an example of like a real pertinent one right now,

the way that the live streams have been set up have always been sort of a pre-brief, an introduction with the authors or a play, and then a play, a debrief piece to this.

And so the communication is never left as a one-off exercise.

I just read the paper.

There is affordances set up to interact with information, to be able to receive it,

at multiple different time points because I think in the dot one you said we could look at it as slices of time but that's probably not accurate in terms of the dynamic that's in play so one of the things the Active Inference Institute also does is has a textbook group now I've not been a part of the textbook group and I don't know whether they do it in sets of three as well to create that kind of

triangulation so that it the interaction that the communication doesn't become monolithic, or monistic.

Or here, here's here's the words that have come down now off the mount, accept them and start, start carrying them out, even though you don't have a context, right?

That chiseling them into the stone doesn't increase their priority, at least if you don't have the context.

So

What I'm curious about from the three of you is, if you want to get past instructionalism in terms, or if you want to get past transmission, is there a basic requirement to have multiple reinterpretations, or at least the opportunity to reinterpret?

Like, from a communication standpoint, must we have reflection and time for that?

Do we have to have time built in for that?

Or are we, are we then bound to a transmitted state only?

Anybody can answer.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

Blue first.


SPEAKER_03:
So, so not like in the way that we have reflection, like we have a pre-brief and then the actual brief and then, and then the reflection time in the live stream series.

So not in that way, but I do think that in effective communication, there is like reflection as an essential component of that.

Like communication, when you have a conversation,

It shouldn't be about just waiting for your turn to talk, right?

I mean, there should be some reflection of what the other person is saying in what you're saying back to them.

Like, hello, how are you doing today?

I want scrambled eggs.

Like, if that was a conversation, it wouldn't work, right?

So there has to be some element of reflecting back what the other person is saying to you, right?

in communication that's effective.

It's not just this tower of disjointed blocks being built.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, Remy?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think that what you said, Blue, is interesting.

A really important element of cooperative communication is that when you're talking to somebody, when you're in a dialogue, you have to concede a part of your autonomy.

You have to accept to be regulated by the other person.

And that's, I think...

where some people who like talk past each other and don't listen to each other and interact it happens really often some friends talk talk like it seems like when when they're waiting they're just waiting when they're listening they're just waiting to say what they want to say so these people don't like don't respect the kind of pragmatic principle of like you you have to to pay attention to what the other person is saying and to have a proper to have a correct communicative interaction you have to concede

You have to accept that your field of affordance is regulated by the person who's talking to you.

You have to let yourself be influenced, be constrained by the person who's talking to you just because you have to listen to it and you have to refrain from turning away and go do something else.

You have to... It's really just...

accepting considering a part of your autonomy and that's another idea from Di Paolo as an active approach of language where like there's in communicative interact in inter any cooperative interaction but in communicative interaction in particular you have to like inhibit a part of your field of affordance to participate in this interaction and listen because

suppose that what i'm saying is really boring to you and you just want to go eat your piece of cake in the in the fridge like you have to in order to participate to uh maintain the the the interaction you have to inhibit this this afford this solicitation and to uh to to let me regulate your your your field of affordance and so there's this part of like i concede

I concede something in order to maintain the interaction.

And when there is no more interest or I'm not able to, I don't want to be regulated and there's another solicitation outside the interaction that's more interesting to me, then I will leave the interaction.

But to maintain the interaction, you have to have

capacity of inhibition and executive some form of what would be called executive control to be able to listen and take what the person is saying.

If you don't have that, you're just going to think about something else and not let yourself be constrained by the communicative acts of the other person.


SPEAKER_02:
So,

Back to Dean's point about multi-part and multi-player communication and engagement.

When we only have one communication, then it can feel like a transmission, like the Rosetta Stone transmitted from the past.

We don't get a .2 or a .1 on the Rosetta Stone.

Structuring...

learning groups and other activities and relationships and cooperative communication as something unfolding, bumping into each other twice says something about those particles that bumping together just once

It's almost like, what do they say?

Once is an accident.

Twice is a coincidence.

Three times is a party or something like that.

So especially with three, because one, two, three, there may be enough of a recurrent engagement and interweaving between

to support reflection, development, to de-emphasize any single of those events because none of them are even half of the total series of three.

So none of them can even be said to be a plurality or a majority if the dot zero, one, and two were to vote, to vote one of them out or something like that.

And I think it does point towards

the reality of our continued interaction with materials and then towards structures that allow us to engage naturally.

Remy?


SPEAKER_00:
I think that what communicating repetitively with the same people, what it achieves, it's

it obviously shapes the generative model.

It aligns them in some ways.

So we come to share expectations and share fields of our dances.

So it clearly eases communicative interaction because we don't have to communicate as much when there's this trade-off between if you have a lot of shared context, you don't have to communicate as much.

And if you don't have a lot of shared context, you have to communicate more too.

to have a useful interaction, to have a productive interaction.

And so what I think we have done is we have aligned our generative models in ways that helps us understand each other better than we did at the beginning.

For instance, we can refer to things that we said in the past.

We can say, oh, when you said that, so I think that's relevant now.

And so we can point to relations to things that we said earlier.

So there's this continual easing of communication

when you have repetitive communicative interaction with somebody, that I think is why we can come to believe that people we're living with, we can read each other's mind without talking because there's so much shared context that something can happen and it can make us think something that is shared without us even saying anything.

So there's this context come to be really complex and really...

really deep and so yeah interacting repetitively obviously eases the communication okay so we can meet multiple times do preparation engagement and reflection


SPEAKER_02:
before, during, and after a communication and structure communication so that there are multiple such kind of peaks and troughs.

We can talk about aligning or synchronizing in the general synchrony sense, not making identical, but rather coordinating our generative models through perception and learning.

As you mentioned, it helps us understand each other better.

Like a goal of a communication could be epistemic.

Let's get to know each other.

And it could also have an element of pragmatic value.

Like let's take epistemic action to find out if a collaboration is relevant here.

And then we're going to engage in these pragmatic actions.

Remy?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah and i think that a lot of interaction that we share in our like academic and highly linguistic and advanced societies really often look like transmission interaction so we are saying things that we're thinking to each other but i think that these epistemic or communicative um

in terms of transmission these communicative transmission interactions are are the way they are because they are explicit aims of the interaction in which we're engaged that is we're transmitting content now when we're talking to each other because

In a way, that's the goal of the interaction.

But in other contexts, it's because we have communicative practices that we have developed that we can have these goals that can drive an interaction.

If we're at the grocery store, if we're in another context, we're doing something else.

But when we're in academic contexts, often the goal of the interactions is talking about ideas, transmitting some contents, transmitting some theories, for instance, explaining theories, explaining arguments.

And so these interactions, we look at them and we're like, oh, that's clearly there's, we're transmitting content when we're talking.

But the idea is that this is really a small subset of the cases of communicative interaction that we engage in in everyday life.

And we take these as paradigmatic cases of communicative interaction when they are really

the pinnacle of the linguistic civilization.

We're in a really rarefied context where academic discussions are not what we do in everyday settings when we talk to each other.

And we do this because it's an explicit aim of our interaction now that we do this, but in other cases,

In most cases, when we speak to each other, the explicit aim is not to transfer some information or talk about theories.

It's about doing things together.

And now we're doing something together.

We're talking about active inference.

But it looks as if it can be understood in terms of content sharing and content transmission.

But that's because it's the goal of our interaction.

It's not because it's the nature of communication.

I don't know if I'm being clear.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.


SPEAKER_02:
Dean, you had your hand raised.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I just, I think I don't want to put my philosopher's cap on, but I will just briefly, I think we use language and communication to save time.

It's an exploitation strategy.

And so I think when we put a 13 week set of parentheses around a learning moment or opportunity,

we oftentimes get the cart ahead of the horse.

We don't see the pragmatics because we're busy transmitting.

And what ends up happening is the plan forward, that affordance, that exploitation or optimization or savings of time jumps ahead of the prep, the participate and the permeate.

Now we can say that's a luxury, but if we don't respect the fact that people

maybe don't necessarily learn as well when they're handed the plan as opposed to given an opportunity to build one or form one themselves through preparation, participation, and permeation.

We could go away from this live stream and each of us could literally now design a better plan as opposed to Remy came to us with a plan.

No, what Remy came to us with was a sketch.

And then we prepped

participated and permeated that.

Now, the sophistication of whatever comes out of that in terms of a go forward move for each one of us is orders of magnitude greater because somebody didn't say, oh, well, I've only got 13 weeks.

I don't have the luxury to be able to be pragmatic about this.

So there, I'll take my hat off again.

I don't mean to sermonize, but I think when we actually feel what it's like

to let the plan naturally evolve and become a part of the ecology as opposed to driving the ecology, the single source, it changes everything.

And over and over again, every time we have one of these three set live streams, it reinforces what you could do.

And again, you don't even have to be on the Zoom.

As long as you give over the amount of time

to see and sense what it's like to prep, participate, and I think the most important one of all, stick around for the permeate because that's where the real nuggets seem to Daniel's metaphor of icebergs.

Things float to the surface when you give it enough time.

But I understand there's also the 13-week window and I'm paying thousands of dollars to sit in your class and come on,


SPEAKER_02:
exploit the daylight side of your communication and i just don't know that people don't realize that they're cutting off their noses despite their their learning so interesting a lot there uh permeation letting it pervade our generative model or uh percolate letting those messages be passed

letting that ripple or the perturbation take effect at slower and deeper levels and it is really a challenge when the logistical and transmission aspects of communication are scaffolded and those are like the metadata fields that have to be filled out the boxes that have to be checked

and they can feel constraining, yet simply removing them is not a positive solution.

And so the path of least action for many learning scenarios is to replicate the prior.

Over the decades, a professor who might teach the same class in the same way

And there's pros and cons to that.

In fact, some of the most enlivened learning communities have like a vibrancy that transcends an almost ironically static learning experience.

Like we all read this thing.

So it's not that I think the mode of communication and cooperation and education that we're exploring here means that every single experience is going to be like some kind of full attention transformative depth psychology.

I think it would feel more normal and natural and just like participating in

a cool ecosystem that works with that individual's situation what else can we add or where can we go where is active inference in all of this where do you see active inference um not like you know


SPEAKER_00:
are your intentions with my child but um where is active inference in your further research agenda remy i think it gives the um the like uh all-encompassing framework and um yeah the the

the abstractness of the framework allows us to apply it to, as we said, communication between cells and communication between countries or groups of individuals.

This multi-scale property of active inference I think is really useful in the

in allowing us to describe communicative interaction between these various kinds of free energy minimizing agents.

So that's useful.

I think that the

Yeah, the learning mechanisms that are at work in active inference are really useful also to explain how communicative interaction is conducted and how repeated communicative interaction can lead to a form of synchronizing of the generative model as has been explored by Vassil.

in a paper in 2020, I think.

So I think that's really useful.

There's a lot of things that I think we can take from the Active Inference Framework.

the the idea that all actually i think the fundamental intuition is that all all action is uh free energy minimization that that's trivial that that's uh but i think there's a pragmatist uh insight in inactive inference that we can use to um to

to support the pragmatist view of communication.

Everything that an organism does, it does it to minimize its free energy.

And active inference is no different.

And communicative active inference as a form of active inference also aims to minimize the free energy of an organism.

And so when an organism finds itself in a situation where it's

there's a lot of free energy, there's a lot of error prediction, it will try to engage it in its environment, intervene its environment in order to bring itself back in its viable states.

And so all these ideas

when we apply them to communication i think they lead not necessarily by implication but i think they there's a a path to these ideas through the the to the the pragmatic view of communication the idea that that communication is another form of uh it's just a mechanism of regulation uh of organisms in order to minimize their free energy i think there's this kind of basic

biological understanding of the behavior of organism, I think it leads us more toward the pragmatist view of communication rather than toward the more informational or transmission view that is

that is more at home in our really highly advanced and complex linguistic interaction.

And I think that this basic biological framework is a good place to start to understand communication in the pragmatist view.


SPEAKER_02:
Very nice answer.

I'll read a comment from Steven and then we can give a thought on it as well as provide some closing thoughts.

So Steven wrote, explicit aims of interaction are important and can be invisible.

Thus communication appears to be based on transmission.

Should we identify the context through the affordances or via naming the water, like the water we swim in?

That is...

Is the context and the explicit aims apparent via the affordances, or is there a special sauce that flavors the cultural waters in which we are swimming?

Yes, Dean, special sauce, Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
Real quick on that.

I think what maybe...

to build on what Remy just said, I think that perhaps active inference opens up that space to the idea of a special sauce.

It doesn't guarantee that there will be one, and it certainly doesn't promise.

But what it does do is it says, what are the possibilities within this, not just

What are we collapsing down to?

I mean, throughout this series, I've been talking a lot about, well, we can't leave the absolutes, the things that we've experienced out of this equation.

But I think what I think the act of inference affords is that those relativities, those entailments and those entanglements always to be determined can be moved towards and maybe accepted

with more abundance if we use active influence.

But that's just my optimistic take on it.


SPEAKER_02:
Do you have any other closing words before we hear some final thoughts from the others?

Excellent.

Okay.

Blue or Remy, with some final thoughts, how will it permeate with you?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so I'll go ahead.

So yeah, I was really happy to have the chance to talk about the paper with you.

I think that one of the most important things that I'll take home is that now I have a really salient solicitation to go see the plant robot.

in action so like at the second that i close the zoom meeting i'm going to go see that that's really something that i i'm taking from the this discussion uh but yeah no it was really interesting to see different perspectives different backgrounds uh what what these different differing backgrounds can bring uh to a discussion uh that is uh i think that was really uh enlightening

for me and I was really happy to be there.


SPEAKER_03:
I'll just say thanks for coming Remy, we really enjoyed this discussion and for me I think what will permeate is like the you know everything I think about now I just like think about how can I model this in terms of active inference and I feel like this paper will

you know, influence maybe the way that I think about communication, which is a big part of modeling active inference period, especially like in a multi-agent dynamical system.

So I think I will probably leverage this ecological approach in the way that I think about it going forward.

So I appreciate the opportunity to learn about it.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

My closing thought, what I'm left with here is I,

active inference as about affordances it is about the the content of the model is about affordances and active inference is an affordance it allows us to realize epistemic and pragmatic value today and in the future

and in that way we can see it as gripper and gripped just like we could talk about the hand as gripper and gripped whether it's holding hands or grabbing an object and especially in this dot too some very nice points added on language as gripper and gripped

and contextualizing this kind of breakaway verbal community of research and scholarly education and academia and recognizing that breakaway community and skill as something that's crystallizing out of a much more inclusive and pragmatically oriented niche.

And I think that will be a win-win framing because it will help ground what can be abstract and lofty discussions and also elevate and bring attention

and support to some areas and types of communication that are absolutely natural in the field of affordance view and the ecological view but are not always respected so highly under like a symbolic transmission view and

The closing image for me is making the sauce underwater.

I'm just imagining it's like, I don't know, SpongeBob SquarePants or someone's trying to cook and make the sauce, but we're adding things and it's more just like happening in this diffusive space.

And in a way, all kitchens are in fluids.

That's why we can smell what we're cooking, but it's different enough that the sauce stays in the pan

And I think the social inaction of active inference is when the sauce is spilling out of the pan.

All right.

Remy, you're always welcome back.

So hopefully you'll share some developments in this line.

Good luck with the rest of your work.

Thanks, all.

All right.

Farewell.


SPEAKER_04:
Bye.
