## tmsY1ep8ZF4

All right. Hello fellows. We are in by
all independent accounts the last of the
meetings of cohort 7 in chapter
10. We've already had some
interesting sharings and
consolidations. So what would be
interesting in
this
time? How how wh where if chapter 10 is
the
takeoff, where do we go? Or where are we
in our own chapter 10?
Well, for me, for me, you say Stephen.
Yeah. I was just going to say it's model
building. It's applying applications is
where I'm at.
Andrew.
Um well, for me, um it's just an
achievement to have finished reading the
book. I still have to read the
appendices, but um uh upon reading the
book, I feel like I have a sense
of the complete picture, maybe in a
murky way. Uh and then what it invites
me is a couple of u things. One is to be
able to tease out the flesh and the
bones I guess or or to say like what is
actually active inference saying and
then what is kind of like additional
ideas that come out from applying active
inference because those additional ideas
they could be brilliant or they could be
just not so brilliant. Uh but that's a
separate thing. So um and you were just
talking about that if you just look at
the bare bones active inference that's
actually a common theme across all
different types of let's say um I think
it was like learning you know large
language models or or different types of
AI approaches. Um so
um what that means is that in order to
really appreciate active inference it's
important to look at it
minimalistically like not what are all
people trying to do to apply but really
what is it like? It's a little bit for
me like calculus like calculus is
absolutely important for modern physics.
Um and so you wouldn't want to make
calculus more physical than it is. it's
just a mathematical um way of
thinking and then you wouldn't maybe
want to say that the calculus is a
theory of everything but to be able to
really appreciate so what exactly is
calculus and what is it contributing you
know and how does that relate to
linearity let's say or not uh and things
like that uh I think that's where I'm at
and I think like in order to do that
maybe the next step for me is just to uh
compute you know so uh to learn how to
uh use the Python uh modules I guess and
to compute things that would be relevant
for me and get some hands-on experience.
I think that's probably the next step
for me. And then maybe after that like
then to say okay take a fresh look at
let's say what are baianesian statistics
and the related math and stuff and work
from there. That's where I'm at.
And maybe to say like uh what's
attractive for me? It does seem uh to be
um very sweet in terms of putting
perception and action in a in a unified
footing. But that's a very particular
case where you're assuming that you're
looking at the world with a generative
model and then from the point of view of
that model you know you have this active
look at perception and so you have this
active look at action let's say and then
you have this ability to quickly switch
from one to the other based on I guess
free energy um the the free energy uh I
guess maximizing or minimizing the free
energy
So that's all fine, but that's that's
assuming a certain, you know, outlook.
Uh, and I don't think that every outlook
is always based on a generative model.
Um, so there's alternative outlooks,
let's say. But,
um, so just to kind of tease that out,
what what what kind of alternative
outlooks other than looking at systems
in terms of like their input and their
output?
Well, I just don't think like I don't
think necessarily that the physical
world is based on a generative model,
you know, because a generative model is
kind of like a it's a symbolic
assumption that like so in the way I
would think about like um there's
knowing versus not knowing, you know, so
like there's you know maybe values and
variables and so um the generative model
presumes that you have this world of
variables of not knowing of symbolic
language
um But I think that something like a
neural network um doesn't have that. I
think it's it's not about u having
variables and slots. I don't think that
that's a good way to uh think of a
neural network uh working or or just all
different kinds of wiring working. Um
there's there's a and so I think more
like a generative model is working on
top of other things but not it wouldn't
make sense I think to have a like so the
notion that everything is a marov
blanket. I just don't think that that
makes sense. You can look at everything
as if it's a Marov blanket, but that's
very peculiar that's that's a peculiar
maybe important way of looking at
things, but that doesn't uh that's not
the only way that things would function.
And I don't think physics function.
Well, I mean it returns to kind of map
territory there because when you said
that the neural network isn't just
parameters and slots, I mean on the
first level, it literally is. That is
what the parameters of the neural
network is. They literally are
parameters and slots. And then even
abstracting if we couldn't look at those
parameters in the slots, there's still
um an input output relationship which is
modeled with an interface.
Mhm. That's kind of the the the the
surface like the sort of cloud of
unknowing edge of our um doors of
perception that any modeler finds
themsself in which is the situation
described by inferring latent states
from
observations and then the special case
of action is not acting. So the passive
case we get for free and that's why we
seek to study the possible joint
um co-action of perception and motor
movement for example. Well, I think
maybe there's a two ways. See, I think
it's more about I think your points are
important and and I guess they're
probably correct. U but I think it's
maybe then about interpretation like
even with a neural network and I very
know very little bit little bit about
them but I think that there's two
different ways to interpret them. like
you can interpret them in terms of like
a hard wiring where like you're just
getting signals that are coming together
and they're you know at any inst at any
instance there's no notion of variable I
mean it's just what it is it gives you
what it gives you now then you can say
okay but let's make it and maybe that's
the point of the neuron nature is that
let's make it more flexible where it
could be rewired right it doesn't have
to be just wired once right it could be
rewired so the notion that this is
plastic and that this is rewirable and
that these are slots, let's say, right?
Like that's almost like a different
interpretation of what's going on. It's
saying, well, there's a different way of
looking at the neural network where it's
saying this is all plastic. These are
all arbitrary. You see, and I think the
fact is that those both those
interpretations are important. And I my
claim would be I think that both those
interpretations are communicating with
each other and there's a gap between
those two communications. And so so
that's the gap in the action perception
model like the action the I mean the I'm
sorry yeah well the organism and the
environment in the environment you have
one hardwired reality and then in the
organism you have this idea that oh we
can be flexible you know like we can be
flexible but whereas the environment is
considered it is what it is so I think
that Um
I I I think I see you on that view. Um
and we sometimes are thinking about that
like uh it's a static room and the
agentic organism can navigate do the
change.
But the whole point is it's joint system
modeling and it could be a super dynamic
room with a metronome in it or it could
just be two metronomes or it could be
two really dynamic things. It's like so
kind of making a qualitative assumption
that that the environment or the
organism has any given structure or that
that one is larger. It it they're just
convenient. It's like here and there
like there could be here and and here
could be there but well or which is the
context and which is the being you know
I think like that's the kind of question
and so the thing I'm researching and you
know a bit about this I call it you know
it's predis it turns out that you have
this oscillation between well who's the
being and who's the context and so in
quantum symmetries it's kind of you talk
about the context of the context which
could be the being, you know, so it's
kind of like a you have a vector and you
have a what's called the dual space.
These are like functionals on the vector
space like but then the dual of the duel
is typically the vector where like you
just it's the values I guess it could
take. So, and it turns out with a
quantum symmetry when you do the dual of
the dual or you do the context of the
context, you may get back to where you
started, but you're also allowed to get
back to the negative of where you
started, you know? So, it's kind of like
the the in this case it'd be like the
data became the slots and the slots
became the data or like the particles
became the holes and the holes became
the particles. And so and the idea is
that there's this thing called B
periodicity where you can cycle through
these things and there's like eight
different possibilities and you just get
back. So the thing I realized yesterday
was when you go from context and back um
and you look at this whole cycle, it
looks like the database update problem
where like you have two copies. We're
kind of like looking at things from two
copies and then you want to be able them
to be mismatched. Like if you want to
you're working with a database and it's
giving you a presentation, you want to
be able to edit that, but then it needs
to be able to update its record. So
there's going to be a mismatch and then
there's going to be a re synchronization
and a mismatch and recynchronization. So
there's an oscillation between are your
two different ways of looking at them
kind of meshed so nicely together
they're it's hard to distinguish or are
you realizing no here's an instance and
here's a general plastic, you know,
ability. let's say and they need to be
kept separate and they actually mismatch
right now but then they'll rematch. Am I
kind of making sense?
It seems like that it would be again
another a feature of the model that
would employ
the methods. Yeah. So this is saying
like active inference is a very nice
beautiful or maybe even slick like way
of talking about one aspect of this and
then you have to okay so what's what's
the models that you're going to think of
this in terms of and so and that's what
I'm talking about and and I think the
idea is that uh between the organism and
the environment is there a third mind
that is kind of like facilitating that
or not you know is it needed or not but
if you have this kind of like database
update problem and or you have this kind
of like mismatch like or like you know I
have this emotional situation where like
I don't feel things are right let's say
right and you're trying to model
that it may suggest that there's above
and beyond that these things are not
self-regulating there's a regulator on
the side that's contributing to you know
cybernetically managing it that's what
like full-fledged consciousness would be
okay this now is running up against
something that I'm constantly struggling
with. uh this um free energy principle
is a natural
uh uh uh feature of existence I feel and
it's being this this framework um is
being applied
to
our framework which our our human
conceptual framework which is completely
ruled by our conceptualizations I mean
nothing we
do lives outside of the constraint of
how our minds work. Uh we think the
world works the way it does because of
the nature of our construction,
our bodily ability to conceptualize and
these concepts are constrained by the
way we're constructed.
uh and I run up against
um uh working back and forth between
these two realities. The the world is
the way it is and works the way it does
and we interpret it the way we do uh to
the best of our ability. Um there this
uh I I I posted a reference to the
handbook of abduction. Uh you remember
Daniel the $700 book that Oh yes. worth
worth every penny which which kind of u
confronts this problem of it's basically
an epistemological problem. How do we
know what we know and what constrains
what we can possibly know? But again,
everything I'm interested in with active
inference is through the filter of how
the brain works, how the mind works. And
um the I was just at a seminar
yesterday on is it possible for machine
intelligence to have meta
awareness and that's something that that
that this lab is working on right now.
Uh the PI is going to a conference in
San Diego of
um I don't know what it's called but
it's machine learning. It's some big
leagues trying to address this problem
of how can these deep learning models be
aware
of themselves to the point where they
can uh filter out hallucinations
themselves where they can know or assess
how good their reasoning is.
Um so again on that in that vein and I
thought of you when I read this paper
that I posted in the chat um modeling
meta awareness because uh I know you
were working on this three minds three
brains
issue and it explicitly addresses that
uh in a way talking about hierarchical
model of meta awareness and attention
control,
perception, attentional states, and then
meta awareness states, which I think is
kind of like what you were
describing. That's right. Okay, that's
how I'm glad I I copied the link and I'm
glad that you this. Yeah, it's funny
that that that had come up in some other
who knows when chapter 10 discussion,
but I added it in those kind of it was
kind of a Hallmark paper certainly in
terms of connecting multi-cale modeling.
And then here's one from that I um put
in the notes too from a few with um Lars
Sambit Smith, first author in that 2021
paper and right in others. I mean, this
this gives some some very
interesting
angles. Um, and they do test out some
things with
LLM, but like when we kind of get
against that doors of perception, like
beyond that classic Blake quote, I think
of this this letter. Yes. As a man is,
so he sees. And it's like, okay, well
then, you know, pack it up. Nothing to
see here. It's like know everything to
see here, but then how to balance like
the world as it is, doors of perception
being cleansed, seeing the world, you
know, infinity in the flower and all of
that with the
solopsism of anthropocentrism.
It's like, well, how could we escape
anthroentism when we're our own
egocentric
navigational unit and we're seeing
things through our own perception and
cognition apparatus. So, it's like what
could be the escape from
anthropocentrism? And then this part
um you certainly mistake when you say
that the visions of fancy are not to be
found in this world. Like I see that as
the reality of cognitive science,
speculation, counterfactuals, like
expected free energy rollouts, those are
in the world. That doesn't mean that
they're justified true belief. Doesn't
mean that that the
um parameters as they're estimated to be
would be any level of accuracy. But
visions of fancy are found in the
world and and that goes in so many
different ways. I mean taking us all the
way up into sort of matter first
ontologies which lead us to the hard
question of consciousness or mind first
ontologies that that have a uh
counterveailing narrative on the
emergence of stability.
Uh so I have a I have a question uh of
something whether it could be modeled
naturally with active inference or if
it's something different you know which
relates to this and so because I think
of active inference as kind of like the
second mind type of issue uh but the
first mind would be just direct
experience whatever that means like the
answers that are coming out
unconsciously popping into my brain
let's say whatever and uh so there's
these things I talk about as doubts and
counter question. So, um, once there I
was given this question, well, how do
you know you're not a robot, right? And
so, the it's a difficult question
because it puts everything in doubt.
Like, you know, if I'm a robot, how can
I trust anything I know? And so, I think
that there's really only one way out of
that um aside from just falling back to
sleep. But, u if you really want to take
that question seriously, you ask a
counter question. You go, well, would it
make any difference? Okay. Right. And
and the the way the counter question
works, it says, look, I'm not going to
rely on anything I know. So the ability
just kind of like clean the slate to
say, look, and then it's kind of like
you tell me what a robot is, right? Like
maybe I am a robot, you know, or maybe
I'm not a robot, but you give me some
criteria so that I could tell like, you
know, do robots bleed or do they not
bleed or, you know, do robots have
feelings? Can robots fall in love? You
know, what is it? And then maybe I'm a
robot, but maybe I'm not.
But I'm not going to rely on my I mean
I'm not going to I'm just going to let
go of my experience and build it back
up. So what that does from the first
mind's point of view, it's a way of
letting go of itself and saying there's
something maybe more out there like to
get out of your context. And so the
things I was talking about like how do
you go from context to context to
context? This is the way of letting go
of your current context and being able
to get into you know without a context
and into another context let's say. So I
think and so there's I I I did like 30
examples and there was like it ended up
being like seven patterns, you know, of
counter questions. So like is this do I
truly like this? Well, how does it seem
to me? Do I truly need this? What else
should I be doing? Is this truly real?
Would it make any difference? Is this
truly problematic? What do I have
control over? Uh is this truly
reasonable? Like am I able to consider
the question uh is this uh truly wrong?
Uh is this the way things should be? um
am I truly anxious? Well, what am I
doing this about this? And then there's
an eighth one that just whenever you
want, you can say, well, what do I truly
want? You see? So, so there's this whole
apparatus of these things. And I'm just
wondering, I think this is like before
you even get to having a generative
model. This is how you start to become
letting go of yourself and starting to
operate with a generative model that's
abstract, that doesn't know anything,
saying, "I don't know anything, but what
could I do with that?" This is like the
preliminary in order to build up a but
or to to to get back to thinking in
terms of a generative model. But where
would this this type of thinking fit
with active inference? I don't know. Oh,
I think it's there's there's no goal. I
think the it's
it doesn't have a goal, right?
like what do I truly just that's
completely compatible with the the
the kind of model that uses active
inference there are no priors
and then it all your prior with
experience
well so what if you don't have priors
then what happens with active inference
Daniel you can answer that it
don't sort there's the like sort of uh
substrate fabric of reality question
like what is what is the sound of the
silent bell like a like if there
really were no prior what would there
be? So that that that sort of fades into
more more axiomatical metaphysics. But
let's just start with a case where there
there there's a given prior but of a
certain kind but it's a uniform within
whatever kind it is. Mhm. and then
popping up a level of context is like
kind of structure learning like is that
prior
modifiable? Well, I think what this is
maybe I didn't quite absorb what you're
saying, but I think like what this is
saying is like I'm going to let go of
all my priors. Why don't you give me
some priors? Right? like you know but
see what what happens there is that
instead of saying I have natural priors
you know I'm wired in with certain
priors like I'm saying my priors could
be variable like let's go with any
priors you see and that's a huge shift
all of a sudden because you're in a
different realm you're in moving from
the first mind where there's these
things that are hardwired or like prior
that are hardwired to saying oh no
priors could be variable you see
yeah this is kind of addressed in the
whole Buddhist tradition of of
developing a along the spectrum of you
know directed attention
uh awareness to uh open attention open
awareness to nonduality where there are
no subject object differences which is
kind of like no priors in a way. it
that's like uh either there is you know
there only either one awareness or
no separation
between awarenesses th this is sort of
where this paper takes it with
translating yes sorts of meditational
prompts into
um natural
language and using that um in terms
making parametric modifications like
modifying the temperature value
um like in a sort of uh infinite
temperature scenario like just just you
know the ball is vibrating on the
landscape in the absolute zero context
it's going to find a local minima or
maybe even the global minima. Um, in the
infinite temperature setting, the
landscape is functionally flattened. So,
whatever structure the landscape had, as
the temperature goes to infinity, it
doesn't really matter what the
temperature was. So, there's there's
those kinds of parametric
manipulations. And then there's
like usage of natural
as I mean delivering the payload itself
within a given parametric configuration
of the
model. But I mean like this is what are
you showing? What what paper is this?
This is the
um I'll I'll I'll put it in the in the
Okay. Zoom chat as well. Like this is
just from a few days ago. I mean um
obviously with with Lars with with uh
Chandaria. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They're
they're they're kind of going there and
uh I think it's inevitable. I think that
all roads lead there. Uh you look at the
development of for example
um learning algorithms um machine
learning algorithms uh or you know there
are machine learning uh architectures of
the uh cognitive architectures uh
different ways of approaching how to
model cognition. lots of different
models and over the years they basically
all have been converging into the
same
general architecture as as they modify
themselves. And as I say, there's
probably an inevitable convergence of
all these different approaches because
it's all trying to approach the same
thing, the same truth, I guess, is what
I would say.
Yeah, I mean there
there's there there's so many aspects on
this and uh like I think of mind and
super mind orbindo and many different
wisdom cognitive methods and then it's
like and and also there's another you
know from another vision or another
perspective It's
purely quantitative structured
formal accounting
system for for cognitive things. Yeah.
It's like it's that's the deflationary
view is sort of it's just statistics.
Now Blake might call that Newton's
single vision with like the sort of
sleep of technical expertise.
Um, and and I mean it's it's embodied
within our
own ability to to see it those multiple
ways or oscillate or or hold both open.
Certainly, it's reflected in our
communities where some people at at the
syntactic or the semantic level are
going to have
allergies to to these kinds of prompts
as well as allergies to mathematical
symbols.
So then it's like so then that and then
that goes to kind of like Krishna Murdy
like truth is a pathless land like but
how could there be a place with no paths
within or out?
Yeah I I put in a link in the chat to a
presentation I gave u about uh how we
use variables in the mind. Uh and so
like yeah if if you look there like at
that any any of those like but you get
the kind of idea that um when we look at
a variable um there's so much hidden
there because uh it's subject to
interpretation like is it constant is it
variable you know what does it mean for
it to be fixed right like um is it just
a label uh there's so much loaded in
there um that if you try to tease it out
you get all these you know I think like
24 different possibilities or something
like that you know there's this huge uh
risk richness that's being hidden, let's
say. So this idea like with the priors,
are those prior something that are fixed
and constant and just given, you know,
personal or are they become all of a
sudden they become variables that you
can play with, you know, that someone
else could be filling in for you, right?
Like, and how do you what does it mean
to switch back and forth between those
types of um ways of thinking? Uh that's
I think it's kind of there's this chasm
that's kind of being glossed over. Um
wow we really come down to the topic of
communication the how can the
conceptualization yes but then
communication of those concepts
and I this is why we always turn to
rigorous
mathematical you know symbology because
it's the least
vague, the least uh
imprecise and yet we still have to know
when what are the appropriate symbols to
use. We can we can inappropriately apply
statistical
methods and you know uh obscure the
communication even still and yet it's I
think the best we
have or there is the extended mind idea
that I can have my conceptualization
communicate it and because you're so
similar to me in construction. You can
create your own
conceptualization that is more or less
similar to what mine is based on the
means of communication we're employing.
And because we live in a structured
environment that's the same, it
constrains our conceptualizations in a
way that are most likely going to be
most similar.
Yeah. So many ways to take this just
just trying to just trying to
triangulate it with like the abductive
work that you've shared and and what
they're what they're discussing in this
paper like we're not imposing any single
metaphysical system. However, what if
there's a single meta metaphysical
system?
Huh. Yeah. And it's like another like
the the sort of show not tell
realization of metacognitive
science is like narrative and
perspectival
plurality as popping up a
layer in the
consideration of of all of what had been
considered at
a at a cognitive layer. Yes, I think
this is approaching the best we can do.
So in trying to speak that language but
um and I have I think you're all a
little familiar with this what I call
these three minds like uh so I would
think like as a generative model as a
type of metaphysics let's say or
conceptual system and then the point
being for a for a conceptual system to
really function well and do its
job there needs to be a tiny uh and very
uh very clear it's it well there just
seems to be certain things that that
explain that it's or that maybe um
amount to the fact that it's
functioning, it's able to function. And
those are the things that's able to be
able to swap back and forth with the
things it's trying to model. Like you
know that it's if it's if it's a good
model, you can invert it and you can the
context can be understood as the as the
reality and the reality the context and
flip back and forth and all these
symmetries. And there's very few
symmetries you have to worry about. Like
there's a there's but there's so many
there's like eight. And if you can do
that, you have a metaphysics of the
metaphysics. And if you can't do that,
you simply don't have a function. You
know, you have a you have a generative
model that's just not going to function
um very well. It's just going to fall
apart. So um so the fact that the
generative model fits up with the things
it's modeling is what the third mind is
all about and the symmetries that need
to be satisfied for that to happen.
There's which are like updating
symmetries like the way a database would
function. you know, how do you how does
it update itself?
So interesting. I I I I totally agree
with what you're saying. Uh I guess and
I
um it it as a side tangent, I'm always
amazed at why distillations of truths
always come down to three parts. And I
think that's got to be a natural
principle. Well, sorry, it's not a
natural principle of the world. It's a
natural principle of our conceptualizing
mind. There's this, there's that, and
then there's the thing that's neither
this nor that. You know, that's three
parts. Yeah. You have you come up with
the three minds. That's the most
efficient way to communicate what you're
trying to communicate. That's three
parts. I I just find that so
interesting. It always it's it's just a
recurring theme in communicating
features of reality.
Where I see that in terms of the blanket
is first there's agent, environment, and
blanket. That's the three that's the
threesome or the three-fold partition.
Well, first there's there's this and
that. That's the twofold. Agent,
environment just with the arrows
connecting them. Then a blanket is
interpolated. And then the blanket is
nuanced into incoming and outgoing.
And so the the the two, the three and
the four all represent this sort of
canonical
um and and also those two three and four
are part of a conceptual unity which is
the unity of that scenario. So it's like
1 2 3 4 as one two three and four
and like that I mean it it it can go so
many other ways with the with the
numbers in the geometry. Yes, but the
low integer numbers are awesome. Yeah, I
I of course I have my
own epistemology used with this tripart
uh distillation that taken as a whole
makes a
fourth which is echoed in what you just
showed on the screen. It's just but what
we always have to remember is this isn't
a natural law of the world of the
universe all of these you know low
ordered
uh descriptions uh numerical
descriptions it's not a natural law of
the universe it's a natural law of the
way our minds work
well and possibly the way generative
models work. So exactly well our mind is
so you know so we we we'll know best
about our own minds let's say
but but um but then we can we can maybe
see it in other things well we're going
to create these generative models
according to our conceptualizations
right they will work that way too yeah
and then if if they're useful in
modeling different things as sometimes
they do seem to be then that kind of
gives them that kind of gives some
extension to you know, but but I think
maybe to go beyond what Daniel was
saying, uh, like with this three minds
approach, I think Daniel, I think like
you're you're explaining like how it
looks for the second mind. And so like
that would be like
uh like the zeroth mind would be in
terms of needs and responding to needs
and you can see things like Masel's
hierarchy etc. And then but then the
first mind although
it's well it it looks at things
intellectually surprisingly because
that's what it takes to get out of
itself like it kind of to let go of
itself it becomes intellectual so to
speak but then when you have the
generative model and you have these two
minds in like with action perception
then it seems very emotional because
that's what that's what the cognition
that's what the organism reads uh from
the first mind the first mind
communicates in terms of emotion and the
second mind uh responds with cognition
that it imposes but I think in terms of
the third mind the see the the first
mind doesn't see the second mind the
second mind doesn't see the third mind
but the third mind sees them and the
third mind is this willfulness this
cognizance to say hey I have to actively
relate these things and then there may
be like a god or a default that is also
actively somehow relating that I might
just be an instrument of let's Okay. And
then how do I fit with regard to let's
say the default or the god or or
whatever like you know so that I'm in
sync or or am I separate you know that
type of question that's not maybe coming
up in these areas but you know so what's
maybe that's to say like what's the role
of a will related with God you know in
terms of trying to uh actively uh manage
um I don't think that that's maybe comes
coming up there it's it's not mentioned
in the textbook I don't think but
well you can map what you're saying on
to what's said in the but it'd be an
extension I think it says that there's
and so these symmetries and those like
maybe just to add like I talked to my
friend Thomas he's a theoretical
physicist I talked with uh but it
becomes about the conjugate transpose so
like the Hamiltonian in these and these
are like what they call a free firmionic
non-interacting system so it's like a
particle all by itself like what are the
pipe relationships it could have like
with its context. But what's curious is
that it has a Hamiltonian, which is what
you need in order to have a notion of a
coherent self that could evolve through
time because you've got to if you're
going to evolve through time, you've got
to be able to maintain what you are. If
you're going to go through different
dynamical modes, you have to be able to
summarize that, which is what the
Hamiltonian does. But the Hamiltonian
has this thing where the self-
conjugate, it's equal to its own self-
conjugate. And so the question is, well,
what is that? And the idea is that it's
the difference between a a self as a
being and a self as its context like
your personality or everything that
you've invested yourself in. You know,
you can identify with either with the
spirit you you are that you inhabit
something or the context you've created
for yourself to inhabit and then you can
flip back and forth which is what these
quantum symmetries do. And if you as I'm
studying it, what happens and I'll
conclude but is that those two things
which you're equating you can strip them
apart and say oh no let's think of them
separately me as a being and me as my
context and then let me fit them back
together but let's say swap them you
know kind of swap them around or make
one you know there's different ways you
can try to put them together but it's
about those how those two things so the
generative model and the thing it's
modeling can they be inverted to say oh
no I'm a fact in the generative model of
my environment for example.
you know this uh as you're as you're
speaking and and Daniel as you're
pointing out things in the textbook uh
and I you know I've seen these things
and and
had thoughts about them but I'm seeing
new things and having new thoughts about
them listening to this discussion and
and uh watching Daniel's mind at work
pointing out different things at the in
the textbook and I'm uh uh struck
by the reality of the mind being an
interaction with other minds uh just as
much as uh self you know internally
generated
and and I think what that interaction
because I've never really thought much
about that but I think these games with
other people that we play we're like uh
you know we switch from I to you and
other and all and such like who is the
being and who's the context, let's say,
or vice versa. Exactly. By
communicating, we're we're it kind of
forces us to play all these games much
more actively. Um
in reality, we can't play those games
unless we're actually in the presence of
others.
Yeah, it may be very hard to play that,
right? Well, it's it's otherwise it's
internal.
[Music]
Uh I think it certainly helps
there's there's compositionality
internally and there's compositionality
externally like when they talk about
these kind of rights of practice and
passage. It's like you write down the
model, make a simulation and and learn
from from what happens. Yes. And that's
similar to like you you expect that the
restaurant's going to be tasty and maybe
maybe it's it is exactly on point. Maybe
it surprises you. It's like you you want
a hot shower. It could be the perfect
temp or you could update. It's like so
and then
um you so there and then I but then uh
the quote at the very beginning of
10 which is that we're we're least aware
in general we are least aware of what
our minds do
best and it's like it is that or how is
that true? Why would that be true? Why
would
awareness, you know, what is awareness
and self-awareness such that it is like
it's like the joke of the
party? It's the least
capable, but it's the aware
one within an internal
compositionality and then transposing
that into the extended cognitive setting
that you mentioned, Stephen. And it's
like we're least aware of what what
others are doing. We don't know what
others are thinking. Maybe for the best.
And and and certainly just looking at um
and looking at a a tissue or looking at
an ant
colony, it's not that each cell or
nestmate is solving the problem that the
tissue is.
Huh? You're putting this into that
context of situational awareness or or
uh
not it's situated awareness. It the meta
awareness is the awareness but you it
can't be a thing itself.
Yeah. Yeah. Like what is metacognition?
But
metacognition it's like it's like if you
developed a software package with all
these like runners, handlers,
dispatchers,
operators, all these kinds of apparatus,
but then it's like and then what is it?
Yeah. like what's the
terminal rubber hits the road
inference. And it's like the whole the
whole metaccognitive apparatus is just
sort of waiting for the key in the
ignition for something even if it's just
a binary signal coming
in or even like a static signal coming
in. But but the whole but it's not but
the gears don't turn unless something is
is there.
Mhm.
And then it's like how slash can we
introduce novelty within oursel cuz
obviously in a social setting
amongst bodied minds we can see how
novelty could be introduced. Like you
could tell me about a place that you
went today that that I would have
otherwise not have known of.
Okay. But then there's also the
compositionality revealed through the
novelty of just like I don't know what
word I would think of if I were to think
what word should I randomly think of.
It's like coffee cup or something, you
know, again, oh that's cliche or
whatever, but it's like but I didn't I
didn't
know and there's some latent
distribution. It's not that I'm going to
come up with a word from a language that
I've never known.
So it's not a good um random number
generator for your cryptography per se,
but there is some distribution it's
sampled from, but what's the status of
that of that fancy? Okay, real quick.
This is a uh I want to
um ascribe a term to what you
just portrayed. trying to think of
something that you don't know that there
there's a pr that's a principle of
something. I don't know the term to
describe
that. Um
uh this is some somehow it's related
the end goal of awareness,
non-awareness, non-duality.
The the the the goal, the the the
process of
meditation and
escaping
self is to get to this point
of not trying but being of knowing what
you don't know. just being
awareness which is the state one would
have to be
in to be able to think of something one
doesn't know.
I mean that does seem to describe what
I've been trying to talk about with the
third mind to say like if you let go of
all the answers you know like everything
you know which would be all your
prejudices and if I let go let's say of
all of my questions everything I I don't
know all these preconceptions this whole
generative model and then I just what am
I left with? Well, I'm left in this
void, this abstract void of how things
like that get connected, you know, like
what are the possible empty chambers and
the doors and those chambers and things
like that like where so I'm in this kind
of very abstract void that I can get to
know and just just be dis disconnected I
guess from everything and just be but be
in full cognizance let's say um but
maybe so that's that's the state I'm
encouraging with an invest stigatory
community. But but maybe that's the
state that's the state that Buddhism
encourages. I'm not uh sure.
It must
be if if it's if there's a long, you
know, generational millennial tradition
of keeping what's true and letting
everything else go.
It must be the same.
And the advantage of that state is that
then you can rebuild everything, you
know, like just kind of like with a
new with a new sense of where is this
coming from? Like either you accept it
or you or you've kind of reworked it or
whatever. And then you can have this
harmony between the generative model,
the second mind and the first mind
reality so to speak or unconscious or or
whatever.
Well, all of all my takeaway from all of
my interaction
with you know variational free energy
and the active inference the principle
of active inference. It's my takeaway
is this is a general framework that's
universally applicable and it can be
applied appropriately or
inappropriately depending on how
it's put together what the model how the
model is
constructed. But it that it its power is
in its generality and its u disadvantage
is its generality.
Uh and I think
it's Go ahead. I think it's begging the
idea that it so beautifully gives us
freedom. It models the freedom like do
you want to perceive? do you want to uh
uh act well we'll maxim you know I guess
we'll minimize the free energy whatever
and and then but the idea is that yeah
but there could be different solutions
that are equally basically you know
equal or equal within a very small you
know error and so it begs the
opportunity that there's a there's
somebody who gets to choose you know or
somebody who gets to say hey I'm going
to make this am ambiguous and then given
the ambiguity then I'll choose you know
what do I which way I'm going to go so
because but it but it supplies is a it's
a very nice and rare model of freedom uh
or the or the preconditions for freedom.
Well, my again my conceptualization here
is that if the it depends on the
application the appropriateness. So if
if it if it's being uh applied to a
natural system that's pretty
straightforward in terms of physics and
and physical constraints. Yeah. It
doesn't require free but yeah but if
it's being applied to uh
um a uh mind
state then
it has then it's a it's maybe harder to
model always there has to be a behavior
component I mean that's
inherent in this free energy principle
right there there has to be an
action. You know, if if the action is
just a
concept, then it's more difficult
um to construct the model properly.
But if the action is interaction with
the world, then it's a little bit easier
because we're talking about a physical
system which
is we're going to say a bounded
system. Uh may maybe I I'll give my just
concluding thought that for many systems
it does a wonderful job of like uniting
action and perception and basically
saying like things are going to be a
certain way because of how they evolve.
And so that's very physical and and
maybe even deterministic, but it opens
up the idea that uh you can game this
whole relationship where like you can
balance things out between let's say
action or perception or different
opportunities and then there could be
something that just if it's able to
alter the context, you know, to say,
okay, I'm going to reinterpret the
context and that'll force things to go
one way as opposed another way. like it
does not it it sets things up at a
tipping point where it's easy to tip you
know so it's easy to model freedom in
that way it can't you can do that you
can do that make that application
yes and and that's why I say it could be
it can be misleading if it's not
constructed properly
well so something to code yeah
so many great pieces
is so many more pieces in linear time
that that I know we could add and
discuss. H how can something mislead
which does not claim to lead? But then I
mean e every single
little reconfiguration is there when
when
we go to that sort of trilmma
tetral unity duality 1 2 3 4 1 2 3
4 mode on viewing active inference
and uh again there's there's more pieces
um but a good closure for the cohort.
So, thanks fellows for sticking out to
the um epistemically
delightful culmination and and we'll
discuss more in the coming weeks where
we go from here. Thank you Dave for
leading us on this uh journey in active
inference.
Indeed. Peace. by