SPEAKER_06:
Hello everyone and welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

This is ACTIMP Lab live stream number 27.2 on August 31st, 2021.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll follow video etiquette for live streams and see who joins us the short link is the calendar of live streams of the past and future and we did choose 28 um paper but didn't update this slide so check the link for next week's paper

today in 27.2 welcome to stephen greetings in 27.2 we're um joined by the two stevens as it were and um we'll have a few questions that we can

have slides for, the figures to go through, the paper itself, anything else that anyone wants to add.

And then of course, any questions that people type in the live chat as well, if they're watching live.

So we can just say hello, and then we can leave it to the author last, just to maybe open it up or just bring what they

We're thinking about our second discussion here today.

So I'm Daniel, and I'm a postdoc in California.

I'll pass to Stephen Sillett.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, hello there.

I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto, and I'm working on social topographies and other spatial meaning-making and hoping to find ways for active inference to shed light and all of that.

And I'll pass it to the other Stephen.

Is that okay?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, good day to you.

I'm in Finland, southern Finland, based at the Technical Research Center of Finland, and I'm ready to answer questions.


SPEAKER_06:
Cool.

So again, anyone who is watching can post a question, but then there's a few that we have lined up a little bit.

Just one theme that

stood out as far as selecting this paper was that it was applied.

It was applied to making the kinds of objects and supporting the ability to have the internet and computers as well as just objects like pens and things like that.

So how does this idea of helping us design physical systems, which ends up being our niche modification activity as an economy,

How do we help design, maybe if we're not an industrial engineer, but potentially people working on different kinds of projects that end up modifying the environment, maybe even influencing the same systems that industrial engineers use or using some of the same techniques, but people who are just thinking along these lines and want to take what you translated one step towards application in your paper and then think about how it applies in their own work.


SPEAKER_03:
cyber physical system so the latest trend in this is for example the in in the USA and it's called smart manufacturing and in Europe industry 4.0 and a big thing in this is the idea of having digital twins

or digital siblings or even avatars.

And the idea of this is that there's a physical machine

The physical process has got sensors on it and actuators on it.

And the sensors bring live data to the digital equivalent of this physical process.

And then it seeks to optimize by seeing what's going on.

So at a basic level is, although difficult to achieve, is predictive maintenance, for example.

So if nothing else, at least to stop the physical process from malfunctioning or even worse, stopping.

And there's no theoretical...

um foundation for for these industrial innovations for things like digital twins so of course there's a theoretical background of cyber physical systems but there's nothing to uh

anchor it with in my opinion that's very straightforward so if we look at life sciences generally we know that evolution has had millennia of and millions of years to iterate to develop elegant solutions

so it seems sensible at least to me to to look to the life sciences to see how nature's evolved towards least action and of course a free energy principle and active inference framework or theory are from the life sciences and

are in their essence, I believe, very straightforward, as one would expect guiding principles in nature to be, and applicable to human and artificial intelligence, to artificial agents.

So I believe it's useful to start from that basis.

And with the free energy principle, this very straightforward idea of the

trying to minimize the information gap between the generative model and the world itself so that's a very straightforward idea and I know there's the mass behind it is evolving all the time and there's some debating

uh courteous dispute about that but the basic idea seems straightforward so i believe it's therefore a good place to start and because this is such a basic idea isn't it minimizing the information gap between the the generative model and the world itself is this what i've said helpful in any way


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks for this.

I wrote a lot of it down.

Steven's lit.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, some really good points there.

One thing I'd be interested in to know what your thoughts are is, you know, we can end up kind of

adapting our niche through action as a kind of consequence of like following a path and these types of things.

And then we've got this kind of more constructed sort of deliberative

organizational work um in which you know the in many ways the point of that work can be to construct the environment um in which tools will operate you know so in some ways we we use the tools of our legs or the tools of being in in the world and it can sculpt that niche and also we can be very much sculpting a bounded niche so i'm wondering my question is thinking about

whether you see those that kind of distinction as being significant and how you see um the idea of like the free energy or the implications of the free energy sort of rolling out in the niche versus it

the generative model for that niche being embodied in some way.

So anyway, so how much is there something when it's embodied?

For instance, when you're talking about these total quality management environments where someone is trying to maintain, I don't know, ISO standards of manufacturing or whatever.

So I wonder what your thoughts are about


SPEAKER_03:
that whether there's distinctions there in terms of active inference being particularly involved or you know the free energy principle more more generally so um so i believe that um that that the core of quality management is just a an instantiation of

free of realizing the free energy principle through active inference.

That's what I've put in the paper.

But there's a bigger issue about that in nature, things are evolving.

And as I put in another one of my papers in entropy that, that, so there are no, things are evolving to some degree naturally in,

So if you just take predator and prey, they just, it's evolved.

And if you're a beaver trying to get back to the lodge that you've built, your niche construction as a beaver, and there's a links in, if you see in between,

where you are in your beaver lodge and there's a lynx a hungry lynx standing in your way then it's clear that okay you know this is a predator and i should this is not my as a as a beaver that's not my preferred observation

Whereas my beaver lodge is a preferred observation.

But what goes on in human needs construction and ecosystem and environmental engineering is not so straightforward.

So, for example, highly refined food.

it seems to be naturally to us like a preferred observation because it tastes good.

And so it makes life less strenuous and more stimulating.

So if the company making highly processed food, ready meals, so on, it's acting within quality assurance.

So it's doing, in my opinion, active inference to...

realize the free energy principle but what its output is it subverts the free energy principle the externality it subverts the free energy principle because what it's offering to us as consumers it seems to be

consistent with what revolve to do so it makes life less strenuous and more more stimulating but actually it's not good for our health in the long term of course now and then no problem but if that's all you if you live in a food desert

If you live in a food desert, we know there are lots of studies that show that unfortunately this isn't good for health.

So if you take one entity at a time,

It can be conforming with the three energy principle through active inference, but its output subverts the free energy principle because it makes our preferred observations, instead of being good for us, are not good for us.

But we only discover that 20, 30 years later.

So that's quite a lot to, I have a diagram in, let me see, there's a simple diagram of this in, paper, so the paper's called,

It's called Multiscale Free Energy Analysis of Human Ecosystem Engineering.

Okay.

And there's one diagram in it, figure one.

So it's in entropy as well.

Yeah.

Can I share my screen?


SPEAKER_05:
Sure.


SPEAKER_03:
May I remind me?

There it is, isn't it?

Okay.

All right.

Are you seeing multiscale free energy analysis of human ecosystem engineering?


SPEAKER_05:
Yep.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

So here's this diagram then.

There it is.

So what active inference is leading us to is that, from nature, is that our preferred observation supports survival.

An unwanted surprise, so an unexpected difference between

a prediction of what we're going to experience based on our internal generative model.

So an unwanted surprise.

So if the beaver's going back to its lodge, it's thinking it's going to have an unhindered path back to its lodge.

And there's the unwanted surprise of a hungry lynx standing in the way, and it threatens survival.

So that's natural free energy principle.

But through human

environmental engineering niche construction within that preferred observations can threaten survival so if my preferred observation is a comfy sofa a large

tv screen um and a device to change channels and do gaming and then i can just order some food in it comes and very tasty but perhaps not good for me i could be sitting down for

16 hours and then go go lie down for the remaining eight hours and these may be all my preferred observations but they're not good for me whereas the unwanted surprise that supports survival could be messages that okay we should not sit down for more than 20 minutes we should take lots of physical activity we should eat make our own food and so on so

what's going on in human endeavors which may individually conform to realization the free energy principle through active inference can end up subverting the free energy principle outside of that productive active of that production activity

And here there's some numbers.

OK, so.

So beaver could develop a new generative.


SPEAKER_05:
Right?


SPEAKER_03:
See here.

All right, so in nature, for a beaver, the preference distribution for sensory inputs is, for example, plus 10 for the protective pond, the lodge, 0 for woodland, and minus 10 for a hungry predator.

But then if there's a bit of pollution

you change like, okay, so now this is getting more complicated.

So there's plus 10 productive ponding clear water, plus two productive ponding polluted water, woodland zero, hungry predators still minus 10.

But then...

Or the example in this paper is in some island nations, very small island nations where there's a lot of imported cheap calorie rich nutrient poor food.

And then the preference distribution could be plus 10 imported food, plus two local food, minus 10 no food.

even though there's clear evidence that the imported food is not good okay so there it is okay so did that um did that


SPEAKER_06:
lit up the hands I I wrote down some stuff as well but blue welcome um go for it and then afterwards will be Stephen's life


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks.

So I was really curious about that subverted model and where you're maybe not optimizing, where what your preference is is not optimizing for survival.

And I think that you used it in the human context, but I can think of many contexts where animals do a similar thing, like a moth will fly into a flame.

and like a cat like i have these two kittens now in my house and they're like such trouble right like their curiosity like had my cat trapped in a box earlier today like i mean trapped like under furniture in a box which was like so bizarre so i mean i can think of of models where it's always not optimal and so is this something that you think excuse me what was the last thing you said

Is this something that you frame as uniquely human?

Because I can think of many instances of non-human creatures that also have less than optimal preferences.


SPEAKER_03:
No, I'm not framing it as only human, but what I'm

pointing out is is that so for example the moth flies towards the flame but where did the flame come from and the cat's curiosity luckily did not kill your cats that's good um but they were going into boxes but where did the boxes come from

So are these things, of course, there are misjudgments.

So all living things can make a big, and of course, with predators and prey, that for sure the predators are trying to get the prey, aren't they?

people can have and living things can misjudge the how far away the praise and so on and signaling systems can can get messed up and things but with human beings the scale and the determination of

activities is is much larger so i don't there's a there's an american author who's his latest book i think it's called hooked um that uh he studied the for example the food industry for many years and um he his view is that

there's nothing at all malicious going on but it's just if you're if you're in the in the uh a certain business you want you're trying to get as many customers as possible and you're trying to retain them and

With no bad intentions at all.

It's all good intentions.

But then the effects are, we discover, it can be decades later that, okay, this is what we thought was good is not so good.

Whereas in nature, wherever the flame, suppose it was a flame from somewhere in nature.

It was a natural fire.

Well, the natural fire maybe came from a bolt of lightning or something.

It wasn't a determined effort over many decades of ever-increasing refinement of a market offering.

But so there's more.

So what I'm showing in the paper that you read, that diagram about how the quality management system is like a general, it's like an active inference system to reduce free energy.

So it's optimum for the organization, but it can be suboptimal.


SPEAKER_06:
outside the organization so i think a general word to them for this is externalities just uh two quick things one was trying to explore that distinction between what is human other than the fact that we care about us and each other

What is human?

And I was just thinking of the ants foraging out there in the desert and they don't do margin trading or staking of their seeds to try to get fractional seeds and lending of seeds.

It's like layer one seed gathering

versus the higher order symbolic risks that the humans engage in.

So that and the niche modification to the scale, among other factors.

And then also what you said about misjudgment and the ability to misjudge because a lot of people think, oh, well, you know, if

just say traditional understandings of evolution are about fitness then why why do organisms fail why do all organisms not just maximize their fitness or if active inference is about reduction of uncertainty or using action and inference to reduce uncertainty then why do organisms fail and that's where the engineering perspective comes into play like

things just do fall apart.

And just because there is an imperative, whether to maximize fitness or to minimize uncertainty, the point is of the ensemble, there's going to be a distribution of performance.

Like 100 engines, they're going to have some range of failure times, the LD50 for some pharmacological experiment.

So just because the framework has sort of a...

imperative whether fitness or uncertainty reduction doesn't mean that it's utopian or like pangolossian it means that every single thing always works perfectly so just cool points that you raised


SPEAKER_03:
But also, Blue, I have imperfect knowledge, that's for sure.

And I wouldn't make, I don't know enough, and maybe nobody does.

Like what was just said about ants, of course, those words were coming from an expert, and I know next to nothing about that.

many of the behavior of many of animals i don't know so for sure it's not it's not clear-cut it's not one that humans are doing this and all other animals aren't doing it thanks steven select and then of course anyone who's watching live i think this raises some useful areas where we have spaces where it's very free energy minimizing as the main


SPEAKER_00:
kind of way of getting a handle on things and the broader active inference.

So for instance, when we're dealing with equilibrium chemistry, we're dealing with things which are often boiled or heated or made to be effectively dead, which is what happens in most engineering processes, in most food processes.

I mean, the main thing that Coca-Cola does by putting sugar in is it makes a preservative.

Someone was saying to me, oh, why can't they just use water?

It's an awful lot easier to distribute Coca-Cola than to distribute bottled water because Coca-Cola doesn't go off because it's got so much acid and sugar in it, it won't go off, right?

So what you've got is you've got these processes like you're talking about with TQM.

And I worked in the pigment manufacturing industry.

So they were bringing in the ISO standards there around pigment manufacturing because they were inheriting a lot of these formulas from like 100 years previous.

And it was all about minimizing and to make things reproducible and within tolerance.

But you're always dealing with, you never want things to,

be organic you don't want things to sort of to grow in any place in the in the process you want it to all be i suppose you could say dead right but then what's really interesting as you point out is okay that might be what happens within the containment of the factory or the industrial process but it will go back into the world just like it will when it's out now as a product it will be used in

ecological niche and it will not be a dead niche you know that food that maybe isn't even biologically feasible or some of those chemicals are not there's no biological route to create them there's no way to create fluoride compounds biologically it just can't be done it has to only be done synthetically so what's your thoughts about that

sticking with minimizing free energy more when you've only got dead equilibrium systems and then when it and what and how much active influence is involved in in that i suppose a first order is it only a second or third order and then what how things pop out into the niche in the community or whatever


SPEAKER_03:
um i think this is um open question i mean at one level maybe it's um in world systems theory this uh the the framing is that there are so now we're talking about whole countries rather than just um a company making something in one factory that

But there are inevitably core, I think the terminology is core countries.

So it was the Netherlands, then Britain, then the USA, now going towards China.

And then there are peripheral countries, two levels of those.

the argument is that the the development of the core countries is dependent upon taking from the the peripheral countries and um is this entropy being shipped out of the uh so if if you think of like a a factory as a heat pump

And you're getting all the entropy out of the factory operations.

But then where's it going?

Is it being shipped out of the factory?

And then is entropy being shipped out of the, pumped out of the core countries into the rest of the world where things are confusing?

So I don't know.

i mean that's a bit of a broad sweeping statement isn't it so but maybe maybe on one level that's what's going on if there's if you if you have supply chains value chains and you push all the physical disorder out of those by eliminating all the information uncertainty

then does that mean that the physical disorder has inevitably got to go somewhere else I don't know so but maybe and then but with but for sure there are externalities and

The interaction between levels is, because in human endeavors, it's a shifting matrix.

It's not just a simple hierarchy.


SPEAKER_00:
So I don't know.

Can I just ask one thing, just bouncing back off that?

I think it's interesting.

So in some ways, by...

Why are things sort of being taken out of the ecological niche effectively by putting in a processing plant where it's effectively dead?

You heat up your sugar cane wool material in a vat with sulfuric acid, and it's all dead.

It's basically a chemical process that gets put into whatever foods that someone's eating.

The consequence of having that dead plant

equilibrium based process rather than non equilibrium steady state process is that you're saying it puts a burden back on the ecosystem to try and reintegrate it in a way.

So in some ways, is it pushing entropy out?

Or is it just placing a burden on the system to try and find a way to cope with something that it can't naturally incorporate easily into its niche?


SPEAKER_03:
What do you think, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I'm not sure, really.

I'm not entirely certain.


SPEAKER_06:
on this on this um transfer of disorder it's definitely very important like for example when people say well look at the miles per gallon of this car and then okay but where did the metal come from okay but you know everything is tied to everything and how we evaluate policies ultimately and choices are critical and we do have to understand the relationships of um

the world's supply chains but then i thought well it's not like there's a like we're in a bomb calorimeter or a heat bath where there's a constant um number or proportion of some kind of uh negative activity like there could be an ant colony with of in a niche with very low

nestmate aggression or bodies like there's organisms with low rates of cancer or in certain niches you know it's not like a statement of them across all patterns and times but um but then again it was like so things do fail and there's no perfect state but then at the same time um it's not zero sum in the informational game it's not like we're trying to because we're getting energy coming in

So can we kind of transmute physical order with information disorder?

Do we have to like offload something to another place physically?

Does it bump up against any of the information limits or calculations or density of processing or storage?

Will we not be able to remember enough?

And then there's a catastrophic failure.

I mean, there's so many components to your question.

So I hope that we can all keep thinking about that.

Because it's important at the level of human activity with the supply chain.

And it's also an important long range question.

And if we don't have a long range preference, then we're not going to get there.


SPEAKER_00:
i have one more bit in there without yeah um i think what's interesting as well is there's this question of because i don't really believe there is strictly speaking neg entropy as such so in terms of um it's always kind of a relative thing but it's a useful it can be useful to think about it that way sometimes but ultimately it's always a change so i suppose the question

comes in in terms of how much is it around the ability to infer using entropy as much as it is about how you know how much is it to be able to use change in entropy or dynamics of entropy which can be a complex jungle niche you know it could be a lot of entropy change and a lot of stuff going on but it can be very healthy how much is that ability to

dynamically get at the variational free energy really important for life.

Whereas for us, it's all about, at times, in an engineering context, it's just reducing free energy per se, as a kind of an overall entropy term, which could be actually not so much about variational change.

It's just an overall general reduction in entropy.

I wonder what your thoughts are on that.


SPEAKER_06:
One thought on that on the biological side is what's an industrial engineering relationship, ecosystem engineering relationship that has persisted for billions of years or millions of years or just long time, however you want to see it.

The nitrogen cycle and some of the redox cycles in the bacterial relationships, biofilms, the mitochondria and the eukaryotes.

that's a shifting interface but on the other hand eukaryotes can totally count on that interface the powerhouse of the cell as they say to persist but then there's this other sense in which there is still a game theory and a failure mode and uh probably an interface of maximal uncertainty and the requirement for active sensing and trade-off costs

So, again, it's not like things, I think, work 99% of the time or 100% or 20% of the time.

That is kind of how the chessboard is set up for it to even be a winning board at all.

There's just niches where it can't work.

There's temperatures that the population will just die at, period.

So is our engineering conditions such that there is a path that's going to lead to what standard of life with what precision and uncertainty for what distribution of people?

Like did we way, way overshoot and now it's going to change back down to a different way?

Or is there some critical path to changing the distribution of industry?

Because it's not going to be any way it was from zero to 2021.

It's not going to be that way next year.


SPEAKER_03:
Are you still seeing my screen?


SPEAKER_06:
I'm not.

Could you reshare it?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

All right.

This is...

Let me do that again.

Are you seeing now, figure one meta ecosystems in the Anthropocene?


SPEAKER_06:
Now I see it, yep.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Yes, this is a paper, I'll go to the title.

But

This is not by me, by others, nothing to do with me.

I'm just a reader of it.

And one thing that they're saying that you can just, so here, this is the same, these are showing the same things, but A is where human impact on migration-based meta ecosystem.

It's just sort of implicit.

And on this framing of it, they say, OK, so we explicitly deal with the socio-ecological framework about, OK, so what are human beings, what mental models of human beings got, what regulations arise from that, and then that input into it.

So let me go to the top so you can see the title.

yeah embedding meta on embedding meta ecosystems into a socio-ecological framework and this is a response this is just a short paper it's a response to somebody who replied to that no it isn't actually nope i'm mixing up with another one there it is that's the title anyway so i'm wondering if

that may be that each way of making things has got its own

entropy dynamics and in this entropy and dynamics there's physical disorders reduced information uncertainty is reduced but maybe that then pushes the entropy out elsewhere

And then just doing more of the same thing, it's just not possible.

There's a limit to it.

And with world systems theory, this is the jist of it, that there are these core countries and there are peripheral countries that serve them.

And maybe that if there's one way of doing things,

You can't address the entropy that's caused by that by trying to do more of the same or trying to tweak that way of doing things.

And maybe something quite different has to be done.

And maybe there's something to be learned from landscape restoration ecology.

in this about that about um habitat fragmentation that that uh okay so here are these habitats and they've grown and they're thriving but these ones over here they fragmented they split and this there's nothing from them but dispersal

so as people are dispersing from um parts of the world that are suffering from premature de-industrialization that maybe there's something in uh entropy dynamics that

Could be that, well, doing this type of industrial production, this drives out the entropy, but it's shipping it out.

It's going out elsewhere.

And the entropy that is then in other places, it can't be dealt with other than by another way of existing.

Does that sound in any way sensible?


SPEAKER_06:
very interesting area multiple levels of nested modeling and uncertainty and how informational and thermodynamic uh aspects transmute into one another and arbitrage with one another or relate to each other so it's really interesting area

And one kind of thought on that, and again, to the fast food and things that might be unhealthy for us or policies that might be unhealthy in the long term for an organization, it made me think about being on a road trip

and knowing that there was going to be not just the hyper stimulating experience, which has been argued in many other frameworks, like in reward based frameworks, which is what, you know, dopamine, the reward molecule, reinforcement learning, reward learning.

They'll already have a framing for how those products hyper stimulating lead to failure modes of complex societies via hyper stimulation.

OK, so that is sort of a common stance.

With active inference, we can also kind of highlight the fact that those products have lower variability and that there's actually very bland foods that for reason of blandness or like a TV show or something that for reasons of narrative or aesthetic, just similarity, people will rewatch.

I mean, even to videos of types of people didn't expect,

Why do people watch the log burning or the goop playing?

Because they're sort of like the frontier of optimal foraging is about like how it's going to sound, which is a very small thing to be resolving relative to the more deeper, unsettling levels of information that could be revealed, like someone else's perspective of you or something like that.

So it's just interesting how we can actually

As you pointed out, the supply chains are modeled on one hand by these cyber-physical digital twin frameworks that need a unifying

approach and so on one hand active inference does provide that but then looking at the other side of the equation so what you didn't discuss in our paper for these weeks but where you left off when you start introducing the biological and the survival imperatives then we can also have some new ways of thinking about how those industrial products through precision hacking rather than reward hacking end up leading to maladaptive behavior with or without


SPEAKER_03:
reward incentivization are you um what are you seeing on are you seeing my screen now a different yep bird diagrams you see birds yeah generalist bird gap specialist butterfly

interior habitat but especially so this is another paper um i'll again i'll scroll up to the top she says tile um and it's making this point that uh landscape composition and configuration good different species perceptions and so the first one's a human and then it's different species and as it's neatly illustrated there that the same the same place looks different

to different species.

And so what I'm, and the kind of, the terminology here is that there are patches, habitat patches, and they can be corridors between them or stepping stones between them.

And the stuff, the other stuff is called matrix.

And I personally can't ever see that word or say it without thinking about the movies.

So that is a bit of a problem.

But in the landscape ecology, it is called the matrix.

So I think this could be useful.

of illustrating that well okay that so here's the road to the mine these uh from country companies built the road to the mine they built the mine and they're taking the stuff out and they're taking it back to their country to um do highly efficient manufacturing with it and then they send the completed goods back and but then what's left um

So if you just measure that in terms of GDP growth, then the GDP goes up divided by the number of people and it appears that prosperity is rising.

But if you look at it in this kind of view, it shows that, well, there's a lot of blank spaces left here.

And if we think about it in terms of this restoration or regeneration, it

It's looking at it.

Because of course, the perspective of the human, the generalist bird, the gap specialist butterfly, and the beetle, they're all equally valid.

And so let me see what this paper's called.

Landscape Ecology and Restoration Processes.


SPEAKER_06:
even within the same physical overlap one bug might be underground or in the roots or on the ground in the canopy so even the physical micro niche that different strategies or individuals experience in the same spot in the matrix can be very different so there's just such richness to this ecological thinking and

It's just challenging to bring it into play in some of our cognitive endeavors, but I think that is also changing rapidly.


SPEAKER_03:
So I've taken an ecological perspective in.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
we're doing one paper on meme ecosystems and rhetoric ecosystems by the end of this year but it's not active direct but maybe it'll have some relationship


SPEAKER_03:
Could well do.

Um, are you now seeing a table?

All right.

So what I've done here is I've, uh, done this from a, uh, ecological perspective and, uh, well, you can see these terms, but one thing in, uh, a restoration ecosystem restoration is mobile linking organisms.

But, uh,

that like birds and animals that can travel quite a long way they can go so after this is a forest fire then animals that can travel quite a long way particularly birds they can come they can fly and drop seeds and and things like that so this is an established concept mobile linking organism and i'm pointing out that this is something that we've done in mobile factories

And then energetics, another key issue is that if there's no, if all the energy, if all the matter and energy are flowing out, then life isn't sustainable.

And of course, there we are.

So I've done that.

Relating to my favorite subject, movable production technologies.

okay so um so that's like i think this is decentralized systems isn't it that the second point that was it that was the lead-in the segway okay nice how about oh go for it um stephen

Yeah, so I think this is the thing that if everything's, so at the moment, there's this centralization.

Oh, let's have a look at this.

I've got, I go again, so let's have a look here.

Are you, what do you see now?

Do you see a taxonomy?


SPEAKER_06:
Taxonomy and manufacturing distributions.


SPEAKER_03:
And their comparative relations to sustainability.

Yes.

All right, so here they are.

So there are distributed distributions and centralized.

And as we see, there's plenty of distributed options.

And then I compare them in terms of economic, ecological, social, and institutional sustainability.

And where I think active inference, I've just started to look into this agent environment systems.

and framing it as the agent has a generative model, but the world is a generative process.

The sensory inputs are coming from the generative process to the world.

And I think that this enables active influence to be linked to.

uh ecosystem dynamics and that that what we've been well what i've been saying before about this centralized distribution it um it's super efficient and it's getting uh engineering out physical disorder and information uncertainty but then

maybe that entropy is going somewhere else and maybe new information is needed to activate the more distributed options so do you think do you think that

that if there is a predominant paradigm, which in this case there is industrial manufacturing, based on the 300 years old paradigm, that if the information about how to make things is all about that and how to improve that,

And then

then does it become a zero-sum game?

So if it is shipping out entropy, like a heat pump, out to the peripheral nations, do you think it's a zero-sum game if there isn't alternative information?

So if nobody knows or there hasn't yet been conceived an alternative,

then is it like a closed system?

So in a closed system, the entropy, if it's pushed out of one place, it goes to the other places.

So is it a closed system?

Is it a closed system if all the information is about one paradigm?

So is this like, for example, am I in any way coherent here?


SPEAKER_06:
it's an extremely important question and um you know socio-technical systems political systems tokenomics that last forever are these the the uh perpetual motion machines of the 2020s and just a new level of uh computational uh detail and flourish but the same kinds of fallacies and then um

Whatever the thermodynamics of the Earth are, our niche is finite, and we've now made some potentially, whether or not the sum is zero or even negative, or could be positive but is negative, there may be informational and strategic games that don't resolve like heat baths.

So they can't be understood with some of the at least most tangible physical metaphors that thankfully guide the evolution of theories that are first principle like FEP, like Carl Friston with the wood lice.

Seeing the trajectory of a real thing and that's based upon health and longevity.

Blip.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I had a question about the table that you pulled up earlier, specifically about ecosystem engineering.

And so I'm not sure if it's just a term that I'm not familiar with, or in terms of engineering, I'm kind of naive.

So when you're thinking about ecosystem engineering,

I equate that to niche modification or, like, designing a system, like, even, you know, you could design, like, a world system.

So here it says it does not require overriding the natural evolutionary balance of equal ecological fitness.

But, like, I think about, like, the human paradigm.


SPEAKER_03:
Could I just... Sure.

Yeah.

But that's movable production technologies.

So what I'm saying there is that if you've got a movable factory, so a truck, if you've got a second-hand truck with a second-hand container on the back of it, it does not require overriding the natural evolutionary balance.

So it's specifically in relation to, if you look at the top, it says movable production technologies.


SPEAKER_02:
So how is that ecosystem engineering, though?


SPEAKER_03:
No, it isn't.

Yeah, but the point, obviously, this table is not clear.

And it is my responsibility.

It's not clear.

I am responsible for this.

But so the...

what is meant by this is because further up in the paper it's pointing out that if you have fixed production technologies so if you've got a big fixed factory you build a load of roads huge roads going to it and so on that involves a great deal of ecosystem engineering but a mobile a mobile factory it can just go over rough terrain


SPEAKER_06:
also to uh play devil's advocate against the author the enabling function of a realization of something something physical that can be an ecosystem engineering agent aka niche modifying agent

that it's going to have to be a niche modifying agent.

So this is just sort of then connecting that to mobile organisms.

So you have quote plants, AKA factories that are planted.

And then those can be like, they're not like trees simply, but

they're planted and so they have strategies not dissimilar from other rooted organisms but then you have mobile organ linking organisms so it sort of connects that all the things that mobile organisms like all animals do and can do with what a factory could do ecologically blue


SPEAKER_02:
So it just kind of makes me think about what kind of biological organisms take their niche with them, right?

Like maybe a snail or a turtle, to take a large component of their habitat, essentially, with them wherever they go.

The mobile technology made me think of that.


SPEAKER_06:
Yep, some people like to travel with light.

you know, just the keys or something.

Other people, full backpack every time.

Stephen, Silette?


SPEAKER_00:
I like this idea of something coming out of the factory, going into the space, and then things being secondhand.

That's basically the third, fourth, fifth hand.

Because there is something there that is delivered.

I mean, if you're going to use entropy, I suppose you could say...

low entropy kind of new vehicle, you know, whatever it is.

And slowly it gets incorporated into the ecosystem.

It starts to get scratches.

It starts to get this.

Then you see in India, you know, people start decorating the vehicle, you know, all this sort of stuff will happen over time as

it becomes somehow incorporated into the niche, I suppose you could argue.

I think that's quite interesting how that maybe starts to change the dynamic.

I'm still not sure whether entropy is so useful term or whether it's some other way of looking at a metric, maybe something to do with

pre-energy minimization as a thing, but yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
One other piece of that table that was interesting was there was multiple goals like sustainability and fitness.

So it is not a univariate optimization.

We're not just doing reward or utility maximization.

can choose multiple goals and we can have multiple human goals which is especially important for things that you know we care about but then this one of mutualism is interesting because a lot of times mutualism could be seen as like an outcome like the outcome of these two bacteria's relationship in the niche is a commensalism or mutualism or symbiosis whatever it happens to be but actually using this idea of the um

the outputs like the observation states of a higher level bayesian model being like the priors on a lower level nested model having a goal of mutualism is implicit in the lower level model enacting that mutualism because you're not accidentally gonna metabolically coordinate through millions of generations

so this is kind of an interesting way where uh like we have to want to make it work because we're not going to accidentally make it work and get along but that can be a hyper prior like a belief about how things ought to be or how we want or prefer things to be and then we enact policy along those lines


SPEAKER_03:
And by the way, in another paper, I do point out there are limitations to movable factories.

So I'm not saying that this is a panacea.


SPEAKER_06:
But it's sort of like, let's just say cactus versus like a desert animal.

You know, the desert animal, they have different ways of getting water.

And so, but when we can design the system, we can do trade-offs.

Like you could have something that's stationary, but then isn't just holding all of its own money because its money can be like on a digital system.

So it can have some of the advantages of a stationary organism from an ecological perspective, like a tree, but then like the value of the tree could be protected in some other way because we have some other affordance and or that forest could be de-risked at a higher level because it's like, oh, each one of these is, we expect to fail this many percent of the time or we have these quality control checks on it


SPEAKER_03:
I think a lot of thought is required about these things, isn't it?

I don't think there's one big answer, but at least I think one good thing about the energy principle active inference, it ties into action and that ties into energy.


SPEAKER_06:
so this is good yep when you're doing the thought experiment pure uh gedanken then it's like can be elucidating you know imagine you're going towards the speed of light or imagine you have a physical mass of this size but then there's no constraint which is again double-edged sword on some of these attributes that require action

And so that's an interesting idea that it ties us to active states, which is pragmatic and useful, but also

interesting and then also one thing on the affective system and then blue you can ask anything was just we've talked also about higher order variables in organisms being kind of like affective states whether they were the valence like positive or negative or the anxiety or the relative beliefs of an organism um so just

how do we design for when there's higher order states maybe even ones that could be considered affective either for people or for for organisms or i mean uh organizations that have this kind of organismal structure but blue


SPEAKER_02:
So interestingly, like this is going to touch on what you just said, but also going back to what you said about mutualism and the goal like has to be mutualism.

So I don't know.

I really have to contact the author of the book.

2020 paper, uh, Sims is his name, uh, how to count biological minds, symbiosis, the FEP and reciprocal multi-scale integration, uh, which I have found, um, very fascinating, but I would love to invite him on for a stream someday.

Uh,

the whole point of that is that there's like nested cognition happening at the biological scale and specifically that paper looked at the squid and the vibrio fischeri that like light up the squid in the in the light organ and you know in that kind of context as in an industrial organization there's like this nested cognition happening and where

The point of that was the goal wasn't necessarily mutualism, or in that case, symbiosis.

That's not necessarily the goal, but a bigger, grander organism was constructed out of the union between these two organisms.

And so perhaps in an industrial scale, that's also something that happens, right?

I mean, there's different parts to the organization that'll keep it running and you factor in all the supply chain things.

And so there's this nested hierarchical thing that happens and something bigger that has its own kind of cognition occurs as a result of this like mutual beneficial relationship.


SPEAKER_06:
We see the paper.


SPEAKER_03:
The paper?


SPEAKER_06:
We see the paper that Stephen just put up.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, there's some... I thought it said in here somewhere about

Yeah, it's different types of relationships.

So mutualism is beneficial, beneficial, and parasitism is beneficial, harmful.

But in between those, there's beneficial and neutral.

And there are several, in between mutual and parasitism, there are several,


SPEAKER_06:
other states and I just remember that the one of them is beneficial and neutral if I could give a kind of random thought on that and why the informational sphere might have a different entropy dynamic than the physical like the electromagnetic spectrum

that can have a lot of positive and neutral relationships like if someone's operating on two different wavelengths and one is only on one wavelength then they can be like of mutual service to each other or one could just be totally non-interacting because they can be overlapping in space and time at once and one person might not even have to be aware of it whereas in the tangible um i guess most embodied one can be

you know, only one thing per spot, that's zero sum.

There just can't be two atoms in the same spot.

Or maybe, you know, two laws playing out in one territory.

But informationally, there's probably a lot more multichanneling and that might give enough room for practical success, if not ultimate theoretical answerings.

Stephen Slitt at MBLU.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this brings up a lot of issues.

It's very fascinating.

I'm curious...

So coming back to this idea, and Daniel mentioned hyper priors, i.e.

things that we kind of have fixed.

I actually looked that up, actually, to make sure I understood it.

But things that we have is very distinctive.

I'm again trying to compare these

these types of environments where one where you've got an agent wanting or being able to just calibrate in amongst the noise and ones where you want to just keep it as clean as possible you know so

and and the challenges sometimes when you have a a quality management system in those places so for instance i suppose one thing that comes to mind is the experiment with a rat that they used to have and they've had for years about having cocaine or addictive substances and how they would they only needed to have a couple of times and they would be addicted and it was seen as this kind of proof of principle about addiction and how it works and then the more recent work where they instead of putting them in a bare box

and just having the cocaine or whatever they were being exposed to.

They were in a more ecological box where there was things to do.

And they suddenly found that the behavior of the animal was very different.

They wouldn't necessarily become addicted in the same way because they were in a better ecology.

Now, in theory, the entropy has gone up there, if we're looking entropically.

But for the animal, they've been able to engage and dynamically process that.

That's very different to how you would try and create a medical production line, right?

You want to keep it clean.

You want to keep it sterile.

um you want to have those sorts of things so i'm just curious about that that and then the danger maybe in biological system of this hyper prior say that some sort of kick or something that comes from food not having any other compliments around like as daniel you know so there isn't other things so that just naturally kicks in like the reward goal which may be always there as a default

If there's not other things to compliment, it starts running the show.

And that could be part of how we get into these maladjusted behaviors that you were talking about.

I wonder what your thoughts are on that.


SPEAKER_06:
Just quick point of clarification.

That's not what a hyper prior it is.

That's not a hyper stimulating stimuli.

A hyper prior is a prior over another prior in a Bayesian multi-level framework.

So it doesn't have to be accentuating or differentiating or extreme or maladaptive.

It's a general framework for the relationship between variables.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Well, I was thinking it was more of the hyper prior could give a, it's a, it's a, it's a fairly fixed prior, isn't it?

It's one which is a go-to solid prior and it's useful for being that.

I'm just saying having that present.

Hyper prior could be fixed or learned.

Or learned.

Okay.

Okay.

But it tends to be hyper prior means it's quite accurate, isn't it?

It's not fuzzy.


SPEAKER_06:
Hyper is, I think, a spatial designation like supra, not in the extreme case.

Hyper is only referring to the fact that it's a parameter about another parameter.

So it doesn't tend to be hot or cold or anything.

It's just the general phrasing.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, got you.

Got you.


SPEAKER_03:
so but stephen fox if you want to add anything then otherwise look okay we see the head yes so in now the effective system so here

Here's my diagram.

So in this, it's a little bit so small I can't see it myself, that if there's the same starting point,

but of a generative model.

So if the human being in the human robot interaction knows that, okay, so I'm in the predict, I'm human, I'm in the predictive processing business, that's what I'm doing, and

and um so i've got prior beliefs and i have got generative models then the robot

can be um what does that say personas and scenarios for robot based on the humans uh well that's world view but generative model and human readable model of the robot mind that corresponds to that so that's um and this is in

Aligning human psychomotor characteristics with robot and augmented reality.

In this.

So there's a bit of a model there.


SPEAKER_06:
That's also very related to the Felix Scholler's paper, Trust as Extended Control, Active Inference and User Feedback During Human-Robot Collaboration.

Ooh.

I'll put it in the YouTube chat.

I'll put it in the YouTube chat.

Great.

Go for this one.


SPEAKER_03:
So that's...

it's all in the past experiences physiology so this is body memory in the personality gender culture emotion reasoning in bio cybernetics so this paper i'm relating that to what um how this can affect interaction with robots exoskeletons and augmented reality there it is

We got here a few equations.

There it is.

But, hitherto, as I point out in this, that ... Yeah, so.

In previous production literature, the uncertainty of human behavior

This is true.

So in previous production literature, the uncertainty of human behavior has been recognized as a source of productivity, quality, and safety problems.

However, fundamental reasons for the uncertainty of human behavior have been framed previously as a black box.

So what I was trying to do there was relate it to open up the black box.

Frame it as an open box and then fundamental reasons can be aligned with production to facilitate improved production performance.

So that's as far as I've got with that.


SPEAKER_06:
it's almost like for the uh reward utility driven person you can say there's going to be an increased expectation of performance for the uncertainty minded you can say there'll be a reduced variance for the resilience minded or for the reconfiguration minded that there'd be an increased capacity to rapidly reorganize so i think that we'll have all or none blue


SPEAKER_02:
So my thoughts kind of dated at this point, but just going back to, touching back on to mutualism and the electromagnetic spectrum, when you were talking about how the signal can amplify,

there's also the possibility for the signal to cancel, right?

If the wavelengths are the same and they're heading in opposite directions, they just directly cancel each other out.

And it kind of made me think of cancel culture and also the relationship between...

you know, the parasite is also like a nested biological relationship, even though it's not necessarily beneficial, but there's still this nested layer, like the parasite is unable to function without the host, of course, but

the host embodying the parasite is a completely different cognating creature.

And I think about the zombie ants, right?

I don't know if you guys have heard.

Daniel can probably unpack the zombie ant a lot better than I can.

But it's a parasite that then drives the behavior of the ant due to some rewiring of the cognitive process.

So even in the parasite instance, there's still a greater cognizing structure.


SPEAKER_03:
And going back to neutralism again, the other terms are, so commensalism is where one gains benefit while the others, it hasn't, there's a neutral, no benefit, no harm.

And then there's a mensalism where one is harmed while the other is unaffected.

so they're in between so there's first mutualism benefit benefit then commensalism where there is uh benefit neutral and then there's a mensalism where there's um harm and neutral and then parasitism where there's one is harmed and the others benefits


SPEAKER_06:
I wonder if this has to do with the movement from maybe just its semantic, but from sustainability to regenerative.

Because sustainability, it's like the sustain on the guitar sound or the bell.

Like, let's sustain.

Let's have this car and sustain it or make it...

can be meant to mean more than that but it's about uh sustaining something that exists versus regenerating uh means like we're gonna have to be doing more than just persisting or stabilizing it that it has to be also actively having this process of uh of regeneration which always involves like multiple parts like bucky fuller saying that unity is plural and at minimum two

so then now thinking about how from polyculture of growing crops to monoculture green revolution and everything and then now oh maybe there should be the fish in between the roots of the plants and then the birds and then the mushrooms like this are these stable ecosystems that is what remains to be seen but some human modified

niches like sourdough bread and things and beer have been really successful so maybe there's higher order combinations too that could be really successful and be very productive but um this is kind of a framework that helps us at least explore that so that's quite cool


SPEAKER_03:
I was at, remotely of course, there was a launch, the South African Grassroots Innovation Program.

They did a launch yesterday with five lady innovators, and one of them was doing movable aquaponics.

And she seemed to have addressed

it's quite a sophisticated system, but it's all, uh, it's all set up in buckets that can be carried.

One person can carry the buckets.

That's the size they are.

And then you build up the, the farm by different, just having the number of the different, the more buckets you get, the bigger the, the aquaponic farm.

So that was interesting.


SPEAKER_06:
And then again, with a physical zero sum and then the electromagnetic or informational or financial non-zero sum,

If the overlapping is just given the tools that already exist in the ecosystem that you find yourself in, like you're dropped on Survivor Island, you still may be able to find some synergies.

Most of them you won't know, but over a long time, traditional ecological knowledge can learn about some medicinal combinations and, oh, these two should be combined for the boat and these kinds of things.

design, and this is related to what Steven said about the product being plugged into another external niche and what you wrote about the cupboard being attached to the wall, like we could design some pretty minimal pieces that might really scaffold

You build a trellis and then something grows within it.

So the engineering might not be huge to connect a few pieces that have a latent capacity to work together.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, the word you used there, scaffolding, has that got any...

Of course, I've heard it before, but does that have any basis in nature to your knowledge?


SPEAKER_06:
I would certainly say so from the spicule structures like in bones and the way that physical structures are scaffolded to embryogenesis and the developmental scaffolding of the uterus and the

for caretakers and it's different insects and humans and the family and so I think there's the cultural scaffolding and then all the way down to the microstructural cytoskeletal scaffold for scaffolding enzyme complexes that then can do very efficient things too


SPEAKER_03:
It's interesting because the problem with the challenge with so-called grassroots entrepreneurship and innovation is scaling it up.

That's the challenge.

That's what was said yesterday.

That's what was said in India.

There's this problem that solutions are developed and they work.

but they at best stay where they've been in the village where it's been developed.

It sort of just stays there.

And so scaling up and it's an open source, um,

would it's well there it is the technology is there isn't it open source ecology it's uh it's possible to put all engineering designs and bills and materials and um methods of work and all on the internet where anybody can access it but still things are not scaling up thanks blue


SPEAKER_02:
So I think about scaffolding in terms of like neural systems, but also in societal systems.

In the brain, like my PhD work was focused on finding a scaffold that will promote the growth of neurons across neurons.

across the lesion.

And so when you have a traumatic brain injury, the glia, which is like the natural scaffold, like freak out and form a scar to prevent like the whole rest of the brain from dying because cell death can be like this kind of cascading process.

And so the glia, and it literally results in like a hole in the brain where the injury was.

So I was looking at these bioengineered scaffolds that promote the growth of neurons across that hole.

So like it'll form a bridge or a structure, a scaffold for the neurons to grow.

And then, you know, in terms of the societal setting, I think about scaffolding as infrastructure.

And I mean, even in an organization, like you have to have...

bridges and roads and internet connections and utilities.

And, you know, these things are, it's the infrastructure that's necessary for kind of new branches or systems to start up.

And even in like the farming terms, it's like, you know, the, like, I don't know, here we just call them the ditches, but like the irrigation canals, I guess is probably the proper term.

Like that, you know, the, where you can,

get a river to flow off into different subsections and then irrigate the farmland with that water.

So I think about that as the scaffold.


SPEAKER_06:
Awesome, Blue.

Nice connection and sounds like cool PhD research.

We see your screen, Stephen.


SPEAKER_03:
So you see Grassroots Innovation Program?


SPEAKER_06:
Yes.


SPEAKER_03:
okay yeah so that was that was yesterday um although the press release was in july but it's not it's not detailing the book but there we are this is the um so in south africa there were the rate of unemployment is i think officially it's more than 30 percent but um unofficially it could be as high as 50 percent and uh

This is so they're now trying to address at least partly through this grassroots innovation problem program.

So one, and there are, there are similar, and we know that the book decades ago, small is beautiful.

And Gandhi was before that was promoting this, but it does, it's not scaling.

And so there are these in-between industrial production.

There's just this ever-increasing wasteland.

But efforts are going on around the world.

And grassroots is a good term because it's just growing from evolving naturally, isn't it?


SPEAKER_06:
Sounds like really interesting work.

Thanks for sharing it.

Stephen, select.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, actually, that ties in.

I actually was running a project in South Africa, funny enough, and working on looking at how to create community-driven innovation through strategic conversations at the community level.

And there is an interesting difference between grassroots, I think, and community-driven.

So I think that grassroots is often kind of tied to

It's like the base level of the organizational structures.

You often hear it with political campaigns and stuff.

It's the grassroots.

But those grassroots are the grassroots of a campaign where people sort of get into there, which is a little bit different to the kind of a community-embedded, community-driven scale.

And that comes back to this scaling question, which is the same thing that had the problems that... So the scaling is now... When you talk about scaling up, I think that's a big...

challenges how does stuff get scaled up and they often are talking as well about scaling out if you have a program or scaling deep

So some things might scale up because they go up to a higher level and then they basically get dropped down again.

But how do these things get scaled out?

So there may be some, I think you're tapping into a few multi-level issues, which I think are quite important.

So I wonder what your thoughts are about

going into these kind of embedded local contexts to create new seeds, so to speak, for like adaptability and innovation.


SPEAKER_06:
It's like a seed is a biological planting metaphor.

The scaffold is highlighting the industrial component of a biological process.

Like you still need the tomato seed.

So it's not saying it's not community driven.

It's just like a soil metaphor.

Like how these...

communicate what our vision is and they really do matter.

And so they're really important points.

Actually, here's a comment from Kevin in the chat who wrote, is the scaffolding a schema or is this supposed to be anatomical?

That is, is there some physiological analog in the human nervous systems or genome that corresponds to the scaffolding?

I think Blue made an awesome point about the glia and about connective tissue being an immune tissue being scaffolding physically for like the synapse and for cells.

And then the genome, oh yes, the chromatin scaffolding goes deep in the nuclear pore structure.

And that's a whole cool area.

And maybe there'll be a day for transcription factor active inference soon enough.


SPEAKER_03:
so um what you're saying these hands this is a an organization um uh active in botswana and everything they're doing there there we are you can see yep

yeah so this is led by uh fabisa and he he's um applying design methods in um communities in southern africa with great effects

And this is all, so the idea is that people are, with their own hands, are developing innovations and, as you say, can be scaled out.


SPEAKER_05:
Ooh, yeah.

Scaling, it's almost, oh, go on, scale.


SPEAKER_03:
So for example, in that part of Africa, there are many movements, like many initiatives going on.

But it would be very beneficial if there was a...

framing, a kind of unifying framing of what they're all doing, which can be seen as an alternative form of socioeconomic development rather than just as something that's, well, fundamentally inferior.

to the conventional model of industrialization.

So all suggestions are welcome.


SPEAKER_06:
i just put in the youtube chat a volume uh by caporel grismer and whimsat developing scaffolds in evolution culture and cognition and so the paradigm change as steven kind of hinted at very early is like from systems where we eradicate the life to where we welcome the life and all that it brings

and we don't need to build that and we can't build it we're not going to be able to compose the lipids and the millions of years of fault tolerances into some sort of uh you know monster that helps our living systems we don't even have to though we just have to build an engineered scaffold and the scaffold can be radically different than what the final product looks like the scaffold can even disintegrate if it's biodegradable

So it's a really interesting area that this discussion went, which was like towards the engineering that makes us think of like foundries and some of the technical and precision processes, tying them to some natural processes like this evolution culture cognition volume does and unifying frameworks.

those uh together almost point away towards engineering a scaffold not a booster rocket or just a bunker but bunkers might come into play of doing some scaffold design so that there could be reduction of expected free energy through deep time so pretty interesting um point steven thanks for sharing all these resources too blue


SPEAKER_02:
Just a quick comment.

You were talking about the scaffolding disintegrating.

Sometimes the scaffolding is designed to disintegrate.

I think about in biological terms, we have webbing between our fingers that enable the growth of the digits.

And then it's designed to be eroded in the developmental process.

So sometimes that's part of it.

Or even when you get a wound sealed,

You have the stitches that form the scaffolding so the healing process can occur, but they dissolve inside the wound.


SPEAKER_00:
Actually, that's quite cool to think about that as well in the processes.


SPEAKER_06:
And when we, whether in areas that we live in or areas that we don't live in, when we plan to intervene, are we planning to make something that sustains itself?

Or are we planning to deliver or co-create a scaffold that is planned to disappear?

Those are really different views on local and distal intervention.

Steven, with the screen share?

What's on the screen, Stephen Fox?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

So now this is an initiative called Connected Hubs.

So this is coming from the Southern African Innovation Support Program.

And the idea is that there are hubs which support

innovation and entrepreneurship and these are this particular one is um so as you can see the connectivities here in this part of africa and what the idea is build capacities and support and

So it's connecting different

hubs together and so a hub it's just what that means is it's just that usually they've got a physical location and they there are people you can contact there remotely and physically who've got can help with developing ideas for entrepreneurship and social entrepreneurship so this is something that's going on

it's connecting hub so maybe there's well this is hopefully this is the intention is this persists after the southern African innovation support program is on the second phase now after it finishes so this is one

suppose it's summed up in this uh diagram here this idea that there are more and more hubs in and the european commission is um trying this uh africa eu digital innovation hubs


SPEAKER_06:
We'll see this and then there we are.


SPEAKER_03:
So this is kind of things that are going on.

So I'm involved in this project, sustainable network of digital innovation hubs.

So that's something that's coming down from the African Union and the European Union.

And the aim is that this is a somewhat new way of facilitating socioeconomic development.

And the idea is to try to get auto-catalytic effects by more connections, more dynamism.


SPEAKER_06:
Well, they're always welcome to come talk about active inference at whatever stage.

In the last few minutes, we'll just have Stephen and then Blue.

And yeah, just give kind of last thought or question here as we close out.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, yeah, no, thanks.

Very interesting.

And I suppose with active inference, I think...

very interested in these developments.

It's actually how I ended up getting into this, because I was trying to develop community-based hubs in South Africa, funny enough, in rural Maputo land.

And I think what's quite interesting is this idea of a unifying framework, rather than trying to reduce down all the complexity, which is what I was doing for far too many years, is really amazing.

And the other thing that all of these

aspects that you just shared and that ties in with this lab is it's about participation.

As soon as you bring in participatory processes, you bring in these active inference dynamics, you bring in this complexity, you bring in this need, but also the ability to do what mass manufacturing can't do.

But like I thought you said, it's seen as being inferior in our culture.

And I think seeing it as being vital but also challenging is really cool.

So I think that's something I'm going to take away because I won't actually be able to stay too much longer.

I've got to jump on another call.

But that's something I'd like to take away.

So thanks very much.

Brilliant.

Really, really enjoyed today.

Thanks so much.

Thank you, Stephen.

See you later.


SPEAKER_06:
Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
So just a couple of final thoughts.

John Boyk and his idea of connected hubs.

I mean, he was on like probably six different live streams and he gave a very good overview of sustainability and the, you know, how to build an architecture toward a sustainable future.

So the connected hubs kind of reminded me of that.

And then the one other thing was just about scaffolding and, you know, how do we build kind of a scaffolding for our cognitive architecture?

And is this a scaffolding that's maybe designed to dissolve?

And so I think about, you know, scaffolding for our cognitive architecture as education, right?

Like we send the kids to K-12 and they, you know, form this like shared space.

understanding of reality and two plus two is four and how to read books and so forth.

And this kind of education, maybe Daniel will remember, at least in college, when I started college, in biology, many things are so complicated.

that they just give you like a very broad overview that doesn't make sense.

Or I was always searching for like, but that doesn't make sense, but that doesn't make sense, like in your entry level classes.

And then as you get like deeper and deeper into studying biology or biochemistry, you start to kind of understand electron transport and these different like things that are very like micro, but the macro level doesn't make sense without understanding that micro.

And in my mind, this kind of educational or that way that I was taught in college was kind of like building a scaffold that was designed to disappear.

Anyway.

But anyway, yeah, thanks for the talks today and for coming on.

It was good.


SPEAKER_06:
If I can give my last comment and then to the author for the final comment, I just love this idea of the biochemistry education as the removable scaffold.

You learn at once that there's the essential amino acids and then you never wonder why on the nutrition label is there essential and non-essential.

You forget the details, the side chains, the C minus on the test, that all disappears.

with something that's generalized but otherwise we would look at macroscopic phenomena like why can't I swim when there's this algae in the lake well there's some molecular answer we could know at least how to sense make in that area might even know the specific details but also it can be removed in a way but can it be removed intergenerationally

a chemistry to alchemy reversion with similar or different tools that would be quite something so steven with the um final notes but just wanted to say thanks for coming on these streams and it was just like super interesting discussions


SPEAKER_03:
Well, thank you very much.

It was my pleasure.

And I look forward to further cooperation with you all.


SPEAKER_06:
Great.

If you or any of your collaborators on these projects or your contacts in these hubs wanted to present on this or facilitate in any way, then we can talk another time.


SPEAKER_03:
Very good.

Thank you very much.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks again, Steven.

Thank you, Blue.

Bye.