SPEAKER_00:
all right welcome back we are here with john clippinger and we will be discussing active inference biofirm homeostatic agents for bioregional and regenerative finance so thank you john looking forward to this presentation and discussion and more daniel thank you so much for doing this and hosting this uh it's been a great set of sessions it really has it's been very informative


SPEAKER_01:
And this is a follow-up on a session that we had yesterday on basically active inference agents and why they're important and looking at them in an application.

And in this case, in this session, we were going to look at active inference agents in terms of a concept called BioFIRM.

as a homeostatic agents for bioregional and regenerative finance.

We're really looking at the thinking behind active inference agents and applying it to a new notion of the firm that's inherently biomimetic.

And what I wanted with these series of slides is to sort of set up the conversation and the discussion that we're going to have later with Andrew and Daniel

on providing an in-depth look at bio firms as a homeostatic agent that is capable of interacting with the environment in a way that preserves it and preserves itself in the environment.

So what I'd like to begin with is sort of

There's no premise.

I've been involved in looking at regenerative finance and issues around climate change for at least the last 10 years.

And I think there's a growing consensus that we need a new kind of science-based economy based on enhancing life and nature and equality.

We really need to think about one of the economic incentives to make a transition to an economy that values the preservation of life and nature

rather than the extraction or destruction of it.

What we don't need is what we're now feeling the consequences of, and that's the commodification of nature in people, turning them into objects and assets that can be bought and sold and trade without any discrimination between what kind of asset we're talking about.

Are we talking about something that is coal, is water, is life, the biosphere?

They're all assets.

They can all be priced and they all can be traded.

And so you just have problem of total fungibility when actually some things are essential for existence and they exist in relationship to other things to be preserved as living things.

And then the other problem we're seeing it experiencing in widespread just today.

So the unbounded sort of the concentration of wealth and power.

So we have a system that works towards monopolies and the concentration of wealth and privilege.

And this, of course, has created enormous pressures, not only sort of on the ecology, but on the whole society itself.

And you have this notion of maximizing individual utility.

So everything is about freedom of the individuals and atomic agent, independent of the context in which they live and their impact upon others, not just other people, but their other species, the whole environment.

And so we have extractive metrics with a negative externality.

So in other words, you can create, quote, economic returns, but what you're doing is creating a negative externality.

It would be pollution or it would be air pollution, destruction of species or habitat.

This is not reflected in the price.

And then it's left to some other party, to a public good party, to clean up the mess.

But they're not able to clean up the mess fast enough that it's being created.

So we have a sort of a zero-sum, winner-take-all incentive structure.

And we have a lack of transparency and accountability.

So there's no sense of collective purpose.

So this has really forced people to rethink what an economy should be and what it would be to have biomimetic firms in an economy, something that actually worked in concert with nature, not against nature.

So the first thing is important is not to have any negative externalities.

This idea that you can offset the cost of something that's going to be picked up by other parties.

So carbon credits and offsets are really an attempt, a failed attempt, to deal with negative externalities.

And we need to have non-zero-sum incentives.

In other words, incentivize the collaboration and cooperation of parties to take joint outcomes rather than maximizing utility for a single individual.

And we need to have a new way of recognizing that value is created in a really scientific, incredible sense, that value is recognized through a bio capacity and diversity and resilience.

Have that be a notion of value, not just as something that maximizes price arbitrage, but actually creates new kind of value.

The other important thing I think is coming into focus is this idea of agency.

And this is sort of a new concept that thinks that, ah, nature should have agency.

We should have an agency.

And we should have agency of thinking of nature as being given the capacity to be itself, and species to be itself, and people to be themselves, and not have that be restricted.

with that i think we come to the notion of what we call sort of homeostatic fungibility in other words how something is is the value of that realized is in relation to keeping other things alive if you look at the the human body it's like you can't maximize the utility of the heart against the brain or the lungs they all exist together so how you allocate resources

in the body is really maintaining the balances between those different kinds of organs and that's true of nature in those two organizations what we need to also is a sort of scale free and domain free metrics that's scientific and adaptable so we really need to have the scientific process be a fundamental organizing principle by how we recognize and and and and that and exchange values

And this means having something that really is transparent, explainable.

You can't have something that's a black box that's opaque, that you don't know where it comes from, you don't know how to trust it, you don't know how to derive it.

It really needs to be something that's transparent.

So we've seen people talk about the blockchain and things like that, but it's more than just the blockchain.

It's a whole set of methods, being able to see how something is derived and be able to replicate that.

And then the idea of scalable learning.

Systems should learn.

and they should improve over time.

Markets don't necessarily do that.

They actually clear a market around a price, and then they start again.

There's no memory.

There's no learning how to do something better.

For adaptation as a people and in the planet, we need to learn.

We need to improve upon ourselves, and that should be part of our whole economy, not something that's tangential to it.

And finally, the whole idea of governance.

Governance should not be something applied after the fact or top down.

It should really be embedded in the whole system of itself.

And so there's been a lot of talk about decentralized governance and decentralized systems, decentralized autonomous organizations.

But a lot of that is just talk.

They're not really fully autonomous and not fully decentralized.

But how do you really realize that vision?

And these ideas really sort of were first, I think, articulated and recognized by the economist, Eleanor Ostrom, who got a Nobel Prize for her work on the governance of the economists.

And she was the first woman economist to do that.

And I'd worked with Eleanor when I was at the Harvard, at the Berkman Center, and looking and trying to get thinking about a digital common sense.

It was too early.

But here's some of the central principles that she had.

And this is back then when the technology was not very developed, but she developed her thinking based upon how indigenous people manage their resources, their common resources.

And that would be their forestry, their fisheries, the things that they've done for thousands of years, and they're able to keep them in balance and keep their lifestyle in balance through that.

And here were some principles she extracted from that.

So it was clearly defined boundaries.

And you needed to have a common pool resource where people recognize as a common pool resources.

You had to have it congruent with local conditions.

And I think beyond that, in other words, you had to recognize each little bioregion had its own peculiar constraints and issues that you needed to recognize.

And you had to have ways that people could make collective choices among the commons, how to bring people together.

They couldn't be anonymously from one another.

They really had to be

They had to know each other and they'd be accountable to one another.

And you had monitoring process.

You had to monitor it and be able to see where you were.

And if something goes wrong, you have what she called graduated sanctions, which means the punishment was commensurate with the degree of the violation.

But you really didn't want to have a highly punitive system that has its own negative results.

And you had various mechanisms for resolving conflict.

and then i think the the the idea of one of the sheer her concerns with particularly with indigenous people is that the legitimacy of those organizations were recognized by the larger nation state that that they had some genuine sovereignty and integrity and finally this whole idea of nested enterprises so recognizing it wasn't a strict hierarchy there was things that dynamically interacted at different scales and these are ideas that were sort of more metaphors at the time they were aspirational metaphors was very hard to realize in any kind of

operational form.

And she went on to talk about later work in socio-ecological systems and recognize the biophysical and the social factors, how they all work together and how you look across different spatial temporal scales and different hierarchies, how they're linked.

And she was always trying to think about what were the dynamic complex systems that we can characterize by adaptation if you're going to have governance, but when there really wasn't a mechanism there for how to realize those ideas.

Now there's another more recent development, actually it's called Tehanu, that was started by a friend of mine, his name is Jonathan Lagarde, in Africa, and they're doing this in Rwanda, and they're doing it with all kinds of species.

They're starting out with the gorillas in Rwanda, but the idea is that animals, species, contribute to the environment, and they should be paid for the value that they created.

So how do you do that?

You're giving agency

not only to the animal, but to the habitat.

In this case, in Rwanda, they want to give not only agency to, say, gorillas, Rwandan gorillas, but also they want to give agency to rivers and certain bioregions.

And by agency, I mean the fact that they

These things, staying alive, can be valued for their capacity to stay alive and create a habitat that creates a successful and resilient environment.

And so this is a quote from their literature, their website, which I recommend you taking a look at.

It exists with the belief that for these species to live, they must actively participate in economy.

So how do you create a new economy that includes living things?

And how do you recognize that value?

Another approach is something that's come from region networks, which has been working on this for a number of years.

And I've worked with them and they're talking about creating ecological institutions.

And again, it's like, what is an institution?

An institution in the classic sense is separation of people from a set, a set of principles, like the rule of law.

You say, well, here's an institution and it's set up to do these things and people should perform certain roles in an institution.

But the problem with institutions is that they run by people, people get corrupted, and institutions don't work.

In this case, what they're trying to do is develop a constitution for what they call an ecological subject.

Again, it's giving agency and recognition to nature.

And then they have a number of methods by which to govern that and put in a ledger, create some token system.

Regions have been doing this kind of work for quite a while.

All part of a common effort.

Another effort is something called a bioregional hub.

And this will be my last example before making the transition.

But the idea of a bioregional hub is then to pull together different parties in a particular geospatial location

and be able to give them a set of finance and incentives by which they can act to actually create the biocapacity of that particular geo region.

And so it's really working with core communities that are committed to actually enhancing a, could be a river system.

It could be one of the layers they're looking at in Northeast

Bioregion is the Connecticut River.

How can you bring it back to where it was with abundance when they had full salmon, they had a very rich ecological system.

But there are other things in terms of landowners and being able to give them the incentives to rewild their property and actually make a living on that and create an economy and exchange of value in such a way that makes it robust and resilient.

And so they're working with different kinds of investors and social impact investors

in order to make this going to happen.

So this is part of a larger collection of people that are trying to do these things.

Now what we're going to say, and this is a very credit, I apologize for the verbiage here, but what you're going to hear in the subsequent discussion is this idea of a biofirm, which is a firm that is based upon homeostatic

principles and it really i think addresses many issues both operational and aspirational that you see in the whole biofinance movement and and and to to run through this fairly quickly but you're going to find andrew and daniel are going to talk about these things in detail with examples is that it's first principles based it's grinded in scientific method basing statistics and market blankets now in other words you drill down to it and you really understand it rigorously as a science you can understand where

what it's based upon and how things work in a principled way.

It's also computationally tractable as scales and free metrics for doing the whole kind of reporting and that you have this required environmental reporting called MRVs.

And so do you have a method by which you can make statements and claims about the state of the environment that scales and can be used for cross comparisons?

It's also going to be, it's open source.

So the bioform is like a kernel, think of it as a Linux kernel for a new kind of organizational structure can then generate a new kind of economy that's biometrically based.

Another key component is if we're going to scale our capacity to deal with nature, a lot is going to have to be automated.

There's so many tasks involved in different parts of the world and you have different skill sets.

How do you automate some very complex things in a way that can be trusted and generate metrics that other people are willing to accept?

This has been a big problem in climate change.

This is where the extraordinary automation of cognitive tasks through

large language models, transformers and agent architecture allows for an automation of many, many of the tasks of collecting and analyzing the data and learning from the data.

This is very significant.

And then you can create you have the capacity to have create networks of agents working together and create a system of exchange.

So that's a natural evolution that's happening into edge based computing.

that you can have computing on the edge, you can security an edge.

So that's another phenomena.

And then I think, you know, the idea of polycentric governments, this is made of that, but what does that really mean?

Well, it really means if you look at agents that are self-organizing agents and dynamically relating to one another on the basis of the free energy principle, these other principles, you have the effect of a polycentric governance.

And you also have the ability to formally give agency to nature, to different species, to different people, to different kind of competencies.

So that is the whole nature, as I say, of an agentic architecture.

And then I think you have a principal means of interfacing between a biometric economy and the current economy.

That's going to be really important.

So you can't just live in your own little world.

You're going to have to interchange the fiat economy of the world in such a way that actually protects and establishes the value of a biometric economy.

And finally, I think it provides a principle basis for valuing nature-based currencies and assets that we can discuss a little bit in the time to come.

So that's basically my comments.

I think that I always like to end and say, let's make it real.

That we're actually, I think you'll see in the following discussions, we're at a point

where I think the technology is getting sufficiently mature to actually engage in developing use cases of this and bring it to scale.

So with that, I'll hand it over to Andrew.

Thank you.