SPEAKER_00:
Hello, Octopus, and welcome to the fourth Active Inference Symposium.

Thank you for joining us.

We're looking forward to your session titled Cognitive Bifurcations and Mathematical Explorations.


SPEAKER_01:
So in case you need a reminder of what the abstract for this talk was, and I had to look this up this morning, thinkers and thoughts have a co-evolutionary relationship.

This relationship is especially clear in the arena of mathematics, where mathematicians forage for mathematical statements and structures in a process governed by complex and potentially unstable rules.

We will give a partial mapping of the structure of this space, which necessarily relies not only on rigorous mathematical logic, but also on subjective beliefs, metacognitive heuristics, and creative play.

So I've done a magic trick here.

All of these things are claims that are in need of evidence from my perspective, and the goal here will be to

provide some evidence in that direction, but also to engage in conversation.

So in the construction of expertise, I have no ambition here to play the role of expert.

There are certainly qualifications and evidence that I could point to, my experience as a math professor for seven and a half years, my lived experience as a neurodivergent individual for 42 years,

my my time spent in an octopus identity for the last three years openly and none of those things makes what i say here more valuable than what you think about them the only request i will make is that i've given a lot of effort into thinking through these thoughts some of which were quite difficult that showed up for me and i ask that you will give some level of effort towards finding the value in those thoughts and how they can be mapped to your reality

Let's move from the abstract to abstraction.

When people think of mathematics in the modern sense, they often begin here as both its value and its difficulty.

We might imagine that Bob and Alice both have some cows.

Bob has two and Alice has three, and they're curious how many cows they would have if they combined their herd.

Alice can bring her cows to Bob and they can count them then if they have the physical process of counting at their disposal.

a cognitive tool of one-to-one mapping between objects and objects, but they can also do it conceptually.

One of the things that abstraction enables is the ability to move information about physical perceptions more quickly than the physical things themselves can move.

In other words, Alice doesn't have to bring her cows with her.

If she can bring the concept of three or the idea that she has three,

So this is another aspect of mathematics that is often highly valued and highly contentious in relation to the ways in which we realize and reify scientific practice, education, and other ways in which mathematics shows up in our lives is how are we actually giving a physical body to the concept that we are hoping to represent?

The fact that two apples are conceptually in some sense the same as two cows or two fingers is one level.

A level above that is the fact that we can attribute symbols to these representations.

Anything from two interlaced I's in the Roman numeral setting, to two in the Hindu Arabic numeral setting, to words like to and do, to two dots, to two fingers.

Two fingers are physical, yet somehow they're also a basis of abstraction, because the idea of abstraction includes the fact that there must be something concrete to abstract.

And this two fingers are included on the page of abstract representations, partially because I like the idea of things having bodies.

I like the idea of the number two having lots of different bodies.

How many bodies can one idea have?

But also I like the ambiguity here between the two and the three, because in some systems, the way that I'm showing this here would be interpreted as three and in others as two.

So with that ambiguity in mind, there is no slide three.

Please do not discuss slide three later.

We will not bring it up again.

And in fact, it is not advantageous to you to do so because the claim that there is no slide three is an idea wholly owned by eight arms, nine brains.

And if you want to discuss the fact that there is no slide three, there will be a licensing fee involved.

Thankfully, some ideas are open to discussion with no financial transaction involved.

And one of them, as we finally come to slide four, is a very important concept in mathematical pedagogy

called The Rule of Four.

I think this encapsulates thinking that might have been going on for a while before it was formally published, but the first time I encountered it was in the excellent calculus textbook by Hughes, Hallin, Gleason, and McCollum et al.

This was the first calculus textbook I looked at when I was an undergraduate student.

And it was also the first calculus textbook I looked at when I was a beginning professor beginning to teach my first calculus class.

I'm afraid that far too many students probably completely skip this section, which is in the pre preamble.

But one of the key concepts that it elucidates is how to think about mathematics.

And it's not saying this is the right way.

It's saying this is a way, and this is a way that the textbook uses quite profitably.

It's called the rule of four.

And it says essentially that when you encounter a new mathematical concept, there are four distinct but interrelated ways that one might think about it.

You could give a verbal description or a definition.

You could draw a graph or some type of diagram.

You could use numbers in the sense of data.

Or you could use a symbolic representation, like a formula or an equation.

And the extent to which these are distinct and interrelated highlights the value that each of these may have to individuals as a latching on point for thinking about difficult mathematical concepts and calculus.

It also eliminates some of the privilege that might exist around specific representations, around the idea that symbols might be real math, whereas when we explain them at a high level, somehow that isn't real math.

For instance, if we look at the types of mathematical works that mathematicians actually produce, it might be surprising to undergraduate students what percentage of this is not what they would traditionally think of as symbolic.

And what I would mean here is,

equations and formulas like we get to page three and finally we see something that looks like a symbolic mathematical expression but the majority of the work here is spent on words and diagrams visuals

A large portion of this is in the theorems, of course, which are something that is a very individual feature of pure mathematics.

But let's not get bogged down there.

Let's simply say there are many different representations.

And one of the challenges of an effective instructor is to map between these different representations so that people who might feel most at home in one of them can use that as a leverage point for accessing the other ones.

Based on my background, I'm a defrocked math professor voluntarily, also a chaos magician, and so I'm very, very tempted to try to build a functor between this rule of four originating in mathematics and this four-quadrants model of human experience advanced by Ramsey Dukes in his book known as Sysopomy.

which says that there are these four lenses through which human beings can process and structure experience.

There's art, religion, magic, and science.

It's so tempting to try to do something like say the symbols are the magic and the words are the religion and the numbers are the science and the graph is the art.

And I'm going to resist that temptation because I think it's

it might be a useful initial temptation but the resistance of the temptation provides its value instead i'm going to hold this as an idea we'll return to it in a moment where it will play against some other concepts that we're likely to encounter i will stop here for a moment and say something impromptu though which is um there's a practice in this world of chaos magic called belief shifting

where the magician consciously and intentionally adopts a specific belief as if it were something they believed to be true.

And there's a very related practice in mathematics, which is the construction of the axioms or the adoption of the axioms.

So in mathematical proofs, once you adopt specific axioms or specific assumptions, the conclusions should follow not without effort, but in a clear logical flow.

Mathematicians are capable of adopting different axioms.

And this produces what I'm going to call a cognitive bifurcation.

So a cognitive bifurcation, since we've already split things into four, that may be too much.

Let's try to get things back together and just split it into two.

One place that a cognitive bifurcation might show up in the history of mathematics is in the different types of geometry that geometers think about.

So one of the features of modern geometry is the realization that the parallel postulate in Euclidean geometry is not possible to prove from the other axioms of Euclidean geometry.

And so the parallel postulate says that given a line and a point not on that line,

there is exactly one parallel line, or there's actually one line that passes through that point parallel to the original line.

And if you choose not to adopt this belief, as Riemann played with in the idea of one of his lectures, it opens up a whole new world of non-Euclidean geometry, both spherical and hyperbolic.

So the axioms that we adopt and the beliefs that we intentionally choose to consider are powerful tools that can open up new conceptual playgrounds, but also quite dangerous.

Alice and Bob probably feel very safe in this world.

Even if we don't admit a slide three, we admit a number three to describe how many cows one of them may have.

And then the question is, are these all the numbers?

And if they are not, in which directions would we be willing to consider?

Perhaps we are asking what comes after five or after the number after five.

And like a child, we realize that we can continually add one and there is no a priori upper bound.

And we come across the idea of infinity.

Perhaps we start to look for what could be in between the numbers.

And so we discover numbers like one and a half or 1.1.

Or perhaps we make a dangerous leap in the other direction, and we admit the possibility that there is a number which says that you have no cows.

And why you might need such a number is an intriguing question.

But let's say that we do have one.

When we introduce a number in this way, we need not only to consider the fact that the number exists, we need to consider the ways in which it will interact with the other

numbers that exist in other words the rules so as we begin to if we want to we know how to add numbers that were one through five but how do we add to zero and this is a cognitive bifurcation because now we have a symbol that plays by its own rules and we've opened up a whole new world of numbers to where when we added positive numbers together they always increased and we were always heading to the right

The fact that we can now introduce a number where we add it and identity for the binary operation of addition is an interesting split that opens up more possibilities on the left-hand side.

And I would say this is a cognitive bifurcation.

It says in the definition that I'm adapting from Wikipedia,

A bifurcation occurs when a small, smooth change made to the parameter values of a system causes a sudden qualitative or topological change in its behavior.

It's hard to imagine a change smaller or smoother than putting the circle here and declaring that it doesn't do anything in addition.

And yet this immense cultural controversy when these numbers are being introduced

So I'm going to make the claim that mathematical thinking systems are complex systems.

I'm going to give the highly unsatisfactory proof by authority that this claim is obvious.

One piece of evidence we could point to is that the existence of a parameter bifurcation almost immediately suggests that we're dealing with a complex system.

And yet that is not quite the right way to think about it, especially if we're going to be looking at it from the active inference context.

So let's ask for more evidence and let's not accept proof by authority.

What evidence do we see for the belief that mathematical thinking systems are complex systems?

And one way that we might conceptualize this through a model is at the agent level, where we think about the types of agents who are involved in these systems.

I've heard that there would be people here who like ants.

So I've made sure to include some.

And here's my ant hill.

And here are my ants.

And I have these ants foraging or formulas that they bring back to the colony, which then feed other ants, which are part of the ecosystem, the formulas and the symbols that they bring back in this mathematical world.

of semantics is more than just symbols, right?

It's something that actually contributes to the survival of the colony.

But in order to do that, it must be converted into other things.

So it'd be easy to just try to be efficient through this and reduce it as much as we could to something useful.

I'm sympathetic to that viewpoint because mathematics has to be useful at some level to human existence to justify its existence, I believe.

So if we were looking at this on a belief level, on a probability level, we might say something like with certain axioms as priors,

Mathematical theorems are simply beliefs such that an agent, in order to survive, will quickly adopt correct beliefs with probability 1.

If you want to make 2 plus 3 equals 6, you will quickly run into issues in which everything collapses and it ceases to be a useful tool.

And I'm not opposed to this model.

I just want to say it's oversimplified.

Because many of the beliefs that mathematicians choose to adopt and choose to spend their valuable resources thinking about don't have any immediate mapping to applications.

For instance, the question of whether or not zero is a natural number is something mathematicians will argue about.

What is the utility in foraging for this belief?

Perhaps you can think of one.

But I think it speaks to something else that could be happening that mathematicians throughout the centuries have seen, which is that the claims of truth that you make are not entirely limited by the axioms that you assume and by the process of logic.

There are larger questions here, cultural questions of identity, ontological questions of what is real.

What does it mean for zero being a natural number to be a true statement?

Mathematicians find it useful to disagree about this.

The conversations that we have about these things make us better mathematicians, I feel.

I'll never forget when my PhD advisor explained to me why he believed that zero was a natural number.

But there's no mathematical proof that can provide this.

It's an axiom that you accept or do not when you define these numbers.

And when we talk about types of numbers, there's a famous cognitive bifurcation that occurred at some point in history, which is the division, the discovery of the fact that not all numbers are rational.

Not all numbers can be expressed as a ratio between two integers.

If you're not willing to accept this, then you cannot come up with a solution to x squared minus two equals zero.

And of course you could, by authoritarian fiat, simply declare that there is no solution to x squared minus two equals zero.

There's a legend that the mathematician Hippasus, who discovered that the square root of two was irrational, was thrown overboard by the Pythagoreans so that he would not share this information.

And I imagine this as a kind of cyberpunk reimagining of ancient Greek geometry, not as an insult in any way to Pythagoras, who I think would appreciate this, but to imagine that there is a geometer who is not opposed to the idea, but opposed to the pathway by which it came through, and willing to use force to ensure that the dangerous doorway stays closed.

So another model of math person, perhaps that we could view as a boundary between wherever math comes from and the quote unquote real world.

And the real world is full of agents already that we can easily map to.

There are institutions, educational institutions, governmental institutions, professional societies.

There's politics where the government may decide certain levels of funding for those institutions.

Business, which may choose to fund the institutions.

to insert itself into the process of politics.

There are funding sources.

There's media.

One thing that occurred to me as I was preparing this talk is we don't often think of mathematical journals or scientific journals as media, but they are.

They're media that's made and constructed like any other.

And then is the question of where math comes from.

Where does math come from?

This is what I've wrestled with a while.

One reason is it opens up some doors that from the materialist utilitarian perspective of like a school of engineering feel really strange.

Where did Alice and Bob first get that idea of numbers?

And does doing math involve some type of contact with these strange things that could happen?

We don't see very much of this in our schooling, which is often about producing symbols, producing people who can follow precise rules with respect to symbolic manipulation.

And at that point, it can become a type of overcorrection.

And I'm sympathetic to this door that, I'm sympathetic to this perspective that opens the door a bit more to the strange, not only by my own temperament,

but also through the lived experience of people who accomplished very effective physical and engineering uses of mathematics, but were willing to express that they were sympathetic to this viewpoint.

So Heinrich Hertz, for whom the unit of cyclic repetition and a computer processing unit is named for, says one cannot escape the feeling that these mathematical formulas

have an independent existence and an intelligence of their own, that they are wiser than we are, wiser even than their discoverers.

In other words, if the intelligence is in the symbols and not in the humans who are trying to work with them as tools, this provides a very different perspective on the creation of mathematical thought and on the ways in which mathematical thought not only originates but also can be applied.

It also points out to some extent the horror that we can be doing when we do this non-consensual cognitive bifurcation of a person, of people, of persons into math persons and not math persons.

often by their ability to match some preconceived rule to arrive at a correct answer, often with an overemphasis on speed.

So as we think about the fact that the people, the persons, the mathematicians, the math persons may be forging for these symbols and formulas to bring back to the real world, what happens if we begin to give

If we as Hertz did begin to give these symbols their own ontology and their own agency to realize that they are also likely out in the wild searching for the people to whom with whom they will engage productively.

So this takes us back to our stranger ideas where we intentionally left the door open.

And here I'm indebted to Gerhard Mayer, who in his article, Magicians of the 21st Century, pointed to Ramsey Dukes' four-quadrants model as splitting reality into the irrational and the rational.

I intentionally left the rational box off here.

because I wasn't sure where to put it.

I would put religion in the rational category because there are very clear apologetic logical arguments.

It's clear that religion at least attempts to play in the same sphere of the rational science does, whereas art and magic would be in the irrational category.

And I am intentionally echoing the splitting here of the real numbers into rational or irrational with whatever consequences this might have.

To quote Heinrich Hertz again, outside our consciousness there lies the cold and alien world of actual things.

Between the two stretches the narrow borderland of the senses.

No communication between the two worlds is possible, excepting across the narrow strip.

For a proper understanding of ourselves and of the world, it is of the highest importance that this borderland should be thoroughly explored.

And the problem as map makers in an ever evolving and some would say chaotic territory, certainly highly dynamic of this moment in space time where we find ourselves is where to draw, where is the border?

If this is the border that we're supposed to be exploring for a proper understanding of ourselves and of the world, how do we know when we are on the border and when we may be inadvertently crossing it?

And how can we enrich our tools for finding each side and productively bringing ideas from one side to the other or whatever travelers are wishing to cross, whatever we call them?

I've recently been reading this book, Symbolism, by Alfred North Whitehead.

And he speaks to this, but he speaks to it in a different way and one that I would challenge, which is very intimidating, to be honest.

But in this essay on symbolism, he talks about essentially two types of symbolism, the symbolism of the church and the symbolism of language and of algebra.

So he initially says that there is a symbolism of the medieval cathedral, but because that symbolism can be dispensed with,

It is on the fringe of life and has an unessential element in its constitution.

And then he says, and on page two here, there is another sort of language, a written language, which is constituted by the mathematical symbols of the science of algebra.

In some ways, these symbols are different to those of ordinary language because the manipulation of the algebraic symbols does your reasoning for you.

provided that you keep to the algebraic rules.

How can something do reasoning for you if it is purely mechanistic and has no agency?

And then he says, this is not the case with ordinary language, which puts up that boundary again between words and symbols, that the symbols can do something, the words cannot.

So I would disagree here with how he draws the bifurcation

between cathedrals and mathematical symbols.

Pythagoras would also have quibbled with that.

For the Pythagoreans, mathematics was very much a religious practice, and they believed that numbers had a spiritual dimension.

But that takes us to very weird places very quickly.

I tweeted this.

I don't necessarily believe it, but you don't have to tweet everything you believe or vice versa.

So let's go to slightly a bit more out there.

But this is coming back to relevance, I promise.

It has to do with the notion of sovereignty.

And so here I'm looking at the article Sovereignty and the UFO by Wint and Duvall, where they talk about how sovereignty is constructed.

And so this might go back to our definition here of a quote unquote real world, an institution, a government, a nation state, even an individual as being sovereign as a particular construction in the world of our experience.

But this has not always been the case.

I loved this quote that they said, anthropocentric sovereignty might seem necessary.

After all, who else besides humans might rule?

Nevertheless, historically, sovereignty was less anthropocentric.

For millennia, nature and the gods, which nature would be in science and the gods would be in religion, were thought to have causal powers and subjectivities that enabled them to share sovereignty with humans, if not exercise dominion outright.

Authoritative belief in non-human sovereignties

was given up only after long and bitter struggle about the borders of the social world.

So again, we're trying to place a border in which who, what could be sovereign depends on who, what should be included in society.

And there's a great footnote here.

Anthropocentrism need not mean all human beings since historically many physical humans were not considered human socially.

And let me go back here and say that perhaps there's a similar construction occurring.

Perhaps this division, some humans are human and some are not.

We would not recognize that today, but we do recognize this bifurcation into math persons and non-math persons.

And I would say it's equally as social and equally as artificial and equally as dangerous.

So where are we now?

So I've opened some doors here.

Perhaps some of them should have stayed shut.

But regardless, they're open for the moment, and we can shut them when we wish, hopefully.

I love this quote at the end about sovereignty in the UFO.

The UFO can be known only by not asking what it is, because this has been totally obverse to my process.

Here I have tried to know mathematics by asking what it is, by struggling very hard with its identity as an egregore, as a concept.

But maybe some things can only be known by not asking what they are.

So I'm sure that this has perhaps been an interesting metaphysical exploration of some different historical ideas and ideas of history.

How is this applicable to ourselves as scholars in an active inference environment?

Well, what I would like to point out is the ways in which some of these ideas that are already dynamic may be changing very rapidly at this moment.

So if we look at the identity of mathematician,

if we are solely confined to a meat space identity that has certain connotations.

But what do we do with someone like Blue Cow?

And I did request Blue Cow's consent to use their likeness and their thoughts.

The creator of the first hyperdimensional computing OS and the super prompt, a prompt god, someone who is a self-proclaimed mathematician who does impressive mathematical work in prompt engineering

mathematical prompts via github and whose appearance is an anime person dressed as a cow can they be a real mathematician in the way that we currently conceptualize math and are the mathematical ideas that they're bringing ones that we are prepared to reckon with as math

And then when they post things like this, what do we do?

Self-identified schizo.

And it's helpful here perhaps to remember that schizo means split.

Another scholar on this emergent one might call parallel or underground genre whose work I respect is Sir Lupin Watson.

His conjecture, soon you'll be able to buy an AI hacker for less than $100,000.

He'll or she do anything for free.

You'll need to pay only once and it will last forever.

This is exactly the bargain of the theorem.

Once you have proven a theorem once with a finite amount of human effort, it remains irrevocably true and will do whatever you ask it to do for free forever.

So if we believe there's a world where theorems come from, what does that say about other objects or other constructions that might share their properties?

I don't have a conclusion.

If I were going to have a conclusion, it would be going back to the thoughts of slide three.

But one reason I don't have a conclusion is that this is not the end of a completed research journey, but the beginning of something we are all experiencing together.

So I'm gesturing at what I know.

then the next question is what do i hope to know well one challenge that i think this immediately offers but also an opportunity is what does it look like to be an institution in a world where these agents these human agents are seriously considering the same ideas as you are and perhaps offering insights that are not being produced at the level of your institution i don't this may be fringe but i think it's to be taken seriously

and i offer it because many people will see the work that for instance terry tau is doing on leading larger mathematical teams that use ai to modularize math and prove more efficiently in an engineering type framework different from the idea of the individual math

it's less likely that the average academic, I believe, would encounter these types of people who are also doing interesting mathematical thinking, not only about the mathematics itself, but about what it means to present oneself as a mathematician or to present mathematical work.

So I hope these thoughts have been interesting to you, and I'm excited to see what they may have brought up in the form of questions and comments.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you ever so much, Octopus.

I really appreciate the number of different ways that you've kind of viewed this topic.

If I may start with a question.

Sure.

As you were talking about this idea that the formulas maybe exist and that they're kind of waiting to fit onto something, it was reminding me of a song by the Icelandic artist Bjork.

I'm not sure if you're familiar with her.

She has a song called Modern Things where it says, all those modern things, they've always existed.

They've just been waiting in a mountain.

for the right moment and it's their time now.

And so, yeah, I was wondering, you know, what do you think about

something like the global economy, which it's, it kind of acts like an entity in itself.

So it's, you know, it's the invisible hand of the market, for example.

But it's the humans that kind of assemble around it, and imbue the meaning on the all the interactions and all the dynamics.


SPEAKER_01:
yes uh i think again that there again there might be a border for instance if we view economics as purely human transactions of material capital it misses a lot i think a lot of economists would say that but symbols are important even there if you look at a unit of currency it is imbued with symbols that are highly non-functional

almost overridden with symbols that are highly non-functional.

And one of the ways that one can assert authority and or immortality is to issue a coin.

And that's what we see now with crypto economic systems is a debate around the individual sovereignty and the right of who is allowed to issue something that can be used as a unit of exchange.

But that's not a new debate.

There were certain Roman citizens who had the authority to issue a token

And then the question is, where does the value of that token come from ultimately, right?

So again, it kicks back very quickly to questions around beliefs and identity and sovereignty.

I guess the thing there is when something is real, to me, it must have more than just a material component.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Daniel, are there any questions from the chat?


SPEAKER_02:
There's a lot of great commentary, Octopus.

It was a great presentation.

Do you have any final comments?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, well, I really appreciate the invitation to be heard.

and the ability to show up as Octoplus.

It's so meaningful to me and grateful to the organizers and the audience and looking forward to seeing what conversations can emerge from this beginning.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

Till next time.

See you, Octo.

Thank you.