SPEAKER_00:
Welcome to the fourth Active Inference Symposium, Dr. Giacomo Rossettini.

We're very pleased to have you here and looking forward to your session titled Placebo, Nocebo and Contextual Effects, The Missed Link in Clinical Practice.

Over to you.


SPEAKER_01:
thank you for the presentation and for the invitation to use this talk it's a pleasure for me to be here for the active inference symposium and today i talk about placebo nocebo and contextual effects showing the missing link in clinical practice as i mentioned i'm an italian physical therapist i'm involved in clinician and

I come from Verona, that is a city in the north of Italy and it represents the city of love of Romeo and Juliet and if you have never visited them, my suggestion is to do it.

Before we start, I want to declare that I have no conflict of interest for my speech.

I have organized my presentation to discuss the contextual effects.

Firstly, we will analyze the definition and the constituent dimensions of contextual effects.

the impact on outcomes and treatments.

Next, we will discuss the possible link of contextual effects with the active inference and the implication for clinical practice and research.

Finally, we will conclude with a take-home message.

Contextual effects are defined as the effects of the context around the therapy and are generated by contextual factors.

Contextual factors were recently defined in the international consensus in which I participated.

In the slide, you will find an excerpt of the final short definition, where contextual factors are the perceived cues that affect both the patient and the practitioner and can arise from previous experiences and the immediate dynamics within the therapeutic encounter, or a combination of both.

And from a clinical perspective, contextual factors fall into five broad categories or dimensions that you can see represented in this graph.

On one hand, we have the characteristics of the clinicians with their professional reputations, the appearance, the beliefs and behaviors.

On the other side, there are the patients' characteristics with their expectations, preferences and previous experiences.

Between the clinicians and the patients, there is the relational dynamics in terms of verbal and non-verbal communication, what we say and how we communicate.

In addition to the relational component, the treatment characteristics also play an important role.

They represent the rituality of the treatment.

Finally, the fifth dimension is represented by the characteristics of the setting within which the encounter is being delivered.

such as the environment, the architecture and also the interior design.

Well, all these five dimensions interacting with each other can influence the overall therapeutic outcomes.

The question we have to ask ourselves is through which mechanisms does this happen?

I will tell you in the next slides.

Contextual factors have been studied for their ability to induce placebo and nocebo effects, which represent the effects of the psychosocial context around the therapy.

And to explain how this occurs, I want to start with a clinical example.

This illustration shows a common clinical encounter in which patients with musculoskeletal pain receive a therapy such as joint immobilization, therapeutic exercise, or ultrasound injections.

And during the administration of the therapy, patients are influenced by the specificity of the treatment, but also by various different psychosocial cues, such as the clinician's words, the sight and the sound of the healthcare devices, the smells of the hygienic, and also the taste of the drugs when receiving, for example, painkillers.

Well, all these cues can influence the patient's perception, shaping the experience in a positive or in a negative way, triggering placebo or nocebo effects.

Thus, the positive use of contextual factors can produce placebo effects.

When these elements are used negatively, it produces nocebo effects.

And the clinical effects of contextual factors can be explained through conscious and unconscious mechanisms of action, such as expectations, learning processes, personality traits, mindset and even genetics.

However, among the most important psychological theories, expectations, classical conditioning and social learning are the most widely accepted.

The expectation is a conscious phenomenon through which the patient expects that something will happen in the future.

We need to consider patients, for example, who are waiting to receive a therapeutic exercise or a manual therapy for musculoskeletal pain.

Well, they will predict a positive therapeutic outcome by evaluating all the contextual factors around the therapy we offer as a clinician, such as our worth or our behaviors.

Instead, the classical tableau of conditionings is an unconscious phenomenon concerning the past events.

In fact, patients can learn over time to associate a certain therapy, such as for example an injection, with specific contextual effects that represent the rituality of the technique created by the needles that produce a certain outcome which can be positive or negative.

But patients can also learn from others.

They can learn from positive or negative experiences of other patients, family members, friends or from information they get from social media or blogs regarding, for example, musculoskeletal pain.

But how the contextual factors work in practice?

I will use this image to explain these mechanisms of action briefly.

Whenever patients interact with the healthcare context, they are always influenced by the five contextual factors.

And these elements are encoded by the patient's brain, who interprets them and provides an evaluation and a prediction of their meaning.

And if this interpretation is positive, placebo effects are triggered.

If the interpretation is negative, nocebo effects are stimulated.

And these effects are sustained by a cascade of psychoneuroimmunoendocrinological events at multiple levels of the central nervous systems in terms of the release of neurotransmitters.

For example, negative contextual factors can activate the release of cholecystokinin and the deactivation of dopamine and the opioid systems.

Instead, the use of the positive contextual factors can facilitate the release of opioids, endocannabinoids and dopamine.

And also different brain areas can be activated.

For example, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the anterior cingulate cortex, and the grigio periapodal brain and the dorsal horn of the spine are modulated.

And all these specific neurological pathways translated into changes in clinical outcomes.

And using, for example, musculoskeletal pain as an example, if the context offered is positive, the patient will perceive and relieve symptoms.

Instead, if the context adopted is negative, the patient will have an aggravation of symptoms.

And conjecture factors interacting with the treatment specificity are able to influence more the patient's subjective outcomes or the illness dimensions than the objective outcomes that represent the disease component.

For example, pain, disability, experience, satisfaction represent typical examples of outcomes influenced by the contextual factors.

However, not all the changes of the therapeutic outcomes are due by contextual factors or by the specificity of our treatment.

In fact, several confinders can explain the improvements or the worsening of the patient's clinical condition.

An example are reported in this graph.

For example, the natural history of the disease can explain the natural fluctuation of the

towards the means, which represent a statistical phenomenon.

Or, for example, the presence of unidentified interventions, as in the case of patients that present a musculoskeletal pain or receive a manual therapy or a therapeutic exercise and concomitantly receive also a painkiller.

Another question we should ask ourselves is what is the weight of contextual factors in influencing the outcome?

For a long time, it was a common opinion in the scientific community that about 33-35% of the total therapeutic effect depends on the contextual component.

And even if it seems limited, it is actually not, because it is a component influencing clinical outcomes that we should know and we should use in our clinical practice.

And the international debate on the weight of contextual effects has continued to the present day, without finding a conclusion.

Several recent systematic reviews with the meta-analysis has assessed the weight of contextual effects.

What the different authors have observed is that the contextual effects can vary from small to large.

And I report here different examples.

You can see what happened for no specific lobe pain, neck pain, fibromyalgia and also neostratritis.

And the heterogeneity in these results can be explained, for example, by the characteristics of the patients.

the clinicians by the characteristic of the condition analyzed, the interventions considered and also by the characteristic of the statistical metric adopted.

So,

Some students had also provided data on the contextual effects for treatments.

For example, in these meta-researchs, the contextual effects of different treatments was evaluated.

And what we can observe is that the contextual effect is progressively higher in treatment with the highly realistic features.

To go into details, in psychological treatments, the contextual effects account for the 38%.

In pharmacological treatments it accounts for the 61% and in the physical treatments such as manual therapy or hands-on techniques it accounts for the 64%.

Having reached this point, I think that we need to understand how contextual impacts can be related to the theme of this conference, the active inference.

And to understand this, we need to start with a clinical example.

We need to think about the management of patients with persistent musculoskeletal pain, who have negative expectations based on their previous experiences, psychological characteristics,

For example, if we consider a patient with neck pain that in the past has been exposed to exercises and learned that these exercises produce pain, conciliating a negative internal model towards this.

In our outpatients clinic, we offer exercises to our neck pain patients in accordance with the best evidence.

As a result of this direct experience, the patient can have two main outcomes.

At first, for example, it can confirm that the exercises can produce pain, or the patients may not perceive the pain, violating their expectations.

And this violation of expectations is interesting because it can result in two main scenarios.

one adapted and ideal, where patients make an update of their expectations and on their internal model, and a dysfunctional one, where the patients consider this violation as an exception to the rule, or as a result to the chance, and therefore maintain it, and this is referred to as cognitively immunized patients.

We suggest that such differences in updating responses can be understood, at least to some extent, from Bayesian perspectives.

In fact, the ability to make an update of the patient's expectations can be interpreted in the light of the Bayesian model and will depend on the strength and accuracy of the patient's prior beliefs and behaviors.

From a Bayesian perspective, our brains conceptualize and predict

or machine that generates predictions, known as priors, about the expected sensory inputs.

And the integration between the prior and the sensory inputs results in a posterior, the percept, which can be more or less influenced by the prior and by the sensory data, depending on their level of precision.

And let us think about the patients with pain who have negative priors or expectations toward exercise, that represent the sensory input.

And if these priors are very precise and reliable, it will be much more difficult for the patient to rely on the sensory input given by the exercises.

And the prediction error is really minimal and the patients consider the experience as a result of a second chance or an exception of the rule existing in maintenance of the initial expectations.

Instead, if the interpretations are less precise and reliable, it will be much easier for the patient to rely on the sensory inputs given by the exercise, because the prediction error between what is expected and what is experienced will be more significant and will contribute to improving the patient's expectations by generating an update.

And I think this is very fascinating and complex, but it does help us to think about how we can use the context to challenge or make an update of the patient's priorities.

And I will try to help you to understand this point with another clinical example.

With this Bayesian model in mind, it is possible to better understand the clinical scenario presented in this image, where we have a patient with a musculoskeletal pain of the shoulder who has had a negative prior.

In that situation, the patients prefer not to raise their arms because they have been told that the tendons can snap.

On the other hand, we have the clinicians who try to challenge the patient's prior through the tools

the manual therapy, the peripheral reality, the education.

But the clinician also has another separate weapon to use, that the school has the control

by words, cues, behaviors, or rituality that can influence the patient's brain and the patient's prior.

As an outcome of this challenge, we can have, for example, an expectation violation, followed by an update, which is realized when the prior, with low precision, of our patient is updated accordingly with the newly acquired evidence.

The patients lift their arms without any pain and without any types of lesions.

Another possible scenario is represented by the expectation violation followed by the maintenance of the dysfunctional beliefs as the consequence of one having a highly perceived prior, which is considered really unreliable and therefore the newly acquired information and disconfirmatory evidence is not sufficient

such strong pride.

For example, in this case we have a patient with a musculoskeletal pain that during a clinical session managed to lift their arm without any negative consequences to their shoulder, but still believe that lifting the arm will possibly create and lead to the shoulder to break.

unlikely to have, for example, a very high precise prior and might discard the positive evidence, for example, the success in lifting the arm, which might be classified as an exemption instead of the rule.

So, trying to pull the string of this speech, what might be the implication from this talk to our clinical practice?

The use of contextual factors represents an opportunity to enrich the evidence-based therapy.

We know it.

As a clinician, we also need to consider that using contextual factors such as words, touch, the rituality of the technique and the environment could help to challenge the patient's prior and improve the patient's musculoskeletal pain.

However, these observations that arise from the clinic need to be supported by data and more study to substantiate their effectiveness.

Thus, researchers are called upon to integrate contextual effects into their study on musculoskeletal pain.

using, for example, the Bayesian brain and the active inference lens.

To do this, it is important to produce experimental work in the lab and in the clinical work in patients to validate these theoretical models by using, for example, subjective outcomes but also objective physiological metrics.

We are in the end, so I conclude that I want to greet you wishing you to remain curious clinicians, comfortable to see the things from different perspectives and accept the complexity presented in the clinic and also within this image.

Let's not just focus only on the details, the technique.

It is important, but it is not all.

Let us always remember that the scenario in which we operate, it is much more complex and both the context, the moon and

confounders, the search in the sky, comes into play.

Only if we embrace this opportunity and this complexity, we could find new strategies to best manage our patients with musculoskeletal pain.

Thanks for your attentions.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Till next time.