## 9MQQKaKEXs0

SPEAKER_00:
hello everyone it is active lab live stream number 45.0 it's may 27th 2022 and we're discussing the paper the free energy principle made simpler but not too simple

Welcome to the ACTIVE Lab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams.

If you want to learn more about the live streams or any of the other projects to get involved at ActiveInfLab, head over to ActiveInference.org.

We're in stream number 45.0.

Our goal is to learn and discuss this very interesting paper, The Free Energy Principle, Made Simpler But Not Too Simple, by Carl Fristin, Lancelot DaCosta, Noor Sajid, Connor Hines, Kai Ullthoffer,

gregorius pavliotis and thomas parr and just like with all the dot zero videos and indeed all the videos this is an introduction and an overview to a quite technical and lengthy ish paper it's not a review or a final word this is like the opening context for some of the coming discussions we're going to have in the following weeks and beyond

and we're going to first just say hello, introduce the big question, the aims, claims, abstract and roadmap.

Then we're gonna give an overview of some of the keywords that are in the paper.

Then we're going to go through the sections of the paper with a focus on some of the key points, the formalisms, and the figures especially.

So it should be a great discussion, and let's get into it.

We'll start with just an introduction and saying hello.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and I'll pass to Brock.

Brock, thanks for joining and for all the contributions in this .zero.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so exciting to be here and participate in the active lab.

And yeah, I'm just really drawn to this topic.

And this paper is a great starting point for that.

It's really got a lot of, you know, detail that to dig into and a lot to learn.

So yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

So

One of the big questions or one way to state the big question was, what are the foundations of the free energy principle and what does it contribute?

In the paper, they write that they start from a description of the world in terms of a random dynamical system, systems changing through time, and end up with a description of self-organization as sentient, sensing, active behavior, and that's active inference.

So that's the question that we're wondering about.

We're all wondering about what is the basis and the essence and the implications of the free energy principle.

What would you say about that, or what were some big questions that you had coming into and out of this paper?


SPEAKER_01:
I think my biggest question around the free energy principle is, how general is it?

Where does it end?

Because it seems so, they say in the paper also, it's pretty simple.

It's kind of tautological in some sense.

So yeah, that's one of my questions.

You know, where does it begin?

Where does it end?

And like, how general is it?

The other question is, yeah, how?

How does it emerge?

Or what does it look like at different scales?


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So we'll be returning to questions again and again.

Let's check out the aims and the claims of the paper.

So again, it's the free energy principle made simpler, but not too simple.

And the authors are listed here.

The paper describes that it's trying to present the free energy principle as simply as possible, but without sacrificing too much technical detail.

And that's sort of a pun slash self-reference.

That's what modeling in that Pareto optimal or Bayes optimal way is.

And that's going to come back as a theme again and again, giving information, but not overfitting nor underfitting.

And then several claims that they make are that they're going to step through the formal arguments that lead from the description of a world as a random dynamical system to the description of self-organization in terms of active inference and self-evidencing.

they're going to discuss Bayesian mechanics and how those Bayesian mechanics have the same starting point as quantum, statistical, and classical mechanics.

And then they're going to differentiate this Bayesian mechanics for particular systems from some of these previously mentioned mechanics in that careful attention is paid to the way that the internal states of something couple to its external states.

some of the aims and claims, although many more will be introduced and are discussed in the paper.

Any thoughts on that?

Or if you'd like to, oh yeah, go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just, well, let me, that essentially that it's, you know, it's a self-evidencing, self-describing system.

Again, just very, it seems to fit with a lot of different domains and a lot of like, just observed experience.

So cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Would you like to read the abstract?


SPEAKER_01:
This paper provides a concise description of the free energy principle, starting from a formulation of random dynamical systems in terms of a Langevin equation and ending with a Bayesian mechanics that can be read as a physics of sentience.

It rehearses the key steps using standard results from statistical physics,

These steps entail establishing a particular partition of states based on conditional independencies inherit from sparsely coupled dynamics to unpacking the implications of this partition in terms of Bayesian inference and three describing the paths of particular states with a variational principle of least action.

Teologically, the free energy principle offers a normative account of self organization in terms of optimal Bayesian design and decision making and the sense of maximizing marginal likelihood or Bayesian model evidence.

In summary, starting from a description of the world in terms of random dynamical systems, we end up with a description of self-organization as sentient behavior that can be interpreted as self-evidencing, namely self-assembly, autopoiesis, or active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Okay, let's go to the roadmap.

So this paper has layout and it'll be awesome to hear from the authors about why they've laid it out as well as numerous other details.

So we're looking forward to those discussions.

In section one is an introduction and they wrote at the end of the introduction, the remaining sections describe the free energy principle.

Each section that's two through eight focuses on an equation or set actions.

The ensuing narrative is meant to be concise, taking us from the beginning to the end as succinctly as possible.

To avoid disrupting the narrative, we use footnotes to address questions that are commonly asked at each step.

We also use figure legends captions to supplement the narrative with examples from neurobiology.

So there's a main narrative thread

that's going to touch on sections two through eight, each of these being like a single or a cluster of formalisms.

And then, especially in the footnotes, which are formulated as questions, and in the figure captions, which are sometimes quite lengthy and include examples and citations and so on, more of the biological details and inspiration are added.

But the mainline narrative

is going to be touching on these formal areas systems states and fluctuates steady states and non-equilibrium three particles partitions and things in four self-organization to self-evidencing in five lagrangian generalized states and bayesian filtering in six

statistical to classical particles in seven, path integrals, planning, and curious particles in eight, and section nine will be a conclusion.

So we're going to next discuss the keywords at an overview level and just describe like some of the

broader topics that might lead someone to find this paper, be curious about it, or wanna cite it in one of those domains.

And then we're going to just jump right into the introduction.

Each of the nine sections will be clearly indicated which section we're in, and we'll be following the order of the paper, bringing in a few other resources as we saw fit in the preparation.

And we're just gonna focus on

some of the dots, connecting a few and leaving many, many for the dot one and the dot two discussions, because it's again, a paper with a lot of formalisms and a lot of rich topics.

So we're just going to give this overview and try to front load the contextualization and then continue to unpack and develop this and work on our shared understanding in the coming weeks.

The keywords that were listed were Bayesian, non-equilibrium, self-organization, variational inference, and Markov blanket.

So Brock, tell us about Bayesian.


SPEAKER_01:
Bayesian analysis.

So it's basically an analysis method for determining the posterior probability, which is basically your inactive inference.

And it's going to be something like your beliefs after having evidence added to

your prior beliefs, which are something approximately like a hypothesis.

So you have the equation here and also this word explanation, that's essentially what I just said.

So you're adding, you know, observation to hypothesis and changing, trying to reduce the, you know,

trying to approximate this PHV here over EU, the processor probability.

So it is pretty foundational to, yeah, a lot of statistics and physics and other things.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Yes, totally agreed.

Bayesian statistics, it's a big topic.

and just like you said it's about how prior beliefs meet incoming evidence and how that is updated to form posterior you know after the evidence beliefs versus before the evidence and that can be done in this continuous cycle and a lot of the variables that we're going to be seeing and talking about have

interpretations of being one of these.

For example, it might be a variable that represents a systems prior about something or something might come in and that might be evidence.

So we're going to be working within a Bayesian statistical framework rather than, for example, a frequentist p-value driven statistical framework.

But we'll come to these details along the way.

How about non-equilibrium?


SPEAKER_01:
this is um i think a much fuzzier topic um like the tradition like historically you know science studied like equilibrium state systems and non-equilibrium state systems are like more uh relatively newer things um

And so non-equilibrium is, these are things that were mentioned in the paper, it was like flows of between transitions of between like a finite sets of states, having an attractor in a system that over time, you know, perturbations in the system still act as a set of characteristic states to which the system is attracted over time.

So,

and non equilibrium being like a higher energy level state that is its local environment.

But nonetheless, distinct, definite, separate, and over time, continuous


SPEAKER_00:
So just looking at the animation you put here, it's like the brick at some time scale is out of equilibrium, like the brick will also dissolve.

But for some model of a certain timeframe hours, it could be seen as being spatially or just materially in an equilibrium.

And then looking at these two moving entities,

It's kind of like two kinds of non-equilibrium.

There's like the low bar non-equilibrium, this mechanical bird on the right side, the water dipper.

And so it is returning to these characteristics states.

It's not just staying in one location, it's returning to drink the water again and again.

So it's not in spatial equilibrium.

But also there's like this stationarity or there's something about it that is constrained.

And then the ostensibly living bird, I guess, on the cartoon on the left is like non-equilibrium of an even higher or more complex type because that bird might like fly away or do something else.

So there's like a gradient from things that are like the ball at the bottom of the bowl

in equilibrium and then progressively mechanical systems that are returning to attracting states and then what does it mean for biological systems to be or to be modeled as returning to attracting states like sleep or a certain body temperature certain blood glucose any other thoughts on that or we can carry on yeah just yeah this is a different like time scale set of states larger smaller and


SPEAKER_01:
navigating, traversing those states, yeah, internally, right?

And so, I guess it just, it depends where you're drawing the time scale.

Awesome.

But they can be modeled differently like that, right?


SPEAKER_00:
How about self-organization?


SPEAKER_01:
I think this one, like...

Maybe it sounds like just this complex, but I think this is like really familiar.

For most people, they have a good idea of what this is.

And, you know, these, like examples here of non equilibrium systems that, you know, have some

um symmetry asymmetry of constraints that over time causes them to take a particular path through that um you know set of states towards one attractor or another um cellular meiosis and mitosis here um black hole mergers nuclear fission nuclear fusion

very large, very small, in between scales here.

In the paper referencing FEP, they said FEP was about kind of turning on its head this traditional what must things do in order to exist framing of systems and physics to if it exists

what must they do?

And so this is saying, we know we have now a Bayesian evidence of black hole mergers.

What must it be doing for that data?

Now that new evidence to?

Yeah, exist, like,

What, how will, how does nuclear fusion, you know, how does that turn into two atoms turning into one atom?

What must it be doing instead of the other way around?


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Yeah.

Big topic, many angles on it, but sometimes those inversions like actual Constance paper that we discussed in live stream 34 with, um,

about how you got there so conditioned on some thing which we're going to return to existing being perceived being modeled what must that thing be doing in order to exist not what has to happen for the thing to exist but we're going to come back to that and then um the last two we'll just give a first


SPEAKER_01:
coat of paint because we're gonna see them in their technical glory soon so what is variational inference about um i'm actually less clear on this but uh related to bayesian inference it's about approximating that um posterior probability the um after um things happen like but what you know um

to what resolution can you kind of, you know, what precision can you state about that?

And also trying to have a lower bound for the marginal likelihood of evidence of the observed data.

So how likely are you to see the data that would cause that to be that would lead to the posterior probability being what it is?

That was my understanding of this.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, awesome.

What is the divergence?

It'll be awesome to hear the authors' and others' perspectives, but places where we've seen a variational Bayesian inference before, first off, it's not an innovation of active inference.

Variational autoencoders and variational Bayesian methods are being used in active inference with the partial novelty of action being considered as a parameter rather than just sensory parameters, but it's used in situations where exact Bayes is intractable

and sampling-based approaches like Monte Carlo are also not tractable or not plausible.

And so variational inference is about minimizing the divergence between Q and P, mind your Qs and Ps, as they say up there, and making sure that Q is from a family of distributions that is tractable and easy to optimize.

Even if P is something that is challenging,

Instead, a different distribution, for example, one that has a shape looking more like a parabola, more like a bowl, can be fit with Q. And then there's still some detail, like if P truly were bimodal,

Would you want the one that identifies and rests Q on top of one hump and ignores the other hump?

Or would you want the Q that is kind of centered at a place where neither of the P humps are, but contains some density in both?

So those are some detailed questions, but in general, it's about minimizing the divergence between Q and P as a means of approximating

what exact Bayes would be doing in the asymptote.

If the divergence were zero, you would be having the perfect approximation of Q on P. And then anywhere other than the divergence being zero, there's a monotonic way for you to get towards that.

And then Markov blanket, which we're going to come to in multiple formalisms, but just what comes to mind when you hear Markov blanket and what did you want to show here?


SPEAKER_01:
This one is like, I feel like this is the most easy to understand one somehow.

It's like this picture here, you can see is a bunch of dots that are different colors, right?

And you have like a circular concentric circles here.

And that's, you know, that this large inside the large square scale.

there's this like yellow line that separates all the outside dark blue from the inside orange and red and but there's also an an orange inside circle and these these yellow and orange are kind of in a um

in a relationship that keeps the dark blue and the red separate, independent of each other.

But you also have these smaller scale inside the red, inside the yellow, inside the orange here, right?

These other scale of the same thing, like that it is in some sense, either recursive or fractal or,

locally having this same kind of dynamic of two layers conditioned on each other to keep an external and an internal state independent of each other.

Awesome.

Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Which is everything, I feel like.

It's every thing.

Which we're going to be getting to.

Mind the space.

And...

It's an exciting topic and there's a lot of ongoing discussions and developments.

Here's a recent paper by Caspar Hesp and there's many other valuable commentaries on Emperor's New Markov Blankets by Jelle Bernberg, which was previously on a live stream.

So there's many, many technical and philosophical and implementation discussions around identifying Markov blankets, reifying them, and so on.

And we're going to get there.

So into the paper we go.

We're in section one, introduction.

They write, it is said that the free energy principle is difficult to understand.

No citation.

Who's saying that?

No one is saying that.

This is ironic on three counts.

First, the FEP is so simple that it is almost tautological.

circular reasoning indeed philosophical accounts compare its explanandum what it explains to a desert landscape in the sense of quine aquinian desert landscape as per what clark wrote and we'll return to that in a second a second reason for the irony is a tenant of the fep is that everything must provide an accurate account of things that is as simple as possible including itself

Finally, the FEP rests on straightforward results from statistical physics.

So one is, it's not difficult to understand.

It's so simple, it's circular.

Two is, how can it be difficult to understand when everything is as simple as it must be, including the FEP literature?

That's some high level irony.

And then the third reason is how could it be difficult to understand when it rests on straightforward results from statistical physics?

And then I just wanted to highlight this Clark 2013 citation and the desert landscape, because that seems like kind of like a oblique reference, but here's what Clark, and also here's two representations of desert landscapes.

So they're not all bad, in fact, but what Clark wrote was,

referring to radicalisms that might exist within this framework.

In extending the models to include action, action-oriented predictive processing, which is very, very similar to active inference, we might simultaneously do away with the need to appeal to goals and rewards, replacing them with a more austere construct of predictions.

so i don't want to do this or i'm not rewarded by doing that i'm just making predictions and expectations about what might happen and then fulfilling them or diverging from those fulfillments and so um that is this desert landscape vision there are neither goals nor reward signals as such

instead there are only learnt and species specific so kind of developmental and evolutionary expectations across spatial and temporal scales that are in control of perception action loops and so what are we explaining or explaining away that's this desert landscape notion and that's how the authors are beginning the paper with a sort of preemptive tripartite broadside

dissuading one from thinking that this is going to be difficult to understand before launching into the subsequent eight sections that might give you some um evidence to the contrary but yeah any thoughts on that i just thought yeah the desert laquanian desert landscape very apt description and um yeah physical sort of yep it it lines up and


SPEAKER_01:
yeah like I said that this uh it does seem tautological like a lot of these concepts if you think about them from like the statistical physics it's like obviously but um didn't there's just a lot of um area there to be covered right


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, and also note that Clark in 2013 wrote, I remain unconvinced.

Even if the austere description is possible, this would not justify the claim that this is the better tool for understanding the cognitive economy.

It is intractable, so it's like, yeah.

Yeah.

yep awesome so still in the introduction the author is right before starting it might help to clarify what the free energy principle is and why it is big question alert many theories in the biological Sciences are answers to the question what must things do in order to exist

and some answers but we could think of probably many others that people have raised so if if you ask somebody what does something have to do in order to exist some answers could be like well it has to resist dissipation it has to replicate or it has to reproduce or propagate some way like there's stuff it has to do to be there the FEP turns this question on its head and asks if things exist what must they do

More formally, if we can define what it means to be something, can we identify the physics or dynamics that that thing must possess?

To answer this question, the FEP calls on some mathematical truisms that follow from each other.

Then they write, much like Hamilton's principle of least action, the FEP is not a falsifiable theory about the way things behave.

it is a description of things that are defined in a particular way.

And for more reading on this, here's a 2018 interview with Fortier and myself and with Carl Friston.

And here there's some discussion around

Notions of falsifiability.

Can the FEP be falsified?

Or what is the relevance of falsification, which is a frequentist idea, in this Bayesian, meta-Bayesian, post-Bayesian, whatever epoch or mode that we're in?

And just one really interesting quote is from Carl.

I would assert that the notion that a framework can have the attribute falsifiable is a category error.

The notion of falsifiability is thus a very weak notion because it's actually reflecting rejecting a null hypothesis in favor of an alternative hypothesis.

That has some limitations, including the transcendental arguments on falsification, which is just that belief is rarely scrutinized using a falsificationist framework.

and then dropping from the transcendental argument into a more history of statistics and science, when we move from frequentism towards Bayesian statistics, where the p-value and so on, and the parametric distributions are seen as like special cases, but not the whole substance of the statistics, Carl's suggesting that a better way to frame evidence-based selection of hypotheses

which is ostensibly what falsification is after as well is in terms of how much empirical evidence is accrued by competing hypotheses and that's quite a different model than uh can and then falsify the ones that aren't true let's shoot down the ones that don't exist so this is quite an interesting area um what would you say or add to this there's a word uh verisimilitude


SPEAKER_01:
I think that is exactly what he's describing here.

Again, just how much evidence is accrued rather than... I mean, that's in practice how it works.

So I don't completely understand.

The notion of phosphorability is really important.

But...

like Dirac had this notion of beauty, and he's saying, look, if the equation's really beautiful, then maybe you check your experiment first.

So like you were saying, it's kind of like, that's not falsifiable, but...

then what do you mean by not falsifiable?

And that is that you're not examining that claim.

It's kind of there's a, you know, infinite regression there of falsify ability that makes it intractable, which is why taking the opposite approach of just stacking up the evidence is, you know, a way to make the same, it's the same thing, you know, but attractable version kind of, right.


SPEAKER_00:
So awesome.

They write, again, picking up on that last quotation there, that the FEP is not a falsifiable theory about the way things behave.

It's a description of things that are defined in a particular way.

Let's talk about utility.

Is such a description, if the FEP is indeed a description, is it useful?

In itself, the answer is probably no.

Oh, well then we can stop reading.

in the sense that the principle of least action does not tell you how to throw a ball.

However, the principle of least action furnishes everything we need to know to simulate the trajectory of a ball in a particular instance.

In the same sense, the FEP allows one to simulate and predict the sentient behavior of a particle, person, artifact, or agent, i.e.

some thing.

This allows one to build sentient artifacts or use simulations as observation models of particles or of those other mentioned types of systems.

These simulations rest upon specifying a generative model

that is apt to describe the behavior of the particle or person at hand.

At this point, committing to a specific generative model can be taken as a commitment to a specific and falsifiable theory.

Later, we will see examples of these simulations.

So it's like the linear regression concept is not even where you would want to focus the brunt of your falsifying effort.

But if there are two different linear regression models, we might ask which one is preferable or which one is falsified by doing some subsequent perturbation or experiments.

But the linear regression framework is like a framework, hence not falsifiable in the way that people often expect and deploying a specific generative model

analogous to like a specific linear aggression model but different that is where there's a commitment to a falsifiable theory i think the amygdala connects to this that way that could be tested and that evidence could be evaluated within a falsification or bayesian base factor framework falsifying the concept of generative models

They would have crossed that bridge and now could be engaging in falsification and evidence comparison within some constrained space.

Anything to add on that as we close the introduction?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just again, it's a linear model versus a generative model.

The linear model will yield some approximation that's not necessarily a real...

possible observation to falsify the generative model will produce many things that you might not observe possibly but some that you will and then could potentially be falsified like it gives specific examples so yes it's almost like it takes this this meso scale


SPEAKER_00:
and it separates the milk from the cream and the FEP flies over falsification

And then once you're committed to a specific generative model, it's actually written down, not just speculated that it could be written down.

Then it's like, oh, well then it's trivial or against it.

So it kind of separated out the framework, like language as a framework, like Dave just mentioned in the chat.

How would you falsify a language?

You would not any more than you would falsify a conceptual framework.

So one could not falsify a language like English

But things that are said within English might be amenable to being tested once they're actually said using that framework.


SPEAKER_01:
Very interesting.

Evidence stacked up or not versus alternatives.


SPEAKER_00:
Just like language or evolution.

Awesome.

So recall the roadmap.

We're now going to head into the next sections, each of which is going to be building on each other in this concise narrative.

However, also,

semi-standalone in their focus and we're just going to do basically a first pass and some contextualization because we have a lot of time in the coming weeks to discuss these topics in more detail so we're going to go to section two systems states and fluctuations

okay so they write we start by describing the world with the stochastic differential equation pavliatis 2014. so this is um a citation to the book stochastic processes and applications of diffusions processes um and uh just one preliminary note this is not the same sentence as the world is a stochastic differential equation

We start by describing the world with a stochastic differential equation.

So leave your realism at the door.

We're describing models here.

They write, why start here?

The principle reason is that we want a description that is consistent with physics.

Here's some discussion questions.

What does it mean to be consistent with physics?

What does it mean to be consistent with physics in theory or in principle or in practice?

And then they write, this follows because things like the Schrodinger equation in quantum mechanics, area A, fluctuation theorems in statistical mechanics, area B, and Lagrangian formulation of classical mechanics, area C, three different mechanics, quantum, statistical, and classical, can all be derived from this starting point.

So we're going back to like the last common ancestor of those three different mechanics.

And then that is where Bayesian mechanics is going to also be initiated from.

In short, if one wants a physics of sentience, this is the place to start.

Why start where?

Where are we going?

Why are we going?

Anything you want to add here?


SPEAKER_01:
Um, no, I think, again, just that, yeah, that at all these scale physics, it's, it's odd that you would be able to reproduce, you know, derive all these things from something that's not fundamental or important in some way.


SPEAKER_00:
So awesome.

They write, we are interested in systems that have characteristic states.

This means the system has a pullback attractor, the sets of states that the system will come to occupy from any initial state.

So the rubber band is going to pull back to its resting state, if it's allowed to.

And formalism...

that stochastic differential equation describing the rate of change of the states so x are the states the tau is the time and the dot notation is the derivative with respect to time so how states are changing is equal to their flow f of x f for flow and random fluctuations omega so like a signal and a noise term

There's the flow, the ocean current, and then there's the vibration that isn't the directed flow.

And this separation of scales is going to come back again and again.

So dot notation, again, means the derivative with respect to time.

So how things are changing with respect to time through time.

This yellow,

means that time and causality are baked into everything that follows in the sense that states cause their motion.

This equation is itself an approximation to a simpler mapping from some variables to changes in those variables with time.

This follows from a separation into states and random fluctuations implicit in Formalism 1 where states change slowly in relation to fast fluctuations.

So, if

this term the noise term is dominant then there will not be movements flow like movement on a manifold um there's some more details but things are changing in different ways different kind of stochastic equations

that are going to be presented here and in the book and in the citations, they help us see different parts of how we can use dynamical models to understand physics and specifically the physics of particular cognitive slash sentient systems.

Then in the footnote, they ask a question, why is the flow not a function of time?

that's what we're going to return to in dot one how is time dealt with or not dealt with similarly or differently than other frameworks or other physics and then just to stay on this formalism one and then please give any other thoughts this last line of one p of x equals question mark

The next step shared by all physics, so those three areas that we described, classical, statistical, quantum, and Bayesian, is to ask whether anything can be said about the probability density over the states, the question mark in one.

So this is the common grounding.

This is the last common ancestor of the multiple physics.

And now we're going to take it in a different direction.

A lot can be said about this probability density, P , which can be expressed in two complementary ways.

And this is going to introduce a very important distinction and dialectic.

Here are the two complementary ways.

Left side, blue.

Density dynamics using the Fokker-Planck equation, aka, also known as, the forward Kolmogorov equation.

Here's formalism two.

The Fokker-Planck equation describes the change in density due to random fluctuations and the flow of states through state space.

This is like a field model.

And then the second complementary way in orange on the right side, in terms of the probability of a path through state space using the path integral formulation.

And they write for formalism three.

Conversely, the path integral formulation considers the probability of a trajectory or path in terms of its action.

So what are two things that you can say or more about the probability density?

What are two complementary ways that it can be expressed?

What are important similarities and differences between this Fokker-Planck formalism two approach and the path integral formulation of formalism three?

Are there other complementary ways to say it or other ways to say what is here?

But this is just to introduce what's going to be very important and going to be moved back and forth in the course of this paper, which is one representation that's more field-like, continuum-like, and then another representation that's going to be more trajectory and path-based.

What do you see in there?


SPEAKER_01:
um yeah we we discussed this like really briefly about um you know like a continuous um space versus a kind of discrete or instantaneous space like there's some um mostly i guess metaphor there analogy um but when you just ask this question of what are you know other ways to say this like it's it's um

The action trajectory, their path sounds like an action density or an energy density.

Where is the path of the energy and the whole system going to evince itself?

So it's like an action density gradient or something like this.

Yeah.

Cool.

Real interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
Both the Fokker-Planck and the path integral formulations, the formalism 2-3 dialectic, inherit their functional form from assumptions about the statistics of random fluctuations in one.

So recall one with the flow and the random fluctuation term.

For example, the most likely path or path of least action

is the path taken when the fluctuations take their most likely value of zero so we're gonna explore this more but the path of least action is not using action in the same way that active states are exactly path of least action does not mean the laziest or the least energetically costly or the least mobile thing to do it's not that it is so that is what we're going to explore

what does it mean to minimize action in this framework the motion on the path of least action is just the flow without random fluctuations so if the question were you're trying to run in a straight line forward there's two forces there's the flow of you running forward and then there's your thermal vibrations

So in one limit, the flow might absolutely be overwhelming.

The random fluctuation of least action would be that person running forward.

Conversely, if that person was like the size of one molecule,

they would be being buffeted by stochastic thermal vibration, and so they would not be following that path of least action the same way.

Loose metaphor hopefully doesn't misrepresent, but paths of least action will figure prominently in the following sections of the paper, especially when considering systems that behave in a precise or predictable way.

We will denote the most likely states and paths with a bold typeface.

so it can be a little subtle sometimes and so we'll try to um clarify notation and get assistance as we can but like this is like a bold x like a bold x through t is the minimization of that unbolded function with respect to the action a of those states through time and that is going to be related to the change in x through time being just only the flow

So here it was like x dot of t equals the flow of x plus a noise term.

Here, if the noise term is zero, you can drop it.

And then they write, although equivalent, the Fokker-Planck and the path integral formalisms, this dialectic that we've discussed, the formalisms provide complementary perspectives on dynamics.

Did we mention that they're different but complementary?

The former deals with time-dependent probability densities over states.

The latter, the path integral, considers time-independent densities over paths.

The density over states at a particular time is the time marginal of the density over trajectories.

These probabilities, Bayesian probabilities, Bayesian statistics, can be conveniently quantified in terms of their negative logarithms or potentials,

leading to surprisal and action, respectively.

So we'll explore the formalisms more, but just to note that the fancy I, the fracture I, is the joint distribution, and it is going to be a negative log on the joint distribution P. And then similarly, A, the action, is going to be on those same variables in a slightly different way,

being looking like a surprise conditioned upon x sub zero the starting conditions and we're gonna go into more detail in the coming weeks any more comments on section two or we'll continue to three no i yeah that's awesome section three solutions steady states and non-equilibrium so far so sections one and two

We have equations that describe the relationship between the dynamics of a system and probability densities over fluctuations, states, and their paths.

This is sufficient to elaborate most physics.

Big if true.

Here's where the, for example, we could use the Fokker-Planck or the path integral formalism, so either side of that dialectic, to derive quantum mechanics, where the Fokker-Planck becomes the Schrodinger wave equation.

Mechanics one, quantum.

We could focus on systems that comprise statistical ensembles of similar states to derive stochastic and statistical mechanics in terms of fluctuation theorems.

Statistical mechanics.

Mechanics number two.

Finally, we could consider large systems in which the fluctuations are averaged away to derive classical mechanics such as electromagnetism and dot dot dot, general relativity.

Classical mechanics.

Mechanics number three.

All of these mechanics, quantum, statistical, classical, require boundary conditions.

To give the examples, the Schrodinger potential in quantum mechanics, the heat bath or reservoir in statistical mechanics, and the classical potential for Lagrangian classical mechanics.

At this point, the FEP steps back

wonder what space it's in and asks where do these boundary conditions come from indeed this was implicit in schrodinger's question in the famous article what is life 1944 where schrodinger wrote how can the events in space and time which take place within the spatial boundary of a living organism be accounted for by physics and chemistry

And this is a bit of a nod slash reference to the paper of Ramsted et al in 2018, answering Schrodinger's question of free energy formulation.

So this was a really impactful and relevant paper that started a discussion around the FEP and multi-scale FEP and self-organizing complex biological systems and so on.

Anything to add about these mechanics and their similarities and differences?

Markov blankets.

I'll just leave it there.


SPEAKER_01:
I will too.

They're everywhere.


SPEAKER_00:
In Formalism 6...

We're going to go into it hopefully in the discussions, but just in live stream number 32 on stochastic chaos and Markov blankets, just to show where these similar equations were represented, we talked about how the Helmholtz decomposition could be used to take a field and decompose it into multiple sections.

There's the divergence term,

which is like um or the gradient term which is like you're on some landscape and the ruler that's the most angled just going straight up the hill that's like the divergence term and that might be useful for going up or down a hill as fast as possible then there's this solenoidal or curl flow term and that is like an iso contour

and those two are part of the classical Helmholtz decomposition and then there's this capital lambda which is the housekeeping term as it was referred to in 32 and we explored it a bit but it reflects the way that that landscape is also influenced by movement so we wondered if that was like kind of like walking around on a trampoline where you can't just snapshot

the topographical map and then do your navigation on the fixed map but there's some change there we'll come back to that later so that's section three on solutions steady states and non-equilibria now we're going to really get to mark off blankets particles partitions and things in section four all right so what do you see in figure one


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, see these two inner red and green conditioned on each other that keep these external and internal states on the outside separate.

They still have conditional relationship between the sensory states, the external states, and the active states, the internal states, but

not directly with each other.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So they wrote in the caption, it's an influence diagram.

I believe it's also fairly to say it's a Bayes graph, but we're thinking of the arrows as influence and the nodes like the circles as variables.

It's a particular partition of states.

Particular is a pun because it's one specific partitioning.

It's not the only partitioning, but it's a particular one that we're sharing with you.

And it's partitioning that into a particle, into something that's like distinguishing figure from ground.

And the four states that get partitioned are internal states and external states that are separated by a Markov blanket comprised of the sensory and active states.

There's a lot that could be said, and we're going to continue to explore, but just to give a few more notes, the partitioning entails that all of these states come into existence in a model-specific way at the same time.

So it's not like there's some feature of the world that just is fundamentally an internal state.

It's the relationship between an internal and external state conditioned on a blanket by which all of those assignments can be made.

It's like an incomplete sentence to have one referenced without the other.

Also, we have the names of the states, mu for internal and eta for external.

And it's kind of like, they almost look like flips of each other.

then s for sensory states incoming info a for action active states outgoing actions so we have eta external s sensory a active and mu internal states and then there's a few

couples of states, sets of states that we are going to care about.

And the equations that describe them have super different implications.

So one set of states that's interesting to compare together is the blanket states.

B is the set of S and A. And that's more aligned with the Pearl 1988 formulation of the Markov blanket or boundary, where it was an undirected blanket.

And

Friston and others have developed this notion of like a two-way partitioning.

So the blanket is the set of both S and A. The particular states, pi, not to be confused with pi, the policy selection in the POMDP, the particular states are B,

and mu so the blanket and mu so the particular states are internal active and sensory everything except for external so the particle is like the cell the boundary and the internal generative model and then there's the autonomous states alpha which is just a and mu and one way to think about those states are like

If you were to design the system, those are the states that you can control.

You can't directly control the sensory input, which is the only thing that differentiates the autonomous from the particular states.

You can't directly control what photons hit the retina, but you could control your interpretation and your action for where your eyes move, which might absolutely influence which photons do hit the retina.

But the autonomous states are the ones that there's a degree of agency over in a way that is slightly different from just the consideration of the blankets and the internal states.

Let's continue to talk about some of the formalism.

conditional independencies which are going to be let's pull back one more in associating some of these equations of motion with a unique non-equilibrium steady state or ness density we have a somewhat special setup in which the influences entailed by the equations of motions place constraints on the conditional independences of the nest density

These conditional independencies can be used to identify a particular partition of states into external, sensory, active, and internal states as shown in the figure.

This is an important move in what space?

Because it separates the states of a particle, internal states and their sensory and active states, the particular states from the remaining, i.e.

external states.

To do this, we have to establish how the causal dynamics in one underwrite conditional independencies.

This can be done simply by using the curvature or second derivative of surprisal as follows.

So how is the second derivative of surprise related to causal sparse dynamics?

In your own words, what is the formal description of a Markov blanket?

What's this sort of minimal,

Markov blanket.

This is a slide from live stream 26 on Bayesian mechanics.

This is like an undirected blanket.

We don't have S and A separated, just B, intermediating and partitioning, making mu and ETSA conditionally independent.

and what about the fristen blankets type with sense and action separated what about nested markov blankets and so on and so on but just to look at seven we basically have x u and v x sub u and x sub v are conditionally independent conditioned upon b the blanket dot dot dot dot fancy i surprise

D squared of surprise, partial derivative, second derivative of surprise, dot, dot, dot, dot, equals zero.

What does it mean?

How is the second derivative of surprise related to causal dynamics and the partitioning?

But continuing with the sparse coupling notion.

Sparse coupling means that any two states are conditionally independent if one state does not influence the other.

Tautology number five.

This is an important observation, namely that sparse coupling implies the non-equilibrium steady state density with conditional independencies.

In turn, this means any dynamical influence graph with absent or directed edges admits a Markov blanket.

So if your variables are all connected to each other, it's a fully connected social network.

It's a fully connected statistical model.

then I guess you could argue it has a blanket with respect to some other things that you didn't model or you could get into that whole question.

But within that model, there are no blanket partitions to make.

If there are any absent edges, then there are some states which upon knowing them make some other states conditionally independent.

They give some more technical details.

And then they raise a question in the footnote, why does the particular partition comprise four sets of states?

We'll talk about that in dot one.

Continuing on sparse coupling and formalism nine, we can define sparse coupling as the solution to this equation in which all the terms are identically zero.

So what terms are zero?

What is the reading of this equation meaning?

Under what situations are they zero?

Are they being measured and said to be estimated at zero?

Are they being dictated to be zero?

So what terms are zero?

What does that mean in nine?

Sparse coupling means the Jacobian coupling states u and v is zero.

So on either side of the blanket is zero.

look in seven, U and V, they're on either side of the blanket conditioned upon that blanket existing, i.e.

there's an absence of direct coupling from one of those to the other.

This definition precludes solenoidal coupling with U that depends on V because H and gamma

are positive definite.

Sparse coupling requires associated elements of the solenoidal operator and the Hessian to vanish at every point in state space, which in turn implies conditional independence.

So what is being shown here?

But just to give one more visual way of looking at it, this was figure eight from live stream 32.

And we had basically six variables

that were in two clusters of three and they were like two communicating entities.

And so they were being coupled by this like one to four connection.

And so up here on the top left, there's strong coupling within nodes one, two, and three.

And then there's strong coupling within this clique of four, five, and six.

And then there was a sparse coupling between the systems with a one, four,

And there was also somewhat of a sparse coupling within the clique because they're not all block squares.

So we'll return to this.

And it's again on the theme of how is sparse coupling related to the particular partition and a Bayesian mechanics for particular systems.

They give some more formalisms in 11 about blankets and couplings and flow.

We'll go into it later.

And 13 is very informative.

The normal form means that particular partitions can be defined in terms of sparse couplings.

Perhaps the simplest definition that guarantees a Markov blanket is as follows.

External states only influence sensory states.

And internal states only influence active states.

this means that sensory states are not influenced by internal states and active states are not influenced by external states here's formalism 13 so recall eta external s sensory a active mu internal so f is the flow and omega

is going to be the noise and the subscript in something is here like tagging it to be about that variable so we have the rates of change through time here's like a vector or a tuple this vector is describing the four states and it's how external sense action and internal states are changing function of time this

just like formula one is gonna be unpacked where we had X dot of T equals flow plus noise.

Here, we're doing like four of those in parallel.

And so it's like external states changing through time is a flow on external states as a function of external sense and action, plus the noise of external states is a function of time.

So sense and external states are a function of external sense and action states plus accompanied noise terms.

Whereas action and internal states

are functions of sense action and internal states.

And so it's like external and sensory states are not being caused by internal states.

That's the only missing guy here, mu.

It looks like NSA, it's not, it's ETA SA.

Conversely, the autonomous states, the ones that we have more agency over, the odd one out, the missing, the dog that's not barking, is eta.

So these autonomous states are flows on sense action blankets and internal states.

So the bottom two rows are the autonomous states, and those are defined as flows of particular states, functions of flows that are using the particular variables, whereas the external and sense are driven by external facing variables.

How would you read that?

Under the sparse coupling, it's simple to show that not only are internal and external states conditionally independent, but their paths are conditionally independent given that path integral formulation.

Okay.

Any thoughts on these last few?


SPEAKER_01:
yeah again I just feel like whether the math is landing for people and this um you know separation of the internal states and the being the internal flow is being conditioned on the sorry the Autonomous States right like um it's also it's just

partially like tautological or just makes sense in a simple, the way that the model is presented.

Couple slides back.

I'm not sure if I guess this is the right spot to bring it up, but thinking also about just, so like, I think a question that I have frequently about this is like,

where do they come from where do things come from well they come from you know the separation and conditioning of you know particular from background and the blanket forming out of blankets form etc or where is what's the difference between the internal stay the externally like you said if there was you know this giant social graft all everything's connected they're all connected then then there's no markup blankets

just like two cells in the body how do they know that they're not um you know they both have their own markov blankets and yet they are both like external states that are indistinguishable from kind of the rest of stuff to themselves right for for each of them right um like

over time that you know dissipates right and so yeah i just i guess i wonder like the over time um dot notation here like how that um the dynamics of

how something becomes an internal state or an external stage, how that exactly happens, because it just seems like when you look at a lot of examples on, you know, our

entropic physics you know um anthropic like um state where we're right like everything is good for us um and everything we can observe right it's it's like galaxies or something oh they're so far away they don't you know there's a lot of intergalactic you know in space that's not affecting it's very external you rewind it a few billion years like


SPEAKER_00:
lots of interaction lots of markov blankets so it's like um yeah like where does that begin and end yeah oh markov where art i sting yeah um formalism 14 and 15 are further details on the entropy of internal and external paths and the conditional independencies of paths

That's going to conclude section four, particles, partitions, and things, which was about the Markov blanket partitioning of particles, particular states, and so on.

We'll move pretty quickly through the following sections.

Section five, from self-organization to self-evidencing.

Equipped with a particular partition, we can now talk about things in terms of their internal states and Markov boundary.

namely autonomous states.

And we can talk about particles, particular states.

The next step is to characterize the flow of the autonomous states in relation to external states.

In other words, considering the nature of the coupling between the outside and inside of the particle across its Markov blanket.

It is at this point that we move towards a Bayesian mechanics that is the special provenance of systems with particular partitions.

The existence of a particular partition means that given sensory states, one can define the conditional density over external states as being parameterized by the most likely internal state.

And we had several discussions in Livestream 26 on Bayesian mechanics with Lance DaCosta.

This is where variational inference is gonna come into play.

We will call this a variational density parameterized by the internal mode.

Q, the distribution we control of internal states.

Mu, about external states.

Eta is defined as P of external states conditioned on sense.

Equation 16 means that for every sensory state, there's a conditional density over external states and a corresponding internal mode with the smallest surprisal.

This mode specifies the variational density.

where by definition the KL divergence between the variational density and the conditional density over external states is zero.

More formalisms, more details.

Inducing the variational density is an important move.

It means that for every sensory state there is a corresponding active mode and an internal mode.

This mode does not mean style here.

Mode means like the most common value in a statistical distribution.

The active and internal modes constitute active and internal manifolds.

We will see later that these manifolds play the role of center manifolds, namely manifolds that contain paths that do not diverge or converge exponentially, the operative exponents.

The internal manifold is also a statistical manifold because it is equipped with a metric and implicit information geometry.

This is because movement on the internal statistical manifold changes the variational density.

This is moving towards that dual information geometry perspective.

What is equation 17 showing?

We're looking at the flows because if we're interested in those paths of least action,

we can discount that fluctuation term.

The expectation of the fluctuations is zero, so we're able to drop those omegas with a subscript that we saw in 13.

So now we're going to be looking at the flows on different states.

As for the top two, the external and the sense states, those are going to be about surprise.

Fracture I, fancy I.

For action and internal states, the autonomous states, that is free energy.

Minimizing surprise about external and sensory states, minimizing free energy about autonomous states.

What is that F?

the free energy in question is an upper bound on the surprisal of particular states.

So in variational Bayesian methods, ELBO and free energy are used to bound the surprisal.

Here we're bounding surprisal on a particular partitioning, including action to model the action perception loop.

So we've seen variational free energy several times.

do these different rearrangements mean what other rearrangements or restatements of f are possible they give a few thoughts here anything you want to add on variational free energy knowing that we'll have a lot of time to go into that's why just bringing it up that's what formalism is 17 and 18 bring us to


SPEAKER_01:
yeah back to pat the path and a goal um you know say like um it's i'm wondering my my question is um in relation to action and energy and the way this is being stated like what um

yeah what is what is the like action version of this that's what is like the easy to to miss like oh it's just energy um thing that is in the way of like framing this here um because they're not the same thing right like so um

Yeah, that's my question, is just differentiating that or better defining which parts are action, which parts are the energy components of that.

That's what I would like to be interested in rearranging or thinking about these equations.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

They write in footnote 19, is variational free energy the same kind of free energy found in thermodynamics?

Like Gibbs free energy, perhaps.

The answer is no.

This entropy is distinct from the thermodynamic entropy of internal states.

We're going to return to this and to have.

Are we talking about thermal free energy?

Or are we seeing equations that look like descriptors of thermal entropy, but we're applying them in an informational setting?

We'll return to it.

As they had brought up before, one can formulate this along the lines of a center manifold theorem, where we have a fast flow towards the center manifold and a slow flow on the manifold.

going fast towards the valley ravine, and then going slow on the river.

This decomposition can be derived simply using a Taylor expansion, Taylor series expansion around the time varying autonomous mode.

So here is a Taylor series expansion.

It's evaluating a function at a given point, usually zero, and then taking its first derivative,

and then taking its second derivative and using higher and higher derivatives to approximate increasing distances from the reference single point where that function was actually evaluated.

So how is the Taylor series expansion or other power series expansions related to time varying autonomous modes?

What about that flow on the center manifold?

We know from 17

the flow of autonomous mode can be expressed in terms of free energy gradients those are the two f's on the autonomous um so this expression 20 unpacks the manifold flow in terms of accuracy and complexity parts of free energy where the accuracy part depends on the sensory states and the complexity part is a function of and only of autonomous states

The manifold will look as if it is trying to maximize the accuracy of its predictions while complying with prior Bayesian beliefs.

Bayesian statistics, these are all Bayesian variables.

Here, predictions are read as expected sensory states under posterior Bayesian beliefs about their causes, namely variational density over external states.

The real temperature out there in the room, hidden unobserved external state.

thermometer reading, sensory state, and then states some sort of cognitive mirror or representation as modeled of temperature that's conditioned upon the thermometer reading, but there's some generalized synchrony across that thermometer blanket.

In footnote 21, they write, question, do particles minimize surprisal or free energy?

we'll go into it because they say minimization implies a teleology that goes beyond any claim of the fep whence teleology i thought we were like talking about teleology earlier so how deep in the desert are we what what what level of mirage are we engaging in but we'll get there and that takes us to uh figure two

which is going to show two components of autonomous flow conditioned upon sensory states.

So I'll move us away.

We can talk more about the technical details, like how it relies on the Taylor expansion, but here are the autonomous states and the black line potentially can be read as like that manifold attractor.

And so there's a movement towards, directly towards the attractor.

And then there's a movement that is perhaps orthogonalized, keeping in mind the difference between the gradient and the solenoidal flow.

And together...

through time so this is not just like a hill previously like in 26 we saw like the hill and the particle makes its way to the top of the hill as a function of gradient ascent and solenoidal coupling flow here we're not just ascending a hill like we're tracking this moving point through time but we're converging in this spiral way

and then we can maybe unpack that in relationship to manifold flow and how even if this black line is the manifold then how is the entity staying on the manifold so we'll talk more about figure two now they're going to summarize this section a particular partition of non-equilibrium steady state mass density implies autonomous dynamics can be interpreted as performing inference

particular kind it's not doing every kind it's doing a specific kind and it's a particle there's the fast flow towards the center manifold and the slow flow on the manifold the manifold flow can be interpreted as bayesian belief updating and posterior bayesian beliefs are encoded by points on the internal states statistical manifold in other words

For every point on the statistical manifold, that synchronization manifold, there's a corresponding variational density or Bayesian belief over external states.

These are internal states about external states conditioned on the particular partitioning.

And that can now be expressed as the variational principle of least action.

This is a basis of the FEP.

Put simply, but not too simply, I guess,

It means that the internal states of a particular partition can be cast as encoding conditional or posterior Bayesian beliefs about external states.

This licenses a poetic description of self-organization as self-evidencing.

We'll unpack it later, just wanted to mention it so we can continue.

In Figure 3,

different ways in which this self-evidencing is connected to various theories for example value surprise entropy and model evidence and the schematic is illustrating how minimizing variational free energy wait but i thought that minimization implies a teleology that goes beyond any claim of the fep

but minimizing variational free energy relates to normative theories of optimal behavior like value maximization pragmatic reinforcement reward learning pavlov surprise novelty info gain infomax why is the free energy principle here isn't it like all of them entropy and model evidence as well and then just to conclude the section um

They ask, is it tenable to interpret gradient flows on variational free energy landscapes as variational inference, or is this just teleological window dressing?

The next section addresses this question through the lens of Bayesian filtering.

In brief, we will see that autonomous paths of least action implied by our particular partition are the paths of least action of a Bayesian filter.

This takes us beyond as if arguments

by establishing a formal connection between particular dynamics and variational inference.

So, to discuss, what are particular dynamics?

What is variational inference?

What is the relationship between particular dynamics and variational inference?

What would it mean for it to be as if?

And what would it mean for it to be something different than as if?

okay continuing on six lagrangians generalized states and bayesian filtering now say we wanted to emulate or simulate active inference what if what if that were the case we could find the stationary solution to the fokker-plank equation and the accompanying helmholtz decomposition

We could then solve number 21, recall it's paths of least action that characterize the expected behavior of this kind of particle.

However, there is a simpler way to recover the paths of least action by finding a path that minimizes Lagrangian at every point in time.

Noting from three that the path integral of the Lagrangian is the action.

First, they're going to reintroduce generalized coordinates of motion.

So we talked about that in number 26 as well, but the generalized coordinates of motion are like the position, velocity, acceleration, and higher and higher and higher derivatives of the coordinates of location.

So it's taking like the XY coordinates and adding their first derivative and their second derivative and their third derivative and just having that in a vector.

So that's what's shown here.

X through time, the derivative of X, X prime is the flow

second derivative the first derivative and so on that's the integrator chains pid control and so on in the generalized coordinates of motion state velocity acceleration and so on are treated as separate generalized states that are coupled through the jacobian so if the first and the second are related to each other in the second and third and third and the fourth there's a sparse coupling in that vector

This allows us to relax certain assumptions and gives a quadratic form.

We'll unpack this more, but there's a sparsity and a capacity to do modeling of movement in the generalized coordinates of motion.

Now maybe three, maybe six are sufficient, but this is like an infinite dimensional framework

but it may be the case that you can go super far with like just a few.

Formalisms 23 and 24 describe that M can be read as a mass matrix.

That would be interesting to know what is meant there.

And there's a suggestion that precise particles with low amplitude random fluctuations behave like massive bodies.

So that's like the baseball on the parabola.

The air fluctuations and the thermal vibrations are not dominating its trajectory, but the one molecule baseball, it is getting tossed and turned.

In equation 25 and 26, they continue describing using that Helmholtz decomposition, the divergence free flow and the curl free flow.

in terms of the gradient descent on a Lagrangian.

That'll be helpful to learn what they mean.

And then crucially, when that is minimized, the mode of the path becomes the path of the mode.

That would be something useful to understand what is meant.

What's the difference between tracking the mean and tracking the mode?

For Gaussian distributions,

like the Laplace approximation or any other second-order curvature, what does that mean?

And then just to close this section, the generalized free energy is easy to evaluate, thankfully, given a generative model in the form of a state-space model.

Here it is.

F of sense, action, and internal is going to be...

some terms that we'll learn about.

And finally, one can simulate active inference by replacing the generalized flow of autonomous states with a generalized Bayesian filter.

So here we have 27.

Very similar, except notice that there's a lot more arrows and the bottom two, instead of 13,

we now have these bottom two rows with the d on a and the d on mu and some triangles have been introduced we'll unpack more what that means any thoughts or comments or we'll continue to seven so yeah awesome seventh from statistical to classical particles

So far, we have a Bayesian mechanics that would be apt to describe a particle or person with pullback attractor.

But what is the difference between a particle and a person?

This speaks to distinct classes of things to which FEP could apply, molecular versus biological.

Versus?

Here we associate biotic self-organization with precise and predictable dynamics of large particles.

So as we described earlier, if we were talking about classical mechanics, something bigger would be more resistant to thermal fluctuation.

We could think about that analogy to mass in the statistical setting.

Where are the priors like massive and they're just on their own inertia and they're not being buffeted by stochasticity versus where is it a lightweight something that is getting buffeted?

So here's going to be a distinction between statistical and classical mechanics in the setting of the particular partition.

It is often said that the FEP explains why biological systems resist the second law

tendency towards disorder, and the natural tendency to dissipation in disorder.

However, this is disingenuous on two counts.

So is Friston 2013 disingenuous?

Or is that paper combating the disingenuity?

First, the second law applies only to closed systems, while the free energy principle describes open systems in which internal states are exposed to in exchange with external states through blanket states.

A lot to unpack there.

What exactly is the exchange?

Is it like an informational exchange?

Or are like nutrients crossing and becoming incorporated into the internal states?

And second, there is nothing so far to suggest that the entropy of particular states or of paths is small.

so this is like the design language for particular states that might be totally buffeted by stochasticity or totally on the least action railroad and everything in between but nothing has been said to identify um one or the other and so everything high and low entropy densities

So there's two particles in two different rooms.

One particle is equally traveling to all parts of the room.

The other particle is staying in one part of the room.

So one of them has a very ordered distribution of space, and the other one has a very disordered equilibrium gas flowing throughout the room.

Both of them are particles.

So what distinguishes between high and low entropy systems?

e.g.

between candle flames and concierges respectively 28 we could have had a concierge and that is going to describe that and we'll come back to it this suggests that precise particles such as you and me respond to environmental flows and fluctuations in a precise and predictable fashion

Well, I'm an unpredictable guy.

Yes, in our regime of attention, it is almost like tuned to some maximally confusing or uninformative things, or we could have some cognitive experience of being confused, but...

someone's blood sugar through time has more predictability than zero so it's on that continuum from totally buffeted to totally on the railroad tracks and it's more like the railroad tracks if you want to survive or design high reliability systems and then they're going to introduce figures four five and six four is about the difference between generic and precise particles using an information diagram

For precise particles, there's no uncertainty about autonomous states given sensory states.

Knowledge about action.

Knowledge about internal states, like metacognition.

Is the behavior of precise particles sufficient for sentient behavior?

Perhaps.

Figure 5.

The implicit computational architecture used in simulations of sentient behavior.

And six is reproducing an example from the act-inf literature with action and action observation.

So, figure four has to do with information gain and sharing with generic and precise particles.

Do you want to add anything?

Otherwise, we'll just take one look at each of four, five, and six.

Okay.

Figure five, Bayesian mechanics and graphics summarizes belief updating implicit ingredient flows on variational free energy.

And six, sentient behavior and action observation.

So this is like somebody involved in pointing or tracing or handwriting and also looking visually.

In summary, precise particles immersed in an imprecise world respond almost deterministically to external fluctuations

Why might this behavior be characteristically biological?

Precise particles may be the kind of particles that show lifelike or biotic behavior.

So let's think of those two particles in the two rooms.

One of them, 24 hours a day, no matter what the temperature is or what the light-dark cycle is, it's always equally covering all parts of the room.

The other particle, you find out that when it's light, it stays in this part of the room, and then when it's dark, it stays in this other part of the room.

which one of those particles without knowing anything more seems more biological?

The one that's diffusing like a gas molecule or the one that has this orderly distribution, especially one that's conditioned upon like salience external factors.

So the distinction between those imprecise and precise particles getting buffeted by thermal vibrations

or being like the classical like the kepler universe like the planets going around orbits totally unbuffeted by thermal vibrations rests on the relative contribution of dissipative and conservative flow to their path through state space one might associate precise particles with living systems with characteristic biorhythms and then they bring up many many nested biorhythms

from rapid oscillations that are multiple times per second in neural systems, heartbeat, respiratory, circadian, seasonal,

life cycles even pulling out to the evolutionary angle turning this on its head one can argue living systems are a certain kind of particle that in virtue of being precise events conservative Dynamics biorhythms and time irreversibility so wow how are these all related to each other where does the time irreversibility connect and their summary

The emerging picture is that biotic systems feature solenoidal flow in virtue of being sufficiently large to average away random fluctuations when coarse-graining their dynamics.

And figure six explores that more.

Okay, final technical section eight, path integrals, planning, and curious particles.

The previous section was focused on linking dynamics, changes through time,

to densities over generalized states.

Internal states can be construed as parameterizing Bayesian beliefs about external states.

Internal states are about external states in this model.

In what follows, we move from densities over states to densities over paths to characterize the behavior of particles in terms of their trajectories.

So, formalism 29.

We're interested in characterizing autonomous responses to initial particular states, autonomous, the action and internal states, the ones that we control.

Recall that when random fluctuations on the motion of particular states vanish, there's no uncertainty about autonomous paths, given external and sensory paths, knowing exactly what to do and exactly what to think.

and there's no uncertainty about sensory paths given external and autonomous paths, knowing exactly what senses will be observed given the external world and the autonomous paths, which is what one does and thinks.

If we interpret entropies as the limiting density of discrete points, figure four, then the uncertainty about particular autonomous,

and sensory paths given external paths become interchangeable.

Formalism 30.

Formalism 31.

Expected free energy.

The autonomous path with the least expected free energy is the most likely path taken by the autonomous states.

Expected free energy.

How can we read it?

What does it mean?

Why does it matter that we're focusing on autonomous states, autonomous paths?

And how is it similar or different from other representations that we've seen and that we will see of expected free energy and free energy of the expected future and so on?

Expected free energy threats.

where it can be regarded as a fairly universal objective function for selecting paths of least action.

Planning, planning as Bayesian inference.

Equation 33, expected free energy, expected action, Bayesian optimal decisions.

Utility, pragmatic value.

expectations of information gain optimal info gain bay's optimal experimental design optimal hypothesizing so not just falsification not to beat a dead horse but rather than constraining and then executing keeping this infinite game optimal design perspective open so that we can always be here

of the balance between optimal decision-making and optimal experimenting.

When simulating with active inference and planning afforded by path integral formulation, one usually works with discrete state spaces and belief updating over discrete epochs of time.

That's where the partially observable Markov decision process, POMDP, comes into play.

And plausible policies can then be scored

evaluated based upon their expected free energy and the next action is selected from the most likely policy.

Policies are sequences of actions that can be taken.

In summary, we now have at hand a way of identifying the most likely autonomous trajectory from any initial particular state that can be used to simulate sentient behavior of precise particles that we have associated with biotic systems.

Expected free energy absorbs two aspects of Bayes' optimality into the same objective functional, which is a function with functions.

The information gain is optimal Bayesian design.

Bayesian decision theory is minimizing the cost function under a decision or choice and uncertainty.

As with the interpretation of variational free energy,

This dual aspect functionality of expected free energy is an interpretation of a single existential imperative to possess a Markov blanket and implicit thingness.

Teleologically, it's worth reflecting upon the differences between the generative models that underwrite variational and expected free energy.

For VFE, the generative model is a joint density over external and particular states

supplied by or supplying the non-equilibrium steady-state density for the path integral formulation the generative model is a joint distribution over paths because consequences the generative model acquires a temporal depth they then have several figures that continue on this theme

Figure seven is related to a DaCosta 2020 discrete state space synthesis paper showing special cases of variational and expected free energy.

Like when there's no preference, there's optimal information gain.

When there's no ambiguity, you get pure risk sensitive policy.

When there's no intrinsic value, you get expected utility theory.

And when there's no ambiguity or preferences, some recent work by Ramstad et al have started to soft reboot the FEP and connect it to the principle, which we're going to be looking forward to learning more about.

Figure eight is about Bayesian mechanics and active inference.

So we can contrast that with figure five, Bayesian mechanics and active inference.

Figure eight, Bayesian mechanics and active inference.

Figure nine is a simulation in which eye saccades are occurring, and we can explore this more.

To the conclusion, there are many points of contact between what we described and other theories.

Please read the papes, discuss special cases,

discuss the mechanics of synchronization separation of time scale and applications and then in closing they write about how the developments are speaking to the shift in focus from the foundational issues addressed in this article to their applications learning and applying active inference and fep

is quite possible that the foundational aspects of the free energy principle may also shift as simpler interpretations and perspectives reveal themselves that brings us to the end of the dot zero so brock what would you like to add or say


SPEAKER_01:
would like to add that for the next on zero i will be preparing my answer to this part first um ahead of time um i don't know just writing down a few things and thinking about um intractability and uncertainty and um possible kind of informational

information entropy kind of questions that you could ask around that, like what makes those kind of ultimate Markov blankets of intractability?

Like how action intensive is it for information to cross?

Or for the external states to influence the

Indirectly influence the internal states, right?

And another question... How hard do you have to push on the blanket?


SPEAKER_00:
What kind of push?

So yes, they're conditionally independent, but also they do influence each other via the blanket.

So how hard do you have to push?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And it seems like, I guess what I'm saying is that the scale...

which we kind of you're using the particle people and the baseball analogy right and we talked about that yesterday or the day about like just a large you know matrix large space of

states of variables of you know um dimensions of of what you mean by a markov blanket in a particular you know and the scale of that markov blanket to the environment right um having like a big seeming to have a like a big impact on how hard you have to push there right


SPEAKER_00:
um the baseball's flying through the air but the particle is spreading out and you know being pushed around and yeah and i was like are we little molecules trying to push the baseball or are we the designated hitter who's way overpowered and able to put it wherever we want or are we just doing the tiniest buffeting

Maybe this is a design language that helps us frame both of those settings and recognize when are we able to be guiding the path of least action and where might, no matter how hard we yell, maybe we're not influencing it literally at all.


SPEAKER_01:
Or we're influencing it stochastically.

It's not.

We can't concentrate our action into one

you know path right um one pet like so yeah there's i don't know there's a lot of um wonderings and questions that are like not uh probably very well informed to just read the papes on and continue reducing uncertainty


SPEAKER_00:
um yeah awesome work with this dot zero and thanks a ton for being a part of it thanks everybody for watching and all the great comments in the chat and we'll see you in the dot one and the dot two bye awesome thanks again see ya

## V0l9fOJgbtc

SPEAKER_04:
all right hello and welcome everyone it's act inf lab live stream number 45.1 it's june 1st 2022 welcome to the active lab we're a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at the links here on the slide this is a recorded and an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Head over to ActiveInference.org to find out more about what we're up to at the lab and participate if you'd like to get involved.

We're here in live stream number 45.1, and we're in our second discussion around this paper, The Free Energy Principle Made Simpler But Not Too Simple, by Fristin, DaCosta, Sajid, Heinz, Oldshofer, Pavliotis, and Parr.

and the video just like all of them are is a introduction and an invitation for those who would like to ask questions in the live chat for those who would like to join us next week in the conversation and just to try to learn and unpack and understand this paper as well as seeing it as a starting point for the continued learning and applying that we're all involved in and

We will just begin with some introductions and overviews, remind ourself where we've been in this paper, and then start to think about where we're going.

And we'll see who joins, we'll see who asks questions in the live chat, and I guess where we go together.

So we can begin just by giving an introduction, saying hi, and mentioning anything like what's something that we're excited about, what's something that we liked or remembered about the paper, and what is something that we're wondering about or would like to resolve towards the end of the discussion.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and I'll answer the questions later.

How about you, Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
I'm Blue.

I'm a researcher in New Mexico, and I don't know why I'm tasked with going first.

There's a lot of things that I think I would like to have resolved or a greater certainty about, like including the hierarchical nature of active inference and how mathematically that works out.

as well as like the time dependence and time independence.

And I'm curious about like, can, I don't know, we can get more into it later.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

While people are filing in and getting their questions ready, let's take a look back at

Big question, kind of situate ourself in this paper and just recall also what the main sections are in the roadmap.

So Brock and I worked together on 45.0.

and we highlighted the big question just one way to ask it as what are the foundations of the free energy principle fep and what does it contribute and then also we can ask how is active inference related to fep and we drew from the abstract where they mentioned starting from a description of the world in terms of a random dynamical systems

and ending up with the description of self-organization as sentient behavior.

Greetings, Carl.


SPEAKER_01:
How goes it?

I've just managed to get back in my house after being locked out by my son, but otherwise fine.

You found an alternate policy approach?

I did, and some keys hiding underneath the bucket.


SPEAKER_04:
Would you say this paper is the key to the free energy principle, or what is the key?


SPEAKER_01:
um this is which one's this this is the um the simpler one simple as possible uh made simpler but not too simple ah no there are simpler ones there are i hope there will be simpler ones so this is this is one route to the desired simplicity all right so what is this paper about


SPEAKER_04:
What did you intend to do and how did you accomplish that in this paper?


SPEAKER_01:
It was originally conceived as a brief summary of the particular physics paper.

If you remember that one that's an archive, a very dense 100 page deconstruction of physics as we know it.

So this was meant to be a technical

rehearsal and um focusing specifically on the free energy principle and the active inference part and was meant to be as simple as you could get it but as it was being written it became more and more complicated so now we're writing another one that's even simpler it was a technical rehearsal then it was a dress rehearsal and then before you knew it yeah um


SPEAKER_04:
well there's many places to jump in but first thanks so much for joining and feel free to join and leave as works for you we were interested at the outset with the layout and the roadmap of the paper so you described how there's the introduction and then the following sections are topically arranged so how did these seven inner

sections come to be is that the seven islands in the island chain are there other topics how did you come to this order and these seven sections right are you posing the question to me i guess blue could go for it but maybe you could go first


SPEAKER_01:
So I can't see who else is here, so I'm not quite sure who else could speak to this.

So from my point of view, as the author, it was exactly as you say, it was the stations en route from the basics or the basic assumptions of the free energy principle, which is basically the Langevin equation,

right through to the end, which is an account of sentient behavior meant in a very deflationary way.

So it was just the steps that you would need to take to go from a Langevin description of some system through to, first of all, defining systems of interest that had steady state solutions, and then

further thinking about the nature of thingness how you would distinguish a thing from something else and the implications of that distinction as articulated with a Markov blanket for the dynamics and various interpretations of those dynamics and of course the interpretation we use is that of

self-evidencing or gradient flows that look as if they are the kind of gradient flows you would see in systems representing in a Bayesian sense the causes of their sensory inputs on their Markov blanket and then looking at special classes or types or kinds of particles and in particular the limiting case of large particles

where the random fluctuations on the particular states, namely the Markov blanket and their internal states, tend to zero, essentially vanish, such that you are now describing things that have a classical aspect in the sense that you wouldn't need a sort of microscopic or quantum description, that they move and behave in accord with classical Lagrangian dynamics.

and that has um some special put some special constraints on these gradient flows on the lagrangian or the surprisal um that is being read as a gradient flow while sharing the same minima as a gradient flow on variational free energy and that takes us then to the final move which is um

what that would look like in terms of planning as inference and the articulating that in terms of expected free energy and then we stopped awesome blue anything to add or we can continue this line


SPEAKER_03:
I have a question that's like a burning question from reading this paper and listening to Carl talk and then also doing the textbook reading group.

I'm curious about the language, the causes of sensory inputs.

I'm curious about this because you can see it in so many ways.

I know that it's open to interpretation and depends upon the model of the system.

As someone from a neuroscience background, like the cause of my sensory input is like a 450 nanometer light wave or a pressure wave through air in terms in the sense of sound.

So when you think about the cause of the sensory input, like if there's a red balloon and I'm seeing red, like that's 700 nanometer light wavelength that I'm actually detecting.

But the balloon is missing from that.

And so I just wonder, why did you choose this term?

Or do you mean it in a literal sense?

Or is it supposed to be abstracted?

Am I supposed to, you know, come away from the cause of my sensory input, come away from the red light and go more towards that's a red balloon?


SPEAKER_01:
I would come away from the red light and go more towards the red balloon.

Would you excuse me for a second?

But the son that lost me out is just knocking on the door because I stole his keys.

Oh, yes.

All good.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Move away from the red light.

Away from the red light.


SPEAKER_01:
Sorry about that.

So the notion or the use of the language causes...

is used in a very broad sense in terms of carving up all variables into causes and consequences.

So very often when you talk in any modeling context, particularly in terms of the inversion of a generative model, people ask, what do you mean by inversion of a generative model?

Well, what I mean is a generative model

is a probabilistic description of the joint occurrence of causes and consequences.

And usually the consequences are observable and the causes are not.

So they're sometimes referred to as hidden causes.

So the generative model provides this description of the joint occurrence, probabilistic relationships between causes and consequences.

And the way that we

or the way that one can understand sensations or sensory samples is as the consequences of some abstract causes.

But because the causes are hidden or unobservable, they can only be inferred.

So these causes now become random variables that can only be inferred.

It's from the point of view of a modeler, the forward model or the generative process would be a map from cause to consequence.

But we only have available or at hand

or on I, the consequences.

So we have to do the reverse mapping, which is the genesis of the notion of model inversion.

We have to map from consequences back to causes.

And that's basically the process of Bayesian inference.

So that's where the language comes from.

It's just sort of splitting the whole universe into two types of variables, causes and consequences.

When you move to the free energy principle,

as articulated in the particular physics paper, things become a little bit more nuanced because now you've got the consequences of external causes impressing themselves on the Markov blanket.

But you now also have internal states internal to the Markov blanket that are now doing the Bayesian model inversion effectively.

But the causes are meant as a universal and very, very high dimensional or referred to

a set of very, very high dimensional variables, external states out there that conspire through whole chains of causal links to produce the sensory consequences.

So I would subsume both the red balloon and the reflected and irradiant light and all of the

biophysics that causes your retinal cell to fire, that whole chain of causality will entail a whole series and possibly uncountable number of hidden causes in generating the consequences.

And you have to work back through that chain and hence the

the notion of hierarchical models that explicitly try to put that chain in place.

So one level of your hierarchical model, you have a red balloon and another level of the model you might have the consequences of that red balloon in the outside world, which would be, you know,

reflected light and passing through your optical machinery and impinging upon your retina.

All of these things will be implicitly modelled or coarse-grained in your generative model so that you can solve the inverse problem, reconstruct the scene out there.

given this is how you observed it.

Because how you observed it is specified in the generative model through a likelihood mapping.

So if I knew the cause, red balloon, what would it feel like?

How would I palpate it?

What would I observe?

And that whole likelihood model would entail all the mechanisms that you described as sound waves and pressure waves and photons and the like.

Just to conclude, another common word or phrase people use, certainly in machine learning, for this notion of causes that are unobservable, that they are effectively random variables because they are the support of a generative model which is specified as a probability distribution.

is hidden states.

Another word for this is latent states.

And I've been told off by some reviewers for using the word latent states, but I can't remember why.

So I've reverted to using them in exactly the same sense.

Latent states or hidden states are those unobservable variables that are distinguished from observable states or outcomes


SPEAKER_03:
measurements or or data so that's where the language comes from that's very helpful yeah it really helps me um because it's something that i've struggled with but to think about it a hidden cause in terms of a causal chain that leads to the observation that that's a very helpful um way for me to think about it thank you good


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, and also how hierarchical nesting of models, which we can come back to, it's like one model might be the unobserved is the temperature in the room and the observation is the number on the thermometer, but you don't really see the number, you see the light.

So then you could have a two-step model where the causes of the temperature are the shape of the thermometer and then the shape of the thermometer is what number it is.

And so depending on how much data

the adequacy that's needed one could coarse grain and just say we're going to go from the hidden state to the observed inferred number or can start to parse that if there were degrees of freedom there let's maybe go through oh i just could say that's a nice example but yeah you could have a sort of a deep


SPEAKER_01:
artifact or person or creature with you actually has a representation of temperature as the cause of the shape or the height of the thermometer or you could have a very um shallow artifact that just registers the height of the thermometer and i have in mind here the difference between a thermostat and me or you so we would know that you know we would represent and explain changes in the shape

in terms of a change in temperature, because that's our model, and we would have a deeper model.

But the thermostat might not.

It might directly act upon the world simply because there are some quantitative single-valued scalar observable that is telling it to switch the radiator on.

So it's a nice distinction.

There's no rule which says how much core screening or how

much depth or hierarchical structure you bring to the table in terms of trying to explain what you can observe great let's go to quite early in the discussion in the introduction um elsewhere


SPEAKER_04:
the tautology and the tautological aspects and the falsification have been explored.

So let's jump into a slightly different point, which is the utility.

So there was a rhetoric in the paper, is such a description of the FEP being in this framework or principle like way?

And the answer was probably no.

there was a however so where do you see the utility of the fep and how does that come into play in the particulars for carl or blue maybe to you first blue goes first this time yes blue where have you seen utility in the fep


SPEAKER_03:
I like that the FEP resolves so many very difficult things to model, or maybe it doesn't resolve it fully yet, but has the potential to resolve, is maybe a better way to put it.

especially in terms of hierarchical modeling, also the balance between exploration and exploitation, complexity and accuracy.

So I think that it's useful to describe circumstances where there's not always a single solution, but maybe a best solution, or how can we find the best solution, given what we know.


SPEAKER_04:
okay what would you say carl where what was the function of this example with the principle of least action which we'll also want to explore but how is their utility in the fep how is their utility in the principle of least action and what is their relationship between fep and the principle of least action


SPEAKER_01:
I think that Blue has provided the answer and it can be illustrated with Hamilton's principle of least action.

So if I wanted to understand how a ball was thrown or understand its dynamics and its kinetics and the laws, the physical laws by which a ball or a massive body pursued a particular trajectory,

then what i could do is to apply hamilton's principle of least action to the particulars of this situation the mass of the ball the initial conditions the um the wind resistance and everything else that i would need to know in order to predict the behavior and understand the mechanics that underwrote what actually unfolded so um if you sort of dumb down

lose aspiration to understand sentient creatures and the distinction or the relationship between exploration and exploitation, and just think about understanding the trajectory of massive bodies, what you will end up doing is appealing to a principle of least action.

And all that says is these prescribe the lawful behaviors if you apply that principle to a particular situation.

So for us, as builders of sentient artifacts or neuroscientists trying to understand sentient creatures, what it says is that you have a principle at hand that allows you to build.

And if you can build an artifact that either resembles or reproduces the kind of behaviors that you're interested in studying, then you have a more formal understanding of the mechanics and how those artifacts or systems actually operate.

Or you can simulate.

Or you can build artificial intelligence systems.

So it's all in the pragmatic building of

something by applying the free energy principle to something and you may be asking well what is that something well it's a generative model so all the hard work starts not in understanding or deploying the free energy principle you know it's all the hard work is really specifying writing down the generative model apt to describe the kind of creature you're interested in or that you're the the system um

that you're trying to characterise and understand.

I'll just close by

nodding to, or giving a nod to, Richard Feynman here, because that whole, the motivation for application of the free energy principle, and in a sense the motivation for the free energy principle in and of itself, was just to realise or provide tools for realising the observation that was famously or purportedly on his blackboard at the time of his death, that you can't build something, you can't create it, you can't understand it.

So to build it is to understand it and vice versa.


SPEAKER_04:
Great.

I'll ask one follow-up on Feynman, and then we have a great question in the chat.

What is variational inference as Feynman utilized it and as it's utilized in FEP and ACTIV?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, variational inference is generally read as a suite of

data analytic tools called variational Bayes that used to always also be called ensemble learning.

But I haven't heard that phrase in the recent years.

So what is variational Bayes?

Well, it's a form of approximate Bayesian inference.

which should be contrasted with exact Bayesian inference.

So what's the difference between approximate and exact Bayesian inference?

The key difference is that you assume a functional form for the posterior beliefs that you're trying to update from your priors to the posterior beliefs.

Now, in assuming a functional form, you are going to depart from the actual true posterior.

And it's that departure,

which renders the inference scheme an approximate Bayesian inference scheme.

But what you buy for that approximation is tractability.

So exact Bayesian inference cannot be realised physically, by which I mean it's mathematically intractable and also numerically impossible to do exactly.

even if you have enormous sampling and you use sampling-based procedures like Metropolis-Hastings or Gibbs sampling, just open brackets is another way of approximating a posterior just with a large number of samples and sample density.

So what's the fundamental importance of the move from exact Bayesian inference to approximate Bayesian inference?

namely variational inference, it's because you've assumed a functional form which makes your inference approximate, you can now analytically convert what is an impossible marginalization or integration problem into a tractable optimization problem.

So just to put some flesh on that.

if you wanted to use um if you wanted well let's take richard fireman's problem he was trying to work out the probability distributions over all the paths a small particle could take from some initial state to some final state now given the nature of the paths he had in mind there is a universe of an enormous and countable number of such paths which meant that any um

either analytic or numerical realization of these paths, meant that it was impossible to normalize the distribution by marginalizing or integrating over the distribution to work out the normalization constant, also known as a partition function, which you would need in order to specify the probability distribution.

So when people talk about an intractable marginalization or integration problem, what they mean is for very high dimensional probabilities,

you cannot integrate under the unnormalized distribution to produce a probability distribution.

However, if you know the functional form, then you can create what's called an evidence bound or a variational free energy, which is always, for a physicist, always greater than the probability

the quantity that you want to estimate or marginalize the evidence that constitutes the result of that marginalization, also called the marginal likelihood, which means that if you can reduce that bound, you're guaranteed to find the minima that is always greater than the thing you actually want to minimize, which is usually the negative log marginal likelihood.

which converts an impossible integration problem into a tractable optimisation problem.

And that's conceptually quite important.

So what it means is that you are now converting effectively an inference problem, an exact Bayesian inference problem into an optimisation scheme.

So now you have

a formal definition of the normative account of behavior.

You can now talk about inference as an optimization procedure where you're optimizing a well-defined objective function that is the variational free element.

Why variational?

Well, very simply, given the functional form of your approximate posterior,

And given the functional form of the bound on the marginal likelihood or the negative log marginal likelihood, to be more precise, you then use the calculus of variations to demonstrate that this is indeed a bound and thereby you can perform a gradient descent or you can find the minima analytically as part of that optimization scheme.

So the variational Bayes just means you're using the calculus of variations to license the use of a particular approximation to the posterior.


SPEAKER_04:
Welcome, Thomas.

Thank you for joining.

Would you like to say hi or give any overview?

I can continue with the question or please feel free to take it in any direction.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, thank you for inviting me.

I don't have any particular comments at the moment because unfortunately I missed the start of it.

Apologies that I joined late.


SPEAKER_04:
Perfect.

Well, I'll go to the question that was in the chat.

So this was asked by Jax in relationship to our discussion about the balloon example and the thermometer example with hidden causes and observed consequences.

is this all in the service of homeostasis so how can we connect what we've been talking about with this causal bayesian framework and the variational inference to the idea of homeostasis and survival for cognitive entities as per tradition we could go to blue or thomas if you'd like to jump in on that no please go ahead


SPEAKER_01:
You have to give Thomas a few minutes to settle in.


SPEAKER_03:
Daniel, I'm deflecting that question back to you.

So you've dodged every question so far today.

So we're going to let Daniel answer this one.

Sure.


SPEAKER_04:
So just to give a first thought, so we just heard about how variational free energy calculation is converting an impossible integration problem to attractable optimization and a gradient descent that's through time.

and so if we were trying to stay within homeostatic bounds for temperature or for blood sugar or some other vital parameter and we found ourselves anywhere but exactly on the one target location so we're some divergence away from a set point

number of paths that we could take back to get to our set point or to get to the range of comfort just like feynman's particles the number of paths we could take would be infinite like in the blood sugar example you could change the regulation of every single gene in every single possible combination so the number of paths and microstates would be very large

variational inference and planning as inference would give us a way to, in an unfolding through time way, functionally optimize and return to homeostasis

rather than waiting on the sideline for this intractable integration to occur we could start moving in a direction that's more like a ball rolling to the bottom of a hill or like a molecule descending to a gibbs free energy attractor but in some other space that we're doing inference in maybe blue next

We'll go from least knowledge to most.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I don't know.

Homeostasis, I think there's always... So we started off by saying...

what exists or if you exist, what must you do?

Right?

Like, so the paper starts off saying this way.

So if something exists, what does it, what must it do rather must, what must something do in order to exist?

So it starts with the reverse of this.

And I think homeostasis is like the most, um,

driving force behind life, which goes back to the life as we know it paper and also a particular physics.

So what must something do in order to exist?

Something biological must maintain this non-equilibrium steady state density of homeostasis because if you don't, then you die.

So equilibrium in a living system is death.

Fundamentally, I think that it does come back to homeostasis, yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Thomas?

Sure.

I think I've got my bearings now.

I think homeostasis is always quite an interesting comparison or thing to relate back to variational inference and the free energy principle and for me part of the reason for that is that homeostasis is really just the observation that sensor values tend to live in some particular space over time or some particular distribution and so it's more when we talk about homeostatic bounds what we're talking about really are just

a description of how things tend to be.

And coming back to this question about inverting this question of how things have to exist and going in reverse and saying, well, it does exist and it exists in this form.

How does it then do it?

We're sort of starting when we talk about homeostasis from the principle that we are in this range.

And traditionally you then talk about negative feedback type mechanisms, reflexive correction of deviations from some set point.

But you could also see that as exactly the process of maintaining some steady state density over time, of climbing probability gradients exactly as you would for variational inference.

And when you look at things in that framing, and particularly because in homeostasis we're normally dealing with sensor values, whether those be Bayer receptors or

measures of blood glucose and that sort of thing.

We're really dealing with a probability distribution over some sort of sensory data here, predominantly interoceptive data, which is effectively a marginal likelihood once you then equip it with a model of how those sensor variables are generated.

And so one of the things that's useful in terms of taking it from homeostasis to variational inference or putting it in the realm of the free energy principle is it then asks you to try to formulate the sort of generative model you'd need to be able to explain those data and therefore to

optimize your own internal environment.

And that's, I think, where a lot of the interesting neuroscience comes in, where you try to build the models that the brain might use and then invert as the process of performing autonomic reflexes and the like.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you.

Carl, anything to ask or we can continue with other questions?


SPEAKER_01:
No, just very briefly, just to reinforce the last two answers.

The question is an excellent question, because in a sense, the free energy principle is just about describing things that have a generalized homeostasis.

So it's not saying, how would you implement homeostasis?

It's saying that our universe seems to be populated with things that possess a homeostasis.

So what behaviors must they, what principles must they conform to?

So, you know, it's a very good question.


SPEAKER_04:
In this notion of generalization, we just heard generalized homeostasis.

And I'd like to ask how it's connected to two other generalized homeostasis.

generalized synchrony and generalized coordinates of motion and if there's any other generalizations we can add those but how might this notion of generalized homeostasis be related to generalized synchrony for one entity or in communicating ensembles and then the notion of generalized coordinates of motion


SPEAKER_01:
Shall I take that one?

Sure.

Shall I take that one first?

I think there's a very close relationship between the notion of generalized synchrony and the notion of homeostasis.

And by generalized, I just mean the same tendency to keep states that matter, sometimes referred to as essential variables in the cybernetics literature, within certain bounds or within viable domains.

If you wanted to describe that process as a systems, dynamical systems theory, what you would be saying is that the

trajectories through some state space are limited to a relatively small attracting set and the smallness of that attracting set defines the bounds or the range that characterizes that particular system so for you and i we have quite narrow bounds say on our temperature

and that just means that our dynamics keeps us within or close to those set points.

So from a point of view of the dynamicist, understanding the

dynamical behavior of two systems that are coupled to each other.

And these can either be a creature or a particle and its embedding niche or environment or the external states, or there could be two similar particles in dyadic interaction.

the way that if they are coupled and they are both restricted to a small set of states or paths that they relative to the the total number of states or paths that they could pursue or occupy then they're said to have a generalized synchrony technically it means that i can predict how i will move given your state and vice versa so i think there is a very close

formal relationship between the notion of generalized synchrony and homeostasis of the kind that is accountable to the coupling between one system and another system.

Generalized coordinates of motion, I think, are meant in a slightly more technical sense.

So in order to understand the dynamics,

So to move from a description of things in terms of where they are in some state space, say your temperature, and now to understand the processes that keep you at a certain temperature, then you have to talk about the rate of change of temperature or the paths in a state space where one dimension or coordinates of that state space is temperature.

So how would you describe mathematically paths?

Well, you could just have a long list of states as an increasing function of time, or there's a more compact way of describing a path, which is effectively to use a Taylor expansion and describe it with a list of coefficients of that Taylor expansion, which turn out to be the state you're in at the moment,

your velocity, your acceleration, your jerk, and all higher order temporal derivatives.

And if you go to an infinite number of temporal derivatives, you can now reconstruct using that Taylor expansion, your trajectory into the future and into the past.

So generalized coordinates of motion are just the observation that you have to

describing or more precisely in defining the support of a probabilistic description of a system if you want to describe the paths then you just augment the state with all its higher order temporal derivatives and that's called generalized coordinates of motion interestingly should be slightly

disambiguated from the way that people use generalized coordinates in physics.

So that's usually read as basically thinking about a complete description of the system just in terms of the state and its first order temporal derivative.

So you'll come across, for example, in mechanics, p and q, so momentum and position.

So if you're in quantum physics, you'll be dealing with real and imaginary parts of a particular variable or a probability distribution.

The important observation here is that you've got more than one variable to describe what's going on.

And this, if you like, is the simplest kind of generalized quants of motion.

So it's basically x and x prime or the rate of change of x or x dot.

But you can extend that notion ad infinitum to create a Hilbert space or an infidimensional space where one point in this infidimensional space

encodes or stands in for mathematically represents an entire trajectory or path and that's a formalism that in fact the free energy principle is actually articulated in in terms of path integral formulations awesome thomas would you like to add anything there it's difficult to know what to add to such a comprehensive description um i suppose one


SPEAKER_00:
and perhaps this is more a question for Carl, but you mentioned the idea that a Taylor expansion is a more compact way of describing the trajectory.

I was wondering whether that's necessarily true.

I appreciate it would be if the trajectory is relatively simple.

but you could argue that you need a very large number of Taylor's coefficients to be able to adequately describe a more complex trajectory, complex in the sense of nonlinear, whereas it may be simpler in some circumstances just to have a series of discrete temporal points.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, excellent question.

Yeah, it speaks to when I or people like me talk about compact, where sort of implicit in that statement is the notion of some truncation.

And certainly one truncation of the kind you just mentioned would be having a discrete set of points.

But if you wanted to represent the entire path,

you're obliged to write down an infinite number of numbers.

You can either write an infinite number of states as time moves forward or backwards, or you can write down an infinite number of Taylor coefficients or generalized coordinates of motion.

certainly generalised courts of motion in and of themselves don't afford any compactness.

But when you actually apply these different kinds of representations, practically speaking,

then there are two kinds of truncations that now present themselves if you're dealing with continuous time trajectories so that your path is now described as a function of time you normally have to truncate it by specifying t equals zero and some horizon in the future you know the initial and the final state so there's a choice there that you have to make in order to deal um practically or numerically indeed some instances um

analytically with a path by truncating its length in time.

The equivalent truncation in generalized coordinates of motion is in terms of a discrete bound or upper limit on the number of the generalized coordinates or order of the temporal derivatives.

The nice thing, the compactness

comes in generalized coordinates in that there's a natural there's a natural space in which you can do that truncation and that comes from the fact that as you increase the order of the temporal derivatives or the order of the generalized coordinates of motion because the variance of the random fluctuations on the higher order motion gets

large very, very quickly.

You can assume that after a certain number of generalised coordinates or orders of generalised coordinates of motion, the precision is effectively zero.

So that means that you can get away with describing an infinitely long trajectory

with a small number of generalised coordinates because there's no further information in the higher orders.

So it now becomes like a local description.

But in that locality, it becomes compact in the same way that you would discretely change the length of the time series or the path in a function of time formulation.

So practically what tends to happen

And it has to happen in the sense that the random fluctuations have to be fast.

Therefore, they have quite a narrow autocorrelation function.

And the shape of the autocorrelation function determines how quickly the precision of higher order motion decreases.

So generally speaking, even for quite smooth random fluctuations, you don't need generalized orders of motion beyond about four to six orders of motion.

So just practically speaking,

then you now have a compact representation.

But in doing that truncation, you now can no longer roll out the path using the Taylor approximation to t equals infinity.

You can only roll it out with confidence for a relatively shorter period of time.

It's not defined precisely because, of course, you're defining it probabilistically because you've got random fluctuations in play.

So it has a sort of soft locality associated with it, but only when you do the truncation.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

ask a follow-up on the taylor series especially in spm the statistical parametric mapping there's discussion of the volterra series so what is the volterra series how is it different from the taylor series and what are they doing does blue want to take this ocean thomas ever go


SPEAKER_00:
I can have a go, but I think that's a bit before my time being involved with SPM on the whole.

As I understand it, it's more a kernel-based representation of dynamics where you're looking at convolution with particular kernels over time as an expression of how dynamics might evolve.

Beyond that, I think I'll probably have to refer back to Carl to answer that one in any detail.


SPEAKER_04:
i'm asking to understand a little bit of the history of the movement from focusing on the taylor and the volterra to only seeing the taylor series in the current paper we're discussing so but thomas is uh absolutely right the the volterra series is a way of describing um uh


SPEAKER_01:
convolution operators that are an equivalent description of your equations of motion in terms of convolution kernels of increasingly high order.

But Daniel, you're also absolutely right implicitly in the sense that a Volterra kernel expansion just is a functional Taylor approximation to any given dynamical system.

So

What's the difference between a Taylor expansion of a path of a function and a functional, a functional approximation?

And it just it's using exactly the same technology, but now

expanding the or applying the Taylor approximation to the equations of motion so the functions that determine the flow of the system so you're applying a Taylor approximation to the flow operators or the equations of motion but the spirit of the expansion is exactly the same as a standard Taylor expansion I don't think we need to know much more about it really in the sense that

The Volterra series expansion is another way of providing a compact description, compact in the sense you truncate the Taylor expansion.

In the same way we were just describing truncating the order of generalized coordinates of motion to get a compact representation and in some instances a compact inversion scheme.

So normally when people actually apply, and certainly as we apply in a practical data analysis context Volterra series, we generally don't worry about very high order terms.

And in fact, all our software is written just to deal with first and second order terms.

So we actually stop at the second order, second order derivatives or functional derivatives, which is, you know, even simpler than the, you know,

stopping at the fourth or the sixth order in terms of expressing the original variables in generalized coordinates of motion.

But because it's really a device that just represents a differential equation in terms of convolution operators and kernels, it doesn't really get you anywhere in terms of understanding the mechanics or the theory behind it.

So there is nothing in the free energy principle that refers to

the Volterra series expansion, but you could always derive a Volterra series expansion and the implicit kernels to a certain order, given some differential equations at hand, and if those differential equations

are doing a gradient descent on free energy, such as in a Bayesian filter.

You could always articulate a Bayesian filter in terms of a convolution operator, which might be one way of understanding how Bayesian smoothing and Bayesian filtering operates.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

We're deconvolving and adding action.

in many, many layers and adding more depth to the deconvolution and to the planning and inference.

Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
So speaking of convolution, I have a follow-up question that's maybe a little bit convoluted or hopefully I can articulate it well.

So when we're talking about, in the very beginning of the paper, you talk about the Fokker-Planck equation, and then you talk about the path integral formation, and the Fokker-Planck encompasses random fluctuations, and then the path integral formulation encompasses the trajectory of a particle.

And we talked about, or you talked about the like fast path and the slow path and the fucker paint fucker plank is fast.

And then the path integral is slow.

So I just want to kind of try to wrap my mind around what happens.

Like for atoms inside of my cells.

Okay.

There, the, the density is over States.

Like the atoms can occupy excited States or any number of States.

but the cells are really the ones doing the work.

The motion is happening inside of cells.

So that's kind of the slow, the slow procedure, right?

The path integral path.

But then when you think about the cells, they're in my body.

So the cells that are occupying the states and I'm doing the moving around.

So then I'm on the trajectory.

And similarly, like I am in any number of states with all the rest of the humans on planet earth, we're all in any number of

Like we could be any number of places, but they're all on planet Earth.

And then planet Earth is moving at a slower trajectory.

So what is the math kind of or can you guess or maybe foreshadow how the math compresses or unfolds in this kind of hierarchical situation?


SPEAKER_01:
So Thomas has to answer that one.

And he has to use the word renormalisation group.


SPEAKER_00:
I thought you might say that.

I was going to try and do it without, but now that you've said that.

So...

Just to start with, I mean, you mentioned this problem to start with in the context of the Fokker-Planck equation and the path integral formulations and looking at that sort of distinction.

which I think is interesting when thinking about fast and slow, but is to some extent orthogonal.

I think it's interesting when thinking about fast and slow in that you might expect that the

the Fokker-Planck equation describing the rate of change or the evolution of some probability density is going to be a slower evolution than the evolution of sort of individual particles that might be described by the stochastic differential equation or Langevin equation of that system.

There may be very fast fluctuations but really what we're dealing with when we're dealing with the Fokker-Planck equation is some summary statistics, some slower

a change over time that might be reflective of a mean or a variance.

That does link back then into the idea of a renormalization group, which is a way of describing how things at one temporal scale can be summarized in terms of some slower changes and some faster changes.

Typically, the way you might do that in a dynamical system setting would be to look at the Jacobian, which is a linearized version of the flow equation, and look at the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the flow.

And the eigenvalues tell you how quickly the system is either expanding or contracting or how quickly it's decaying in one direction or in unstable systems going off towards infinity.

And that means that if you take the set of eigenvalues, they will tell you a series of different directions that the system is changing in and the speed with which they're changing.

That means that you can choose at some point at which or some threshold above which the eigenvalues are considered slow and below which they're considered fast.

And I got that the right way around.

I have as long as they're negative eigenvalues.

Those eigenvalues are each associated with an eigenvector, which is just a way of expressing some linear combination of the components of that system.

Or you could think of it as a direction in some high dimensional space that describes the position of that system at any one time.

By separating things out or separating out the eigenvectors and the particular directions based upon whether their eigenvalues are large or small, you can separate the system out into its components that move very slowly and decay very rapidly.

Oh, sorry, that move very slowly and those that decay very rapidly.

And that's effectively the principle that the renormalization group works on when applied to these kinds of systems, because it then says that if we have some way of describing all the things in that system, we separate them out into the fast and slow components.

We can then say, well, let's just look at the fast components, find some new way of grouping them.

and then look at the fast components of that or the slow components of that and continue separating it out hierarchically to multiple different scales.

And that can be quite interesting in a range of settings to think about the emergent behavior you might get at higher and higher levels when the dynamics of the lower level might be a very simple description.

And I think that's probably what you were getting at when you were talking about the sort of very fast movement of atoms in your cells versus the slightly slower movement of yourself and the even slower movement of things that are much larger and evolve over a much larger timescale.

You could read each move from one timescale to the slower timescale as an application of a renormalization group operator.

Is that enough?

From your perspective, Carl, have I said the words renormalization group enough?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, you have.

That's excellent.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Interesting.

I just wrote down, Thomas, when you said thinking about fast and slow, and that plays into this meta-Bayesian cognitive systems on cognitive systems angle.

Any entity might be thinking fast and slow,

famous work but this is thinking about the fast and the slow maybe of a cognitive entity and maybe that's multi-scale so i'm going to bring another question into chat and then we'll be continuing on what type of boundary does a markov blanket define for a system

functional in terms of ports or constructive and modular with interfaces?

Or might both viewpoints be considered depending on modeling reasons?


SPEAKER_00:
I think for me, you may have to unpack what some of those terms mean a little bit more.

When you're talking about ports and whether they're constructive, what does that mean?


SPEAKER_04:
It was a question from the chat, so I'll try to unpack and see what you think.

Perhaps even a general question would be, what is the physical interpretation of these Markov blankets that are being identified?

Are they causal or functional connections that occur across an interface, like a USB port?

Or are they the interfaces themselves?

Or in what viewpoints exist to interpret the Markov blankets in terms of the modeling of some defined system of interest?


SPEAKER_00:
It's an interesting question at quite a few levels, and I think you could probably unpack each of those terms in several different ways.

I guess the first thing to do is think about how we define a Markov blanket and what it actually means, because we can sit around interpreting it in various ways of different sorts of systems.

But actually the key thing is that it's a probabilistic relationship.

It's a relationship between normally three distinct sets of variables, where we're saying that

Two of those types of variable are separated by the Markov blanket probabilistically.

And all that means is that the two that are being separated are conditionally independent of one another.

Once we know the thing that's doing the separating and the thing that's doing the separating is the Markov blanket.

And often that means that there are direct relationships between each of those things in the blanket, but no direct relationship across the blanket.

But then it's important to think about what sort of relationships we're talking about, whether those are dynamical relationships and causal relationships and all sorts of other ways you can describe the interactions between pairs of states.

And there's a discussion we've had on and off for the last couple of years, really, about what is the relationship between dynamics and probabilistic relationships, and even which probability distributions are appropriate to use to even define a Markov blanket of this sort.

One answer to that is that we can look at the Markov blankets associated with some steady state density, but we can also do the same thing with any probability distribution, which includes distributions over the paths and look at the independence or dependence between different paths.

When formulated in terms of path, there's a slightly clearer relationship between the dynamics of the system and the Markov blanket, because once we've said that the path of one variable or two sets of variables are independent of one another, given the

be true about the dynamical coupling and implies a certain degree of sparse coupling between those in a dynamical setting.

And it's probably once you look at the dynamical setting that a lot of the physics, as you framed it, might come in because you can then start to interpret that in terms of physical influences and things that might cause an acceleration or a change in velocity or change in position and interpret it in terms of physical forces.

There are...

There are, of course, other ways in which you can look at Markov blankets and sometimes they're interpreted in terms of sort of cell membranes and that sort of thing.

And I wondered whether that was what was meant when ports were mentioned, because you can think of sort of ion channels as being ports that allow interactions between two sets of states.

I think when people make those sorts of comparisons, you have to be very careful about what exactly you mean, which variables reflect different parts of that blanket.

So, for instance, you might talk about intracellular extracellular ion concentrations being independent of one another, conditioned upon the state of some cellular protein.

So I think, again, it's an interesting question and there are lots of different ways you could unpack it and you could think about a range of different systems and try and interpret what the Markov blanket is there and what the physical interpretation of that is, if it is a physical system.

Ultimately, I think probably the physics of it is going to be articulated most clearly in terms of the dynamical equations, which sometimes bear a direct relationship to the Markov blanket, but it depends where it's defined or in what domain it's defined.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

There was two complementary ways that this question one, it's like this is where the two paths first branched.

And they're complementary.

But

Could you describe where equation one begins and read it however you see fit, and then the question mark at the end, and then help us understand how the probability density can be expressed in two complementary ways?

What is equation one showing?

What does the question mark leave us with?

And how do these two sides shown on the left and the right provide two complementary approaches?


SPEAKER_00:
I feel like I've done a lot of the talking, but I'm happy to take this one as well if you'd like me to.

Sure.

So first line of equation one, we're really just describing some dynamical system that has some fluctuations associated with it.

So there's some degree of randomness where that randomness may be interpretable as deterministic behavior at a much faster scale that we're effectively ignoring through the application of our renormalization group, what we were speaking about earlier.

So our x in this equation is some variable that's evolving through time.

The f of x describes how, in a deterministic system, the rate of change of that variable would depend upon the variable itself, depend upon its position in space.

And the omega term at the end here tells us that there's some additional fluctuations associated with that, something that's changing in a less predictable way, at least at the scale and speed of description that we're interested in.

The second line of the equation

provides a little more definition to that.

So the first equality is relating the current position of the system, the current x, to the probability density describing the fluctuations, so saying how that's likely to be at any one point.

And here we're saying that it's something that is zero mean.

So if we were to take an average over time, the fluctuation would end up averaging to zero.

But then we're also defining a variance that's associated with it, and that's this two times gamma parameter, which effectively tells us about the amplitude of those fluctuations.

The implication symbol then is saying, OK, so if we've found that or if we've defined it in this way, so we now know the form of fluctuations, that then tells us the form of the rate of change of x. And we know that if the average rate of change of or the average fluctuation is going to be zero, then the average rate of change of x is just going to be our f of x. So the same thing.

path or the same rate of change the x would have if we were dealing with a deterministic system.

However, we then have this additional uncertainty around that rate of change which inherits exactly the same variance as the random fluctuations did.

So we then finally have this third line which says, so what is this probability distribution?

How do we now account for what the distribution of X would be at some time?

And I say at some time to make an additional distinction that isn't necessarily expressed in this slide, which is that

we can talk about the distribution of x evolving through time from some initial conditions, or we can talk about the distribution that it will eventually attain if we wait until we're a long way from our initial conditions, which is then the steady state density, so the point at which the Fokker-Planck equation here evaluates to zero.

So there are several ways now we can think about the distribution of X and the density associated with it.

Equation three then says, well, we could also look at it a different way and think about some distribution or density over alternative trajectories that X could take in alternative paths, which is a description of a slightly different sort of quantity, but is equivalent in many ways because they're determined by exactly the same things.

Does that sort of make sense?

I know I've said quite a lot there.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
Have I got myself out of answering the next question?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

Probably one rain pass.

maybe we can even just continue walking through and understanding the formalisms it's how we structure the dot zeros is with the formalisms and the figures in order and so we we follow along and try to connect key points in between so um you wrote that both the fokker plank and the path integral formulations inherit their functional form from assumptions about the statistics of random fluctuations in one which we just described

Then you describe the path of least action and the most likely path.

So what is happening in four?

Where is the fluctuation being reduced to zero?

And what does it mean to take the most likely path or the path of least action?


SPEAKER_01:
Blue, do you want to do this or do you want me to do it?


SPEAKER_03:
Definitely, by all means.

Carl, why don't you go?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

So just to backtrack a little bit and just to reiterate some of the key points that Thomas just made, just notice that everything basically starts with this Langevin equation or stochastic differential equation.

And then you can go in one of two ways.

You can go via the density dynamics description of the probability density distributions, which is a description which is deterministic.

Or you can go via the path integral formulation and you can map gracefully between one and the other.

They're complementary.

You can derive one from the other.

A little bit like the difference between dealing with the equations of motion or dealing with the convolution operators that we're just talking about.

They're equivalent.

in many senses.

However, the way that they are used in the free energy principle are very distinct.

I just wanted to rehearse that because that speaks to the particular question here.

Where did the random fluctuations go?

Before I do that, though, just to note that all the first equality in equation one is telling you

is that there is some probabilistic relationship between x and x dot.

That's all it's saying.

It's saying that there is some coupling, and normally interpreted in terms of a causal coupling, between a function of x and x dot.

so if you just think about our previous conversation in terms of generalized coordinates of motion and everything coming along in pairs like p's and q's in classical physics or real and imaginaries in quantum physics this is why there's always a pair of things at least two things to worry about because all that we're saying here is that there's some relationship between where you are and how you're moving

in state-space, and it's a probabilistic relationship.

So if you think about what that means in terms of modeling things, this is a state-space model.

So it tells you nothing about which is the most likely state to be in.

It just tells you how likely, where am I going to go from here?

That's all it's telling you.

That's all we know.

So you can start to think now about the probability distributions of where I will be in the future.

Or you can think about probability distributions over the trajectories or the paths that you take.

And that's basically what Thomas was highlighting previously.

In the free energy principle, the Fokker-Planck is actually not used very much.

So I'm just saying for Blue's benefit.

She was worried about the fast and slow and how does that fit into the Fokker-Planck.

In fact, most of the interesting stuff comes from the path integral formulation.

The Fokker-Planck does bring a lot to the table, but only when you look at the solutions to the Fokker-Planck equation that you would get.

under the assumption that it has a solution.

And you get into things like the Helmholtz decomposition and solenoidal flow and all of that interesting stuff and the link between the steady state density over states and the dynamical coupling that underwrites or defines the original Langevin equation.

You can ignore all that if you wanted to and just talk about the probability distributions over paths.

So no longer am I defining me, my homeostasis, in terms of the states that I occupy.

That's a side product of the trajectories and the dynamics that I typically evince when I'm in this situation or at this point in state space.

So I think the more powerful

And certainly the basis of the free energy principle, the more powerful calculus is actually in the path integral formulation.

So you can tell a free energy principle story without even mentioning the Fokker-Planck equation if you wanted to.

And really,

that story is a story of least action or Hamilton's principle of least action.

So what does that mean?

It just means that one way of summarising the behaviour of things or the characteristic behaviour of things

is in terms of the most likely way forward from here, the most likely trajectory or path from this point in state space.

What is that?

It is the path of least action.

What is that?

It's nothing more than the most likely path.

What is the most likely path?

Well, it's just given by the Langevin equation, the flow operator, the f of x, iterated in time in the absence or under the most likely random fluctuations.

So what are the most likely random fluctuations?

Well, we've just said that the most likely random fluctuation is zero.

So all that we're doing is taking the omega, the random fluctuations, out of the equations of motion.

And that just is the path of least action, which is just the most likely path.

And if you apply the calculus of variations,

to that notion you get these expressions that in equation four here so the if you interpret the action a as the probability or the surprisal or the negative log probability of a particular path then if you want to minimize the action you're just

trying to identify the path that is most likely, that is just the evolution of the system without any random fluctuations.

So the first expression, which follows a convention pursued in this paper and other papers, that the paths of least action, namely the most likely paths, are in boldface.

All this says is that the most likely path in boldface

simply is that which renders that path the most likely for this system, which is another way of saying that it minimizes the action.

What does that mean?

Well, it means that if you deviate from this path in any way, known as a variation, hence variational calculus, if you vary or deviate from this path, then you are going to increase the action.

So you can think of a marble rolling down a long valley

And the course of the marble rolling down a long valley will follow a trajectory that is always at the minimum of the height of the valley.

And therefore, any deviation from that path will cause you to climb the sides of the valley.

And therefore, the path integral or the average action, perfect, the average action will be slightly bigger than the path of least action.

So that's basically what is meant by the second implication, which is that any variation of the path about the path of least action will cause an increase in the action.

And another way of stating that is that the path of least action at the point of the minima, infinitesimal changes don't change the action because you're at the flat bottom or microscopically the valley has bottomed out and therefore your variation is zero.

And another way of expressing that is where we started, which is the path of least action.

follows the trajectory in the absence of any random fluctuations, which is just the final equality down there.

So it's just the original Langevin equation, but without random fluctuations, or with the most likely random fluctuations.


SPEAKER_04:
So I brought on, as you saw, this classical Waddington epigenetic landscape.

Here's the marble rolling down a hill, coming towards us,

might we interpret decisions as being bifurcations?

Or if we're talking about paths of least action in space or paths of least action on cognitive parameters, where do decisions come into play?


SPEAKER_01:
That's definitely for blue, that one.

Yep, I knew it.


SPEAKER_03:
So can we even make decisions?

I'm going to just answer your question with a question.

Because I mean, if up until this point, we are just a sum of all the things that have occurred up into this point,

We now have a model that's based on all previous action.

And when you come to this bifurcating path, you're just going to take the one that minimizes free energy, right?

Isn't that how it goes?

So according to your model and all the things that have brought an organism to that point, that's my answer.


SPEAKER_01:
I want Thomas to answer now, but he must use the words free will.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm not going there.

I don't think I'm philosophically qualified enough to use those words.


SPEAKER_03:
I skipped right over it, but said it, borderless.


SPEAKER_04:
Anyone can address how is free will related to free energy, or how decision-making plays into a path of least action?


SPEAKER_01:
While Thomas is gathering his thoughts to slip free will in a non-philosophical sense into his response, I think that's absolutely right.

So the notion of a bifurcation, I think, is very prescient when you think about paths of least action on any energy landscape, in particular free energy landscape.

But at the same time, if we just pursue the path of least action, there are no decisions or it looks as if there are no decisions from a mathematical point of view.

But in virtue of the fact that there is an indeterminacy about the paths that you would pursue from the initial where you start, say, the marble at the beginning of the top of the hill here.

That indeterminacy, I think, does call into question whether technically the chaotic structure that underwrites the itinerancy of the thing that we are trying to model will actually

induce a sensitivity to initial conditions, which means that we can never totally predict how we will behave or the decisions we will make, given our state of mind and the state of the world at the present time.

So I think there is a latitude to talk about free will, but it would be of the kind that inherits from deterministic chaos and sensitivity to initial conditions.

And that's

That's quite important, or framing it in the context of bifurcations in deterministic dynamical systems theory is quite an important move because, of course, the Langevin equation does not admit deterministic chaos because you've got random fluctuations.

So you have stochastic chaos, or you could have stochastic chaos, but you can't have deterministic chaos.

So the question now is, is there any opportunity for deterministic chaos in the context of the free energy description of

sentient behavior and choice making.

And I think there is, but only in a very special class of systems where the internal, the particular states or the internal states and the blanket states don't have any random fluctuations.

And you may be asking, well, there must always have random fluctuations.

Well, not necessarily at a particular scale.

If you take 100 million neurons or say even a million neurons, and you now write down your state as

the average of a population or ensemble of neurons, all the random fluctuations in neural noise will be averaged away.

And this is exactly the same mechanics that Thomas was talking about before in terms of

renormalization group and taking certain mixtures carefully to eliminate fast fluctuations and random fluctuations.

So the argument would be here, if you want to talk about bifurcations in the sense of transcritical bifurcations or hot bifurcations,

as a way of describing a particular path of least action or paths of least action from slightly different initial conditions, then I think you'd be perfectly licensed to do that, but you'd have to be very careful in saying that we are assuming here that the dynamics are deterministic and therefore only apply at a particular scale.

and they apply it at a scale where the particular dynamics, the internal and blanket states, don't possess any random fluctuations of that matter.

And that's quite interesting because there are other things that inherit from that assumption.

Again, coming back to this notion of different kinds of particles, some very, very small particles, like the single cells that Blue was talking about before, maybe so small in number and in size

that you cannot average away the random fluctuations and they would not show any deterministic chaos.

But there may be a coarser-grained description of neuronal dynamics and computational anatomy that does actually acquire a deterministic aspect, a classical aspect, where you have an n-body-like problem, which will invariably show some kind of deterministic chaos, which means that then you can get back to one

form of looking at something that might look like free will.

Anyway, now Thomas has had plenty of time to tell us about the dynamics of free will.


SPEAKER_00:
So I noticed that the way you framed that was in terms of unpredictability and that under the definition of free will you were using there, it's things where we wouldn't necessarily be able to predict in advance how well a particular or how a particular system would evolve.

And I'm sure that will

please some philosophers and upset many others.

I don't have an alternative definition that would work better.


SPEAKER_01:
Please everybody.


SPEAKER_00:
And so I suppose we've spoken really about one side of things, which is the deterministic aspect.

And clearly that does become very relevant at larger and slower scales.

And I suppose it's also interesting to think about unpredictability when stochastic dynamics become much more important.

So we certainly could think about systems where there are multiple plausible paths and where

or even a continuum of plausible paths, and the particular path they end up taking will depend upon the particular values that the fluctuations take during the course of that path.

arguably if the fluctuations are themselves just dynamical systems that are deterministic but occurring at a much faster scale it's still not really an unpredictability of the stochastic sort because ultimately it's described by a deterministic dynamical system which again brings us back to this renormalization group idea and it depends a little bit on your your interpretation of what happens at the slowest or so the fastest possible scales when we

performance renormalization operation is the fastest scale something that is genuinely random or is it something that is a sort of recursive recursively faster deterministic dynamics

Either way, it may be that if stochastic descriptions are most appropriate at some scale of description, we can develop a form of unpredictability both from things like deterministic chaos and uncertainty of initial conditions, but also potentially from the random fluctuations that happen along a particular trajectory in systems that have more randomness involved.

Clearly when we're trying to describe a real system or a real brain and the decisions people make, we clearly don't have access to every part of that system and what every neuron in that brain is doing, so to some extent we're always dealing with a partially stochastic system.

And that feeds into how we might end up modeling behavior in those kinds of systems as well.

So if we were trying to fit an active inference style model to real behavior or even simulated behavior, often what we end up doing is adding in a term to account for some uncertainty in the action selection or uncertainty that we as experimenters have.

in the action someone might choose, even if we think we know what the expected free energy they're going to calculate is and how they're going to evaluate the alternative paths they might choose.

So that's just an acknowledgement that if we don't know everything, if we don't have a complete description of the system, then we have to, to some extent, allow for some stochastic parts of that.

Of course, that stochastic element may be purely the uncertainty over the initial conditions in a system that can exhibit chaotic behaviour and that bifurcates in various different ways.


SPEAKER_04:
awesome we'll continue on as we approach the end of the dot one and introduce something we had talked about in terms of the markov blanket previously but it's the particular partition so how have other mechanics

addressed particles?

And how does this particle framework do something different?

And what does that different framing enable?

It's blues turn or I could give a shot.


SPEAKER_03:
Why don't you go ahead, Daniel?


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, as a non-physicist, my understanding is that particles have not been explicitly modeled this way and fields or continua have been the norm.

The particulate description provided here

enables a principled approach to separating bigger from ground from separating an entity that's being tracked that's doing the movement away from the entity that is not doing the movement in a sense that would just be one thought which I would concur with very much you know it's um


SPEAKER_01:
If you go back and think about the physics you did at school, usually it will be focused on the behaviour of some idealised gas in what they would call a heat bath or a heat reservoir.

And really what the particular petition brings to the table are deep questions about how did that heat bath get there?

And the heat bath now stands in for blanket states.

And what's beyond the heat bath?

the external states so you know it is it is a move which I am not aware of

being attempted in any other branch of physics.

So in quantum physics, the Markov blanket, or the thing that contains the particle of interest, probabilistically speaking, is usually defined in terms of a Skrodinger potential, and the functional form of that potential leads to all the applications of quantum electrodynamics that you might encounter.

And I repeat, in thermodynamics, people just talk about there being some blanket states in terms of a heat path, but they don't think about what's beyond the heat path.

In terms of classical mechanics, perhaps there is a notion of particles there, which is less...

less if you like hidden under under the rug the rug but of course you don't have any explicit representation of the internal dynamics because normally

Classical mechanics is just dealing with the motion of heavenly bodies or large, massive objects without really thinking about the faster dynamics that underwrite autonomous movement or animate movement or what people in chemistry might refer to as active matter.


SPEAKER_04:
just a few thoughts on that the classical indeed it does deal with diffusing particles massive bodies but just like you pointed out it doesn't consider internal states so it's like a view from the outside and this is a bit more like a view from both sides which enables us to have

sentient or cognitive behavior on both sides of the observation interface rather than implicitly on only one side which is a very different situation and then you uh talked about in this thermo physics context and in this quantum physics context like

what is beyond the boundary and then uh in the quantum case you said that that was like the role of the heat bath and what's outside of it is the schrodinger potential and what's outside of it and that makes me think about schrodinger's implicit question and schrodinger's explicit question schrodinger's explicit question in 1944 and in ramsted at all 2018 was what is life schrodinger's implicit question was what is beyond

the quantum what is outside of that and so it's almost um interesting though appropriate that the particular partition actually brings those two together but I would let anyone else reflect to how they're brought together

anyone wants to add or we'll just continue to leave a few little pieces before closing the dot one


SPEAKER_01:
I was hoping that Thomas and Blue would... I think that's an excellent observation.

I just wanted to reinforce it.

So what is life?

It's basically, coming back to our early question, it's those systems that are equipped with a homeostasis of sorts.

But beyond that, these things move.

So there are homeostatic systems

that are self-constructing and self-maintaining, that move.

And this, I think, speaks to the importance of having the active states that couple back and influence the external states beyond the Markov blanket.

So, again, speaking to another important natural kind, the distinction between inert particles and active particles,

um where you've got this active autopoetic like aspect to the maintenance of uh of the homeostasis so you know

I think that's quite an important observation that we're not talking, you know, we are talking about a bidirectional exchange across the Markov blanket.

Just to reiterate your sort of observation that what we're doing here is trying to account for the coupling between the inside and the outside of something.

We're not just interested in the inside as in classical physics or the outside or what it looks like from the outside in terms of, sorry, thermo...

statistical mechanics or what it looks like from the outside in terms of classical mechanics, we're actually trying to get to the meat of the maintenance of a Markov blanket and thingness in an inactive context.


SPEAKER_04:
So then as a closing round here, I want to point to one tension that we pulled in the dot zero.

So here in footnote 21,

it says a lot of interesting things but then it says minimization implies a teleology that goes beyond any claim of the fep do particles minimize surprisal or free energy well minimization implies a teleology that goes beyond any claim of the fep okay very well later

The question is asked, is it tenable to interpret gradient flows on variational free energy as variational inference?

Or is this just teleological window dressing?

So where is teleology?

Is teleology in the FEP?

Or is it window dressing?

What's the window?

What's the building?

What's outside the building?

Is minimization teleological?

And is that in the FEP's claims or what other claims are coming to the table if it's not part of FEP in the strict sense?


SPEAKER_01:
This is Thomas's favorite question.

I didn't know.


SPEAKER_00:
My favorite question in that I've asked it before.


SPEAKER_01:
Several times.

And what's lyrical about it?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, it is a tricky question in lots of ways.

I mean, to some extent, the answer to the big, bold question is both.

I think it's also worth asking the question, is it useful?

The reason we've spoken about it quite a lot in the past and one of the reasons it's come up is that in some of the recent formulations we've dealt with in some of the papers that we've been discussing, is that the free energy or the gradient flows have been on some normally steady state density that can be interpretable as a generative model of sorts or as a marginal likelihood.

Now, the challenge is that a marginal likelihood in itself is not necessary, or is, I suppose, a special case of the free energy when the variational density that we were speaking about earlier, this tractable part of the optimization problem, is exactly equal to a true posterior density once we've performed Bayesian inference.

So the question we've often asked is whether that KL divergence, whether this divergence between our approximate distribution, our variational distribution and our true exact Bayesian solution, whether if that is defined stipulatively as being zero, whether there is a meaningful role of free energy minimization as being interpretable as inference.

And there are several possible answers to that.

One is that we're really dealing with, when we're engaging in computational neuroscience, we're dealing with an attractable approximation to how systems behave.

So it's useful from the perspective of a computational neuroscientist to be able to write it down into the free energy functional

but not necessarily treat that as a literal description of what brains and sentient creatures are doing in terms of the variation of free energy aspect.

We could still interpret the marginal likelihood as before, or interpret gradient flows in the marginal likelihood as before.

Another answer to it is that part of what makes inference work, particularly in a dynamical setting, is not going to the bottom of a free energy minimum, but it's finding a way of staying there.

And so that depends upon the ability to predict and the ability to represent some dynamics of how a system is evolving over time.

So it's a question of the model staying at the bottom of the valley and not deviating up the sides.

And we could interpret that as a form of inference as well.

And here we then deal with flows that are not necessarily up or down free energy gradients or marginal likelihood gradients, but are maintaining the same level or staying at the bottom of the valley.

And that's often what we refer to in terms of the solenoidal flows.

And this links back to a lot of the discussion we were having about deterministic versus sort of chaotic dynamics, or I suppose deterministic chaos, where systems can behave in a range of different ways that is very difficult to capture if you're just going up and down probability gradients.

So it talks about how we go around probability gradients, how we circle around the hill or along the valley.

and the potentially chaotic way that we do that.

And that results in a form of prediction, it results in a way of staying at the bottom of the valley and not leaving it.

So we could interpret that as a form of inference as well.

I think they're probably asked some open questions as to whether, under certain circumstances, it looks as if we are also minimising this KL divergence part, this divergence between the approximate and exact basin posteriors.

And I think that's still open.

I think plausibly there will be ways of writing things down that look as if they're doing that.

It may be that it's simply a useful approximation that we can attractively write down and simulate and perform computational neuroscience with.

The third possibility is that if the brain is realised or evolved to realise that things in the world behave in the way we've been describing, it could plausibly be a mechanism or variational inference type approaches could be a mechanism that the brain has evolved to use to model its environment as well, which would bring back this idea of explicit variational for energy.

So I think there are several different possibilities.

I think there's still probably an ongoing discussion about a lot of this.

For me, the idea of inference and variation inference has to be one where the KL divergence is decreasing over time, where it's not something that we necessarily keep static, which might mean that variation inference is

not something that's necessarily happening in the systems we've been describing so far but whether it could be something that could be interpreted in terms of the flow of internal states toward their most likely value and other aspects of that or whether it's simply a good approximation I'm sure Carl will have other things to say on this because I've not given a definitive or a clear answer one way or the other here

For me, variation in inference occurs when the KL divergence is shrinking.

However, you could also argue that marginal likelihoods and the optimization of marginal likelihood is itself a form of Bayesian inference and more akin to sort of model selection.

Certainly it feeds into the idea of active inference in terms of acting upon the world to maximize the fit between model and the world.

And that element is certainly there.


SPEAKER_04:
Excellent.

Carl and then blue will each have a last thought.

And next week at the same time, we'll continue with 45.2.

But for now, Carl and then blue are last thoughts on what Thomas just added or anything else.


SPEAKER_01:
No, I think he's absolutely right.

I mean, it's more interesting to ask the question, isn't it?

I think it's largely from the point of view of the way the world works.

I think the FEP interpretation is largely teleological window dressing.

but I think it's incredibly useful to have that cheap and cheerful and doable kind of window dressing when you actually want to build artifacts that behave as creatures who are autopoetic and have a homeostasis and make the right kinds of decisions.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

First, Thomas or Carl, any last thoughts?

And then Blue, and then I'll close.


SPEAKER_00:
Just to say thank you for organizing this and inviting us to be part of it.


SPEAKER_04:
Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, it was great to have you guys here.

And I definitely had some questions that I've been wondering about for a long time resolved.

So that was really great.


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, this was an excellent discussion.

And we sometimes think about the dot zero as almost like preparing the marble.

I don't know if it's blowing it out of glass or just bringing it to the edge of the bathtub.

And the dot zero, we just walk through in the order as it was laid out and try to follow the traces and understand some of the causal dynamics at play behind the writing.

And then in the dot one,

we're in kind of like this plane.

And so there's little micro variations, some local sense to be made, but I really appreciated how we opened up a lot of threads and also covered a lot of the key aspects of the paper.

And then we'll be looking forward to the dot two when we get to climb or descend or circumambulate and continue the discussion.

So thanks again to Carl and Thomas and all the other authors for this great paper.

And thank you Blue and Brock for the dot zero.

See you next week.

Bye.


SPEAKER_02:
Bye.

## S5-jXzhiG18

SPEAKER_00:
Hello.

Welcome, everyone.

It is ACT-INF live stream number 45.2.

It's June 8th, 2022.

Welcome, Carl.

And we are having our third discussion on the 45.

So welcome to the ACT-INF lab, everyone.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

Head over to ActiveInference.org to learn more about the live streams and other projects that are happening in ACT-INF Lab.

We're in ACT-INF stream number 45.2.

It's the third discussion of the paper, The Free Energy Principle Made Simpler But Not Too Simple.

the first author has joined so thank you very much for that and we're going to be discussing the paper and related topics so if you're watching live feel free to write questions and comments in the live chat and we'll try to address it if it's within the regime of attention otherwise we'll just briefly say hello and then

dive in to any number of places so just to begin we can say hi and we can just mention something we're excited about or something we liked or remembered or something that we might want to resolve by the end of the discussion

Daniel Katz- So i'm Daniel i'm a researcher in California, and I think there was one question that was submitted by Brock that I would very much like to get into and also understand the role of mass and inertia for some of these statistical distributions look.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, I'm Blue.

I'm a researcher in New Mexico, and I have, you know, probably 100 million questions, but one that's been bugging a long time about internal states and sensory states and the influence, whether it's reciprocal or not, so.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, and Carl, anything you'd like to begin with or lead off?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I'm Carl, and the free energy principle on this particular one had a bit of focus on curiosity.

I'm curious to know what you're curious about.

So I was just trying to remember Blue's question there and how I would provide a clear answer to it.

That's what I find fun, answering the questions.


SPEAKER_00:
Let's start with a question about curiosity, and then, Blue, you can ask the question you had.

Where is curiosity in these curious particles?


SPEAKER_03:
They are technically an expression of curiosity, is an expression of the imperative to select those courses of action or policies that

yield the greatest information gain.

And they are properties of certain particles, not all particles, but certain particles.

Interestingly, the

The kinds of particles that conform or look as if they are behaving in a way to maximise their information gain or minimise their uncertainty about states that are external to their Markov blanket are those that show very precise dynamics, usually associated with larger particles, things like you and me.

So if you work through the physics and the dynamics that particles who preserve their Markov blanket have and make the further

assumption that you're looking at a large classical-like particle that conforms to classical mechanics, then you can demonstrate that the active states, the way that it acts upon the environment, are the product of beliefs about action that render the most likely actions those that maximize information gain.

So that's a technical answer.

For me, mathematically, it's all fairly straightforward, but I imagine it might be a bit mysterious for, if you don't know the underlying maths.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, great start.

So Blue, to your question.


SPEAKER_01:
So this is something that I've read many times before, but since I have the opportunity to interrogate you about it now, I think it's a good chance.

So here it says, particular partitions can be defined in terms of sparse coupling.

Perhaps the simplest definition that guarantees a Markov blanket is as follows.

External states only influence sensory states and internal states only influence active states.

And I find this troubling and I've found it troubling often in the past because I feel like internal states can influence

sensory states, especially in the circumstance where someone takes LSD, your sensory states are totally then influenced by your internal state of what's going on.

Is it like poking holes in the Markov blanket?

Or what is happening when the internal states, I feel, have a great ability to influence the senses?


SPEAKER_03:
Right.

I like the notion of poking holes in your Markov blanket.

That's something you wouldn't really want to do too much if you were that Markov blanket, because that would basically destroy the Markov blanket.

And interestingly, much of, you know, I conceive of much of neuroscience is trying to sort of peer through the Markov blanket.

And sometimes you do poke holes in Markov blankets, for example, in invasive electrophysiology, for example, you know, actually sort of get inside and look at the internal states.

But in answer to your question, which is, you know, I think quite an astute question, those kinds of effects would be mediated technically by what we call active states.

So it is certainly possible that you can alter the gain or the sensitivity of your sensory states and your receptor organs.

But that effect is mediated by an active state.

So if you look again at that sort of influence diagram with little arrows in it,

you will see that there is a vicarious path in which the internal states can have an effect and sometimes a profound effect on the responsiveness or the sensory states per se but usually what that translates into is the sensitivity of the responsiveness of sensory states to external states so um in the instance of psychedelics for example um

you might construe that as if the drug was acting at the level of the retina, for example, that might be activating certain active states that are mediating attention like phenomena at a very, very low level.

It's probably not the best explanation for psychedelics.

I would contend that anything that affects your perception

is really something that can be understood as a different kind of belief updating or perceptual synthesis given the same sensory information so i'll come back to you and ask you know well what did you mean by and i know that my internal states can affect my sensory states and you might

Do you really mean your sensory states?

Do you actually mean the rate at which your photoreceptors or any of your sensory receptors are actually firing?

Or did you really mean the sense-making that ensues from the same sensory input due to some internal...

We sometimes call it internal action, but some internal dynamics that change the belief updating and change the kind of thing, explanation you bring to the table for this particular pattern of sensory input.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, and.

So I think it's a little bit of both.

I think...

especially like, I like, I think of some, um, I, I, I feel like it's maybe, uh, MDMA that affects like the, um, the way that your eyes move and in your head, like literally affects like your, your, um, the eyes stickades.

So I would think that like, I guess that's involuntary action.

So I guess then it does impact the action, even though the action is involuntary.


SPEAKER_03:
I guess that makes sense.

Yes, I just endorse that.

That makes perfect sense.

Notice what you've done is you're talking exclusively about action.

You're palpating the world.

And that obviously underwrites the sense making.

But of course, that's not internal states affecting the sensory input.

It's affecting the way that we palpate the world and the sensory input that we get.

and in a sense that that's the you know one way in which we express our curious behavior that we actually palpate uh volitionally or sub-personally the world with our eyes with our with us you know sensory receptors in our skin uh and even our interceptive um um receptors that you know mediate those gut feelings you know these can all be deployed in particular ways but these are reflections of acting on um

acting on the world in order to produce different kinds of sensations.

So that, you know, that answer I think sort of highlights exactly that sparse coupling that underwrites the statistical separation of internal from external states.

Give me another example.

I think the ones that are sort of counterintuitive or sort of violations are the most useful to drill down on, you know, to


SPEAKER_01:
And so, like, I think of extreme circumstances also, not just, like, psychedelics, but, you know, when you're absolutely parched.

Like, so when you're absolutely parched or you're absolutely famished.

So the food smells so much better when you're absolutely starving.

So that's another example of how, like, my internal states, you know, I feel like affect your sensory perceptions.


SPEAKER_03:
That's a great example as well.

So I would read that example.

It makes a number of excellent points.

Certainly the salience of certain sensory cues in different states of being that you yourself infer.

will be very context-dependent.

So, a nice example, the food smells nice when you're hungry.

But to, if you like, articulate that and to realise that, and also make plans in terms of what you're going to do about being hungry, you have to have an internal representation, not just of niceness,

but also being hungry, you know, to recognize that you are hungry.

So I think that example almost paradoxically speaks to extremely high level internal states trying to make sense of all of these interceptive cues that are coming in.

So that's a nice example of interceptive inference.

So in the same way, we try to make sense of the patterns of visual input in terms of

What caused that?

What's the best explanation for this particular pattern?

Is it a face?

Is it a bird?

At very low levels, is it an edge?

All those rules, in principle, should also apply to the patterned inputs you get from your autonomic nervous system, your sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system, and all the receptors that, I repeat, literally report your gut feelings.

And you have to make sense of that.

And some creatures like you and me can make sense of it by bringing these very high level hypotheses like I am in a state of hunger or I am hungry.

But this is just another percept.

And it's as you know.

has the same status as the percept of a face.

A face is a sufficient explanation of what I'm currently seeing and enables me to make all sorts of predictions about what's going to happen in terms of looking at that face and hearing the sounds emanating from that face.

Knowing that I am hungry also has enormous benefit in the sense that it now constrains or provides or conditions certain prior beliefs about what I'm likely to do next, including these mental actions that enable me to attend to certain cues as opposed to other cues.

And I think it's really the smelling nice part and parcel of that is that you are actually attending to olfactory input.

But in order to do that, you've got to recognize that the most likely thing I am likely to do as a hungry creature who knows that she's hungry is attend to my olfactory input.

So the mechanism of attention, interestingly, gets into your example as well.

And I think that's a nice observation in the sense that many people

I think that attention is a kind of mental action.

It's an internal action.

It's sort of basically appealing to this notion of Markov blankets within Markov blankets within the brain.

And certain high levels acting upon lower levels just to set the gain.

And if you're telling a predictive coding story, it's with the precision of certain signals.

In a folk psychology rhetoric, this would be the salience

of particular certain modalities of input that hold precise information for you at that point in time that resolve uncertainty about the state that you're in, hungry, happy, fearful, whatever.

All of these things have to be inferred and recognised by the Bleep updating and the dynamics of the internal states.


SPEAKER_00:
I could first welcome Thomas.

Greetings.

Talk a little bit about action and how action integrates these complex nested chains of causal narratives.

So we talked about different perturbations, whether it's a pharmacological intervention or some optogenetic or something like that.

There could be modification at the level of the retina.

and that's directly modifying the sense states.

So there we don't need to appeal to any internal states changing to change perceptions.

Like you're seeing something different when there's different light on the retina.

Then as was mentioned, there might be modification of active states of oculomotor behavior.

And then Carl, you just brought it to the idea of attention as a mental action.

And so looking back at the partitioning in this figure,

The particular states are the internal states mu and the blanket.

So that's the whole particle as it moves around.

That's the entity as distinguished from the environment.

but there's special attention paid to the autonomous states which are the active states and the internal states and it's almost like these are the ones where control can be applied either in this terms of direct ocular motor action or the possibility of attention as mental action and so sense cannot be directly controlled but

this strange loop way it is what uncertainty is being reduced about which is the outcomes of the observations um and so distinguishing these different subsets of the partitions like the particular states being the entity the particle and then the autonomous states being the ones that have special control degrees of freedom and the blanket states being the ones that intermediate or make the internal and external states conditionally independent each of these subsets

and maybe even other subsets, have special roles in understanding different cognitive informal phenomena like curiosity or drive and motivation and so on.

um and then I make also the example with the food I am hungry and then I thought about well what if someone had to believe I am fasting and that food smells good but it would not be pleasant if my fast were ruined by this sensory outcome so there's even degrees of cognitive action beyond impulsively following um drives that are of one sensory mode um

Thomas, would you like to say hi or remark on anything you're seeing here or anywhere else?

Or there's some questions in the chat.


SPEAKER_02:
So as with last time, I apologize.

I'm a bit late joining.

Ran over a little bit at the hospital.

So lots of things on the slide that certainly I'm interested in and thinking about the roles of attention and you mentioned the word salience as well.

And I guess the thing I might pick up on is that

um in relation to the the idea that attention can be a form of action um is that we can think about we can think about things that are salient as being things that are worthy of attending to worthy of performing that action that then obtains those sorts of data which i find quite a useful way of thinking about the relationship between those two terms and a way of understanding what we mean when we talk about

salience or attention and those sorts of things and for me this is one of the big motivations for using computational neuroscience methods for using mathematical modelling as a way of trying to describe what's going on in that

A lot of these terms are used interchangeably and with very different meanings by different authors in a lot of cognitive sciences.

And it's quite useful to be able to pin that down to something mathematical and unambiguous that says, what I'm talking about is this.

You may use the same word for something different, but at least we can be clear on what is meant by it here.

So for me, it's one of the things that I found got me interested in active inference in the first place, this idea of being able to formalise things in psychology,

in a very precise way.


SPEAKER_00:
That makes me think of pinning insects and sometimes by just pinning a few parts of them the whole pose might be stabilized and then other times you might pin this bug and somebody else says well I have this one that's floating around

It could be pinned down or just trying to walk this path between being clear about how the terms are used, but not partitioning ourself off and saying, well, we're ignoring the casual use of the English word surprise or surprise.

belief or curiosity or attention or salience and we're just going to call that string onto this other formalism so how to navigate the way that sometimes the formalisms do have uh words that tag them like risk or ambiguity and how to be clear about something yet when the term itself may not have sharp distinctions

maybe a lot is cut out or is not fully encompassed by that definition and has issues with then people taking an unrelated issue or definition of that word and projecting that back onto the formalism


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, and as you say, I think it aids with translation to quite a large degree as well, and it's not just shutting yourself off with one specific definition that's different to everybody else's.

It's a way of saying, how can we actually relate all these things together and see if there are multiple different terms that are used that apply to the same underlying construct?


SPEAKER_00:
Lou, would you like to ask anything, or I can go to a question in the chat?


SPEAKER_01:
Go ahead, let's go to the chat.


SPEAKER_00:
okay i'm gonna ask one shorter question while preparing another longer one so ali asks how can seemingly irrational non-optimal behavior in some organisms be accounted for in active inference different types of non-optimal or seemingly irrational behavior whether altruism or making mistakes how can these behaviors be understood within a behavioral optimality framework


SPEAKER_02:
Did you have any thoughts on that one first?


SPEAKER_00:
Thinking about balls rolling to the bottom of bowls, one could say

i don't like where this ball rolled or i wish things had been different so it wouldn't have rolled that way but given where the ball starts and the structure of the landscape it's just playing out a certain way so if somebody has a very strong aversion to risk

maybe even with the total accurate information they could still make a decision where the outcomes are post hoc perceived as sub-optimal due to an extreme attention being paid to the possibility of a downside a one percent chance you lose one dollar but there's a 99 chance that you get a hundred dollars

but if you're paying a lot of attention to that one percent chance of loss maybe that causes somebody to not engage in this offer that in the mean field or in this sort of other way or other set of priors other attention would be quite relevant so um

Given how things are set up, they play out a certain way, and we don't need to take that too much onto the determinism path, but given a set of priors, Bayes optimal or variational Bayes utilizing organisms or those we model as such may get to outcomes that don't always result in them achieving their even specified goals.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
I think about it in terms of, uh, the old expression, if you want to go fast, go alone.

And if you want to go far, go together.

Uh, it's, it's cooperation and, and really in the, um, effort of achieving any goal.

Um, I think that the altruistic behavior in terms of, of cooperation, well, it's not always really seen that way.

I think overall, um,

it is that way.

So, I mean, while giving $10 to a homeless person in your community might be, you know, depriving you of $10, it's also giving that person the opportunity to, you know, have a meal or whatever.

It just is, it's in our nature to be cooperative, whether it's going to directly benefit us or not, because it's only through things like cooperation that we can build rocket ships and,

be sitting here today discussing this paper.

So we wouldn't have affordances like the internet if we didn't instinctively cooperate, regardless whether it directly benefits us or not.


SPEAKER_00:
Great point about the scale mattering.

Zoom in.

Why is that liver cell giving up all the glucose?

Isn't glucose...

something important or pragmatic value for that cell, and it can be true and it can be playing a service at a higher level.

So Thomas or Karl.


SPEAKER_02:
I was just going to pick up on your analogy or your metaphor with the bulls rolling into the different bowls.

And I thought that was quite a nice way of putting it in the sense that the optimum trajectory of a bull rolling into a bowl

for any given bowl is effectively going to be the most likely path it takes.

Now, of course, you could swap that bowl for a bowl of a completely different shape and you would get a completely different trajectory.

So what might seem optimal as a trajectory for one bowl might seem completely suboptimal for another.

And there's a question that comes up here a lot in terms of thinking about psychopathology or disease processes where people say, well, how is it that you can describe that as engaging in optimal behaviour?

Because clearly what's happening is so far from the optimum.

I suppose the answer is that you're referencing optimality with reference to the wrong ball.

And you need to think about what is the objective function?

Whenever we're talking about optimality, we need to say, what is it we're measuring optimality in relation to?

In active influence, clearly the objective function is always going to be a free energy functional, but the specific priors that go into making up that free energy function will have a big impact on the shape of the free energy landscape and therefore where we're going to end up moving, the kind of trajectories we're going to have.

So it turns around the question of saying, is something optimal?

It says, given that it is optimal, what is the appropriate objective function defined in terms of the appropriate priors?


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.

Carl?

Yes, just to reinforce all of those answers and provide a succinct way of responding to this important question, what is the relationship between active inference and bounded or optimal behaviour?

So one way to answer that question is just to

query the nature of optimal behaviour and bounded rationality as it's usually defined in behavioural economics and sometimes in behavioural psychology.

And one theorem which

brings those kinds of formulation into question is called the complete class theorem.

And what that says is that for any pair of loss functions and behaviors, there exists a set of priors that render that behavior Bayes optimal.

So to translate that into the current conversation, what that means is active inference can describe any behavior

in terms of Bayes' optimality, given any loss functions if you allow for different priors.

So what that tells you is that the notion of sub-optimality is itself a little bit suspect.

All you're saying is that there are unique priors that explain this behaviour.

And what you normally end up realizing is that Bayes' optimality in the general sense of active inference is not a way of prescribing optimal behavior.

It's a way of describing it.

And that description requires an identification or specification of the prize in the generative model, which is effectively what Thomas has just said.

And indeed, practical applications of active inference

to say in the context of computational psychiatry are just that they are just using active inference in order to summarize or to understand or characterize a particular person in terms of the prior beliefs they are bringing to the table

given their behaviour and given their sensory states, and you're usually using some kind of economic scheme.

So I think the key thing here is that the principles that underwrite active inference are there to describe, not to prescribe, just in the same sense that Hamilton's principle of least action will describe how a

ball travels through the air, or a massive body, or the ball in the bowl that you were just discussing.

It does not prescribe optimal behaviour until you specify the shape of the bowl, the particular priors at hand, which will be

Or you're, by definition, different for every particle, every creature and every person.

So there is no optimality in the sense that there is a right way to behave.

It's always conditioned on the prior beliefs of the person that you're talking to.

There's a further twist here which moves well on from expected utility theory.

And I'd also suggest bounded rationality, which is that the objective function that underwrites choice behavior and planning has two aspects to it.

It's got the expected information gain and the expected cost or the negative expected utility.

But the expected information gain depends upon what you currently believe, which means that the optimal way to behave depends upon what you believe in this moment.

So there is no, if you like, invariant optimal response because it's always conditioned upon what you know at the moment.

So there may be times when you behave in a way that seems to ignore your prior preferences.

in order to resolve some uncertainty and there'll be other times when that will be less the uncertainty be less if you like um potent in determining what the best next thing or the most likely thing you're going to do um next so I I think active inference gracefully subsumes um bounded and optimal behavior

but as special cases when you can ignore the way that we handle uncertainty.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

And it makes me think of even in the fully observable chessboard situation, there still might not be a single best move.

And so situations with less observability and more openness in their affordances, it's even more that case.

So it's great how you mentioned, Carl, about the description rather than the proscription.

And that is followed nicely by a question from chat.

So IA Roland Rodriguez asked,

Friston has said the free energy principle describes particular existence.

Maxwell Ramstead says storms do not follow FEP while water does.

I deduce then that for FEP the stone exists but the storm does not.

Is that accurate?

Or otherwise, can anything be said to exist that is not able to be described by the FEP?

So, if FEP is about describing rather than proscribing, what can be described with the FEP?


SPEAKER_03:
That's a difficult question.

I'm tempted to get Thomas to answer that one.

I'll give him a starter while he's gathering his thoughts.

So, yeah, Friston says, I think probably Randstad talks about, does he talk about storms or stones?

Because interestingly, storms are somewhat difficult to describe because defining the Markov blanket of a storm is not quite so easy as defining a Markov blanket of a stone.

So I'm going to assume that we're talking about stones as opposed to storms.

So the answer would be the FEP applies to anything where a thing is defined stipulatively in terms of possessing a Markov blanket that enables you to distinguish the states that belong to the thing.

from any other states.

So if something exists, then the FEP applies.

So that's one thing that can be said very, very clearly.

The next question is, well, are there different kinds of things?

And the answer would be yes, absolutely.

And it depends very much upon the causal diagrams we were looking at, the influence diagrams that we were looking at before in terms of the sparsity of what influences what.

So stones may be construed as Markov blankets that

don't have any overt active states.

So they could be construed as inert things, where inert things could be described as Markov blankets or possessing a particular partition, which is another way of saying it possesses a Markov blanket.

And you can distinguish it from a stone from the milieu in which the stone is found.

But that particular kind of particle, or Markov blanket, is inert in the sense it doesn't move around very much.

In fact, it doesn't move around at all in an autonomous way.

So that immediately distinguishes between two kinds of particles with or without active states.

You can go on sort of...

defining different sparsity structures and different kinds of things.

And until we get back to the... Daniel, you mentioned strange loops before, and there is certainly an interesting strange loop that emerges when one's active states or one's actions are hidden from the internal states.

And what does that mean?

Well, it means that now my active states become causes of my sensations, but I don't know that.

Therefore now, because I can read my internal dynamics as belief updating about the causes of my sensations, I now can be read as forming beliefs about the causes of sensations that include my own actions.

And at this point, you have a mathematical image of planning.

that you move from things like thermostats and viruses through to people and anything that has a sufficiently deep or expressive generative model to cover its own action.

So now you get into the world of technology

kinds of things that look as if they engage in planning.

And sometimes that's framed in terms of planning as inference.

And that would be an apt way to describe a lot of the biological self-organization we are interested in, but not all of it.

You could contend that a virus doesn't plan.

You could even contend that at a different scale, evolution doesn't plan.

So not everything

plans, but there will be certain kinds of things, Markov blankets, particular petitions, that look as if they do plan.

Thomas, your turn.


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know quite what I'm supposed to add to that.

I suppose an alternative perspective on the question or, well, more accurately, an alternative question is which systems are useful to try and describe with the free energy principles.

And I think what Carl's described in terms of some of the special cases, the things that, you know,

Is it useful to describe the stone in terms of the free energy principle?

Almost certainly not.

You sort of add in the additional baggage and things, but it's not really doing any inference of an interesting sort.

And perhaps the best way of answering that question is to look at the sorts of things the free energy principle has been applied to and that have found some sort of purchase.

Clearly looking at the cognitive neurosciences, that's where it's had a particular impact.

And I would imagine that part of the reason for that is that what's so interesting about brains and behaviour is that what goes on inside a brain is almost, by definition, is only interesting because it's something that relates to what's going on outside of that brain.

So the whole business of doing neuroscience is about relating internal and external states and the way in which we relate to one another.

So it's only once you start looking at systems like that that you really need to appeal to this kind of formalism.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

So just a few notes on this.

Carl, you mentioned different kinds of things and what taxonomies or classification schemes of things exist?

Along what dimensions do things exist and how does the FEP

bring cohesion or highlight tensions in the ways that kinds of things have been identified um like mental versus physical constructs or just a few that were mentioned um different extent of seemingly internal cognitive states then you mentioned the difference of the extent of the autonomous action

and then i think what the uh question and it was clarified a bit in the chat about the storm and the stone was about resistance to dissipation resistance um in its persistence so where do dissipative persistent regenerative propagative cascading failing systems

growing systems what what how do we think of those as different types of things well technically um it all


SPEAKER_03:
boils down to the functional form of the dynamics.

So from the point of view of the free energy principle, I should say that this is a very colloquial view, which is just emerging over the past few years and indeed over the past few weeks.

So this is not accepted wisdom, nor is there any consensus about it.

But if you want an answer from first principles,

then you start where the free energy principle starts, which is in the dynamics.

And the dynamics are defined by a stochastic differential equation, sometimes known as a random dynamical system.

In physics, this is just the Langevin equation.

And so any different kind of system, and implicitly, if there is a thing in the system, then there has to be a particular partition.

That's something which is at the heart of the free energy principle.

It's defining thingness in terms of the ability to separate states of the thing from other states.

So by definition, we're talking about Markov blankets.

And as soon as you write down a particular partition that implies or requires a Markov blanket,

then...

you have the opportunity now to look at the functional form of the influences of different states and other states.

And then you can now, if you like, knock out further causal influences to create a taxonomy of increasing sparsity of systems and ask questions.

What sorts of behaviors would these more and more sparse systems

demonstrate and one nice example of that we've just been discussing is if we cut the connection in the functional form of the coupling amongst the subsets of the particular partition between the active states and the internal states so that now the active states, my action,

now becomes hidden from the internal states because it's been uncoupled, then it becomes a hidden cause of my sensations and I get a very different kind of interpretation of the internal states in terms of belief updating.

So that's one nice example of what would emerge just by thinking about

um things in terms of their dynamical architecture namely the functional form of the dynamical coupling between different different um different subsets of things you also introduced a very important another distinction so that would be if you like one dimension um

along which you would be able to elaborate different kinds of things, different classes of things, different categories of things, of increasing sparsity and probably in the increase in the sparsity, increasing sophistication and you're more closer to things like us, basically.

The sparse you get, the closer you will get to

and you know things that show autonomous behavior of of an intentional kind that has this planning aspect but there's another crucial distinction which you refer to which is the distinction between particular states that are dissipative versus conservative now in this instance for all things that exist for a given period of time

then the Markov blanket has to be there because that definitionally specifies the existence of the thing.

So that's an existential imperative.

But within that non-dissipating Markov blanket, you can have particular states, namely autonomous, internal, active, plus sensory states that belong to big things.

And that's important because with big things,

all the random fluctuations that do the thermodynamic dissipation are averaged away and they start to behave like classical objects so you have this distinction between small things whose internal states and sensory states and active states could show lots of random fluctuations you know possibly even down to the quantum level versus big things like you and me

that actually obey almost Leclercian mechanics, classical mechanics, Newton's laws of motion, for example, or electrodynamics in terms of the behavior of neural populations and the like.

So these classical dynamics are subject to exactly the same rules and principles that underwrite the free energy principle.

But in this special case, all of the internal active and sensory paths dynamics are paths of least action because you've averaged away, because you've coarse-grained to an extent that

There are no more random fluctuations.

And that creates a very different kind of behavior that, you know, again, moves us into the realm of creatures that plan, basically, simply because they have this precise kind of dynamics.

So in summary, from the point of view of just the maths, I think the taxonomy you're looking for, which I don't think is actually out there yet, but could be in the fullness of time.

And I'll just say the reason I don't think it's quite out there,

is if you look at physics up until now, no one's really got beyond just saying there exists a heat bath or a Scrodinger potential or a heat reservoir.

So they haven't really thought about a partition into a heat bath, the thing that's contained by the heat bath, and the thing that contains the heat bath, which is the external states.

So there isn't really a mechanics that really talks about thingness in this explicit way.

which is one reason I suspect there isn't actually at this stage a physics of different kinds of things.

But if there is, my guess is it would be articulated in terms of the sparse coupling amongst partitions of a particular part, subsets of a particular partition, and whether or not certain subsets or their dynamics are subject to non-trivial random fluctuations and uncertainty.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Well, apparently we all expect and prefer such a taxonomy.

So people can probably guess how that will influence our future policy selection.

It also takes us to a question that Brock had raised in the week between the dot one and the dot two.

So Brock asked, I'm interested in how Markov blankets interact and affect one another, specifically when their scales differ by many orders of magnitude.

For example, baseball versus the air molecules, DNA in a cell nucleus versus the environment, alpha particles versus DNA.

It sometimes seems the larger scale overwhelms the smaller scale and vice versa, conditioned on some particular time scale.

I'm wondering if we're considering the Markov blanket as its Markov chain into the past and future if that relative scale is taken into account.

Some things have shorter or longer Markov chains that could possibly explain this seeming flip-flopping of direction of effects in their relative mass scales.

Or is there some generalized synthesis of action slash free energy that considers both of these and others to explain the direction of effects?

So how do dynamically...

potentially dynamically changing boundaries and multi-scale systems come together to help us understand cascading top-down or bottom-up effects?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, Dylan, you should answer that from the point of view of evolution.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, here would be one thought and a precursor non-FEP perspective on this is Synergetics, the version of Herman Haken, 1983 classic citation, multiscale systems like the ripple and the wave.

Where is it that changing the ripple influences the wave and vice versa?

as well as synergetics, which is a more geometric perspective that Bucky Fuller provides.

So people have been thinking about what kinds of top-down and bottom-up effects are causing cascading changes in multi-scale systems.

And then to bring it to evolution, like you suggested, the structure of the system, so the system as received by the current moment,

sets up certain affordances for very similar stimuli to propagate through a system in a non-linear way.

So for example, like a pheromone of a given shape

might bind to a receptor with high affinity that opens local channels that makes that neuron fire and that amplifies and so that causes a change at the organismal behavior level because of the shape of that perturbation but then just adding one methyl group or modifying the chemical very slightly

So a very similar stimuli or a photon of a wavelength outside of the receptive range of a given visual receptor doesn't induce that kind of a cascading change.

Perhaps it could just be said that the structure of the system and maybe even the sparsity of the connection amongst subunits predisposes it in a given moment to have what appears to be almost exquisite sensitivity for certain kinds of changes, while very similar changes next door may have very little effect and that potentially at a higher level,

evolution through the intra intra and intergenerational time scales gets to a multi-level position where the kinds of stimuli that one wouldn't want to have propagate through the system don't and the kinds of stimuli that one would want to have propagate through the system do because that multi-scale system is the most responsive and adaptive over multiple time scales

Otherwise, there might be something highly sensitive at one scale, but it's at a blind alley at another timescale or vice versa.

Yes to blue.


SPEAKER_01:
I instantly thought of evolution as soon as I heard that question and really thinking about where a situation where the particle of larger mass is overwhelmed by a particle of smaller mass.

I thought about the sperm cell.

So upon fertilization, I think that the particle of smaller mass completely overwhelms the particle of larger mass.

Although the blanket of the sperm cell, I think, is then subsumed into the mother of a baby.

But I was reminded of the paper by Matt Sims that we discussed about counting biological minds and the interaction between Vibrio fischeri and the squid.

when the the i mean the squid go in and out or the the vibrio fischeri go in and out of the squid in a very like um pretty it seems like very magical daily cycle and um compose the light organ or cause the squid to like light up and enable its um hunting uh behavior or facilitate its hunting behavior because then it doesn't cast a shadow over the organisms that it's hunting

And in this situation, it's interesting.

It's these nonlinear effects.

It's not one little bacteria that can make a squid light up, but it's got to be like a sufficient concentration of bacteria that, that caused the lighting up of, of the squid.

And it's like a, a compounded effect.

So here, like the, the small Markov blankets of each individual bacterial particle really

maybe overwhelm the larger system.

And I, I don't know, I, I feel that way also about humans, the microbiome and the work that we've, um, you know, learned over the last 20 years, 10 years, maybe, um, about the microbiome and its importance in human behavior, uh, the gut brain access, just overall, uh, human function functionality, um,

and toxicity and so forth.

So I think that all these small Markov blankets really have a very important effect and non-linear, but it does seem to take quite a mass of them to make an impact.


SPEAKER_03:
Can I just come in on the...

So just to pick up on this synchronization of large ensembles of similar kinds of Markov blankets, I think it's a very important notion.

It does strike me that sort of three fundamental issues buried in this question.

There's this sort of ensembles of Markov blankets.

And then there's the link between different scales.

So Markov blankets of Markov blankets.

And then how does this manifest in terms of intuitive concepts like maths?

So just to rehearse what's just been said from

distinguishing between ensembles of Markov blankets at the same scale, then you now have a mathematical image of multicellular organisation through to eco niche construction, through to cultural aspects of evolutionary psychology in terms of lots of people interacting together.

And this has many, many fascinating aspects.

The one

if you like, heuristic that I always keep referring to when

trying to understand what a free energy like principle would bring you is that because the variational free energy is an extensive property it means that the free energy of the ensemble of a collection of multiple Markov blankets all talking to each other or coupled to each other via their blanket states

is the the can be cast as the sum of each individual uh free energy and if you just um

simplify the notion of free energy as predictability.

What you're saying is that the likely state of an ensemble is that in which they've jointly minimized their free energy by making everything mutually predictable.

And this normally is manifest as generalized synchronization, which is exactly the behavior of

bugs that light up together or birds that flock together.

So you see this and you could actually argue that sort of things like language are just one expression

of a way to ensure that we're all mutually predictable.

And ensuring that we are jointly mutually predictable means that jointly we can minimize our free energy.

So there's lots of really interesting directions that you can take that notion of what would happen if you put lots of Markov blankets together.

The second thing, which I think speaks more to the evolutionary thing,

is the link between blankets of blankets at different scales.

And we've just heard in the previous answers that this normally entails not only a coarse graining moving, if you like, up in terms of a spatial scale, but absolutely crucially, a temporal scale.

And I think that that's absolutely crucial.

The fact that the Markov blanket at a lower scale

is likely to last for a shorter amount of time than the Markov blanket at the biggest scale.

So it's perfectly permissible to apply the free energy principle to Markov blankets that exist for a short period of time from the point of view of a larger scale.

and allow for a metamorphosis, a phase transition, a merging of Markov blankets with the sperm and the egg cell.

But from the point of view of the scale above, this is perfectly permissible.

So the free energy principle only applies at the time scale that is associated with the level in question.

But now the game is to understand how the Markov blanket or Markov blankets at the scale above

couples to the scale below and vice versa.

And this brings us to all sorts of delicate issues about how you would read evolution and epigenetics as prescribing short-lived Markov blankets in phenotypic time, for example.

uh it also again speaks to um this fundamental role of the separation of time scales that daniel was talking about in relation to synergistics you know fast and slow modes um so i think that that kind of um thinking about things from different um different point of view of a separation of temporal or spatial temporal scales

begs some deep questions about top-down and bottom-up causation that is, if you like, can be articulated in terms of the endurance of Markov blankets at any particular scale.

Finally, the mass thing is interesting.

It relates very much to the scale.

So mass at a quantum level is usually read as the inverse amplitude of random fluctuations.

So if you're looking for the intuitive notion of mass as dictating the behaviour of a very small particle at the quantum scale, then the quantity that underwrites that is the amplitude of the mass.

of random fluctuations.

As things get hotter with more and more random fluctuations, they tend to have, they look as if they have smaller mass.

But as you get bigger and bigger and bigger and you move into the world of Lagrangian mechanics and classical mechanics and the random fluctuations disappear,

then you're in the world now where mass takes on a very different meaning and it effectively can be regarded as an active state in the sense that my mass attracts you.

So I act on you through my mass attracting you.

And then you're in the world of general relativity, n-body problems,

And I mention body problems because the only thing that makes them interesting is exactly the nonlinearities that Blue was talking about.

So if you didn't have those nonlinearities and those solenoidal flows that underwrite Lagrangian mechanics, the orbiting of the heavenly bodies or anything that oscillates in a classical sense, then you would not have

the itinerant dynamics that are characteristic of non-equilibrium systems that that conform to classic classical mechanics so just the notion of mass i think is itself really very interesting and takes on very very different meanings mathematically depending upon whether you're working a very very small scale or a very large scale


SPEAKER_00:
this is kind of a call back to our previous discussion we talked about three generalizations we talked about generalized synchrony generalized coordinates of motions and generalized homeostasis and so i'm actually seeing these reflected in your response and in your trilemma carl um the ensembles of markov blankets at the same scale of similar or different kinds of things

is a general synchronization.

And again, that doesn't mean lockstep.

That means it could be turned taking as a generalized mode to allow for this mutual predictability.

And that's generalized synchronization.

And then the second point had to do with the relationship between scales, whether that's accomplished with a renormalization or with some other framework from synergetics.

And that made me think about the generalized coordinates in space and time.

and kind of like a GPS coordinate.

Not exactly, but it's like scales of 10 in space.

And so there's some coordinate systems that help us navigate multi-scale spatial and temporal with this notion that things that are things for shorter amounts of time tend to be smaller.

And even things that have large spatial extent and are short-lived

smaller parts of them are even more short-lived so it's kind of true within and between different kinds of things and then this final one i feel like should connect to generalized homeostasis i was thinking about the orbiting of the planets as a generalized homeostasis in some way like the non-linearity

is such that it isn't just collisions and repulsions but actually there is an attracting set and there's biorhythms that are predicated upon the generalized synchronization and the generalized coordinates somehow and that allows for multi-scale generalized homeostasis which is to say persistent multi-scale things

Let's go to a slightly different and technical question.

This is from ML Don who wrote, say in our generative model we have n numbers of possible states S. Given observation O, we would like to estimate PS conditioned upon O equals O using variational inference.

What if we needed the n plus first state variable in order to describe the true posterior better, similar to thinking out of the box by adding dimensions?

So partially observable states would mean two things.

One, I don't know how many states I need, so I need to be flexible in thinking out of the box for better estimation of P as conditioned on O. And two, given observation O, I am not certain what state I am in.

Could you please discuss the idea of flexible growing and pruning of states S while estimating the true posterior?


SPEAKER_02:
So this is a question that's come up occasionally over the last few years.

And I remember Ryan Smith did some work on exactly this question, specifically on how you might grow the states in your model.

So I think it's still an open question as to what the optimal way of adding in new states or new hypotheses is.

But I think the way of evaluating whether those additional hypotheses are useful is much better established.

So the answer to the second part, how do you evaluate whether it's useful to have an additional state or hypothesis as part of your model or not, is simply to perform a Bayesian model comparison.

So you calculate the marginal likelihood or a free energy approximation to that when the state is in play and another one when it's not.

It's interesting to note that the question highlights both growing and I think pruning was in there as well.

And that's interesting as it's much easier to prune them away than it is to work out how to add in new states.

And we can do that very efficiently using methods like Bayesian model reduction, which effectively say let's sort of run the model or fit our model

when we've got all of our hypotheses in play, and then test post hoc alternative models in which we've set the prior probability of certain states to zero or to nearly zero to compare how much better would our model be without it.

It's better in the sense that we managed to reduce the complexity of the model we're using, we simplify things and comply with Occam's razor while maintaining a high degree of accuracy in how we predict the data, which are the accuracy and complexity terms that we get in a marginal likelihood or free energy.

So if we had a simple way of adding in additional states,

then it's simply a matter of then calculating with that additional state, is the marginal likelihood improved or not?

An alternative way is to say, well, no, actually, let's just take the pruning perspective.

Let's just start from a very large number of states and an over-parameterized generative model of our world with many hypotheses that we don't plausibly think are ever going to really be there, and then simply prune them away in relation to the data we have until we've got the simplest,


SPEAKER_00:
accurate explanation of those data it's very interesting about after a proposal is on the table whether we're in the Bayesian or we're in the frequentist world evaluating alternatives can be done with a defined

approach but it is how you get the proposal onto the table what generates new alternatives because the space of model modifications may be like pragmatically or even in principle open-ended especially if we allow for very complex structural maneuvers like nesting of models

that is basically open-ended in which proposals are possible however those may be modeled as actions of some model builder and then they have certain affordances i can add nodes remove nodes connect add a connection remove a connection or perform these structural modifications

And then it could be something like a genetic algorithm or some other policy selection approach that results in the space being heuristically or adaptively explored in terms of model structures.

But it's never going to be as defined of a question as comparing alternatives because that has a very specific kind of plug and chug basis.

unlike the creativity and the open-endedness associated with making model changes.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, and the point you make about finding a way of a set of operations to build a model is an interesting one as well.

And certainly we had some discussions with Giovanni Pizzulo as well not long ago, and thinking about exactly what sort of operations those might be, whether it be duplicating parts of a model, adding in hierarchical levels or taking them away, adding in states, taking them away.

and how that might manifest in terms of natural selection of models over and development of cognitive architectures over evolutionary time.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

We did discuss at least one paper of Pizzullo et al that was talking about the simple homeostatic architecture and how that could be turned into a more anticipatory structure and so on.

Let's turn back to the roadmap.


SPEAKER_03:
Daniel, before we go on, can I just mention just three things which people...

might have heard about, which would be sort of related to what you've just been discussing.

The first thing is structure learning in radical constructivism.

So the work of people like Josh Tenenbaum in How to Grow a Mind, I think was the title of one of his popular papers.

So this is exactly the same problem that you've been discussing.

What are the rules and principles for growing models and learning the structure of a model that could include an n plus one state?

So that's a very interesting literature.

The other, probably more technical, take on this is called nonparametric Bayes.

where there are priors used to decide whether to include or not state n plus one, given you are currently using just states one to n. And they rest upon things called stick-breaking processes, like the Chinese restaurant process.

So there is quite a literature out there in terms of

structuring the growth of a model, I repeat, usually under the rubric of non-parametric Bayes.

And then finally, in economics, there is an ideology that rests upon this distinction between not knowing, having uncertainty about states of the world, and having uncertainty about

states that have never been encountered or represented before and that's sometimes referred to as radical uncertainty so which is meant to distinguish just between just being uncertain about states of affairs to be knowing that i just don't even know that these states could ever happen um so

interesting in radical uncertainties usually uses a motivation for not committing to a probabilistic or bayesian uh description of things so you move into sort of heuristics of the gerdke-gorenza sort and narrative explanations for things but i think if you you know if you

cast radical uncertainty as exactly the kind of problem that you'd be trying to think about principal solutions for you can probably bring that kind of um economic perspective back into um into formal maths uh just one final point and this relating to the previous question about um ensembles and the conclusion that we all try to make our worlds as predictable as possible that sort of suggests you don't need to grow morals very much

if there is a case that we construct our own universes in a way to make them predictable.

then we actually don't need very complex models.

So I wonder whether, in fact, the shrinking or the Bayesian model reduction is perfectly fit for purpose and certainly is consistent with me in the sense that I was born with too many neurons and too many connections.

And as I get older, I just lose stuff.

But at least I become more fit for purpose at modeling my little world, which you all carefully keep very predictable for me.

And thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
I'll connect that to one common casual framework, but in a recent paper with Scott David and RJ Corday, we connected Rumsfeld's quadrant, the unknown, known, known, unknown,

And interestingly, in that famous quote by Rumsfeld, if people look at it, he only mentions three of the quadrants.

And the unknown known is actually like a hidden quadrant.

And we sort of in a preliminary way asked, what do these different situations mean for different knowledge about particular states?

So known-known includes the metacognitive aspect of knowing not only all the partitioned states, but also the policy.

And then in the unknown known, the partitions are known, but what is unknown is actually the policy.

You got the atom level description of the car, but you still might not know what policy to take in terms of using the car.

And then knowing unknown is basically the bounded rationality bounded at the perimeter of the particulate entity because the internal and blanket states are known as well as potentially even what to do.

but the external state has high uncertainty and then this unknown unknown which is that radical uncertainty might include like not knowing what's out there or how to pursue it and there might be different mappings too but um that was just coming to mind with this question about uncertainty about states of the world and then uncertainty of states that haven't been observed before let's return to the road map on our road trip

And is there a section that somebody feels like plays well here, or a section that we haven't been able to cover any of the figures or formalisms of?


SPEAKER_01:
So I don't think we've covered any of the figures except for figure one.

Maybe we want to look into the figure two, autonomous flow, manifold flow.


SPEAKER_00:
great so yes we did spend a lot of time talking about the particular partition in this discussion and in many other discussions and it's really important it's the particular physics but it would be awesome to just spend a few minutes on each of the subsequent figures what is being shown what do the axes or formalisms represent and what are the implications of the figure

So here we have figure two.

Or Carl or Thomas, what is being shown in figure two?


SPEAKER_02:
I suppose there are a couple of things being shown in figure two.

I think the graphic on the left with the spiral is quite a nice way of demonstrating this idea of there being some solenoidal element to the flow which is causing it to sort of have this circular structure.

that then as a consequence of having the the dissipative part of the flow with this gamma term so the difference between the Q being the solenoidal and the gamma being the

the dissipative part of this flow and that then reduces the amplitude of this spiral over time and you end up with this settling to some point.

So it's just setting out the two different directions really that things can evolve in.

um and i'm trying to remember exactly what the equations were in the paper that led to the the expression in terms of the um the alpha and the bold alpha um carl may remember that better um carl was this a a least action path that we were talking about here in terms of the bold alpha is this the settling to the least action yeah yeah and um it's um


SPEAKER_03:
an analysis which people might come across when they look at things like the centre manifold theorem, or indeed the slaving principle that Daniel was just talking about from synergetics.

You've got this sort of fast fluctuations that are drawn to a centre manifold, in our case,

the center manifold or the manifold that sort of draws trajectories to it are the paths of least action that constitute in the joint space of the external and the internal autonomous states this synchronization manifold but in this instance not synchronization between people but synchronization between the inside and the outside great and how about the right side

Sorry, I meant the dark line on the right-hand side was meant to be the synchronisation manifold to which all trajectories are drawn and largely lie upon that synchronisation manifold and any perturbations sort of collapse back to or are drawn back to that manifold in the spirit of the left-hand side of the diagram.

So using words like manifold is to emphasize this is very much related to the center manifold theorem.

It also speaks to one way of describing generalized synchronization of chaos or generalized synchrony, which is collapse to or constraint, constrained flows on a synchronization manifold.

So this is just your one way of graphically illustrating the, um,


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Any other thoughts on 2?

Where's the housekeeping term, the lambda?

Because there's the Q and the gamma, but as we've discussed in Livestream 32, there's another term there too.


SPEAKER_02:
So I think that the Q and the gamma here are sort of implicitly being treated as constants.

So they're not varying over state space in this particular graphic.

And so the house key material will only appear where there's some variation depending upon where you are in state space.

In principle, you could put it back there by allowing those slightly more complicated trajectories with more interesting solenoidal flows.

I think normally we tend to just assume that the space is defined such that the gamma term can be treated as effectively a diagonal or even an identity matrix, or at least a block diagonal type matrix.

That gets a little bit more complicated when working in generalised coordinates of motion because of the structure that the blocks have to account for the correlations between different orders of motion.

But it doesn't necessarily have to vary depending on the way you are in space.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_03:
You should feel licensed to ignore the housekeeping term in most of our papers.

It's too complicated.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, on to three.

So three was labeled as Markov blankets and self-evidencing.

What is being shown in three?


SPEAKER_03:
I'll do this briefly, then one of you can take over.

This slide is usually used to illustrate that the free energy formalism or understanding dynamics as gradient flows on an energy functional

is unremarkable in the sense that it has a lot of construct validity in relation to existing and legacy formulations of behaviour, usually of a normative kind.

And by normative, I just mean that there's some objective function that is being extremised.

So it's just meant to illustrate that this physics-like formulation in terms of

dynamics and gradient flows on this free energy functional looks and is in a position to formalize lots of existing theories and constructs, such as reinforcement learning, natural control theory, provided you now read

the objective function as a log preference or the log of your prior preferred states.

I'm just showing that taking different perspectives on normative accounts of behaviour is very, they're all formally very, very related in the sense, for example, that the negative of value so defined

becomes self-information.

If you were not an economist and you were an information theorist, you would read the same quantity, basically, as self-information or surprise along surprise.

And you wouldn't talk about expected utility theory.

You'd talk about maximum efficiency in an information theoretic sense.

If you were somebody like Herman Haken and thinking about synergetics, you'd be taking the average of the self-information or surprise.

then these dynamics would be basically the thing you are aspiring to understand and describe from the point of view of synergetics.

And if you're a physiologist, homeostasis.

And of course, if you're a statistician or somebody like us who's interested in the pure probability theory,

then you could interpret these gradient flows as articulating or at least describing things like the Bayesian brain hypothesis.

So it was just an attempt to show that there is just one simple dynamic under the hood of all of these well-accepted, well-proven accounts of normative behaviour.


SPEAKER_00:
Why is free energy principle in the blue cell?


SPEAKER_03:
I think just because it could be described as a principle articulated in terms of information theory, where information theory is just probability theory with some geometry.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, and while we're on this question of unification,

What does the cover of the active inference textbook mean?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm curious to hear what you think.


SPEAKER_00:
Tradition dictates that blue go first.


SPEAKER_01:
Isn't it like the one ring to bind them, the one ring to find them, and the one ring to rule them all, or like that?

No, really, I've given really, it's like the Lord of the Rings reference, except like instead of the inscription, there's math.

Anyway, there's the funny take.


SPEAKER_00:
of the things i see before we hear um two-thirds of the answer um yes there's the lord of the rings reference and also it's a a blanket and it's a particle and it that's the equations that are about partitioning internal from external states and so the with a minimal amount of text

and the minimal number of threes presented, mind, brain, and behavior, PAR, Puzzulo, and Friston, there is the partition.


SPEAKER_02:
Carl, I'm in two minds as to whether we tell them.

I thought it'd be like, it's more interesting having these different interpretations.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Okay.

I won't push it.

Let's go to figure four.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, just to say that Markov blanket and the three, three, threes, that's very clever.

Also, we didn't realise how clever, I think this is Thomas and Giovanni came up with this, but completing the ring with an extra equal sign was quite an insight for me at some point.

Can you remember that, Thomas?

Was that you or Bob who suddenly spotted the idea of making everything equal in a true circle of causality?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah um i think it was giovanni how she raised the missing equal sign now but now we have three other ways of setting this very clever uh clever little icon yes i wish we thought of all of them great okay in figure four it's describing generic and precise particles so what are being shown here


SPEAKER_03:
I'll take this one because I did this one.

So this is exactly trying to depict the distinction we were talking about before when we were asking about a taxonomy of different kinds of things and I was just saying it's useful to make a distinction between very small quantum scale things and large classical scale things where

the particles are sufficiently large that the random fluctuations go away and every particular path is a path of least action and in this specific case there are certain sources of uncertainty that disappear that manifest as a collapse of certain uncertainties and

that can be captured using what's called an information diagram so this is an information diagram and it's basically you can understand the areas as uncertainty or entropy and the left-hand set of panels is in the general case that would be suitable for your very small particles showing the shared and unique information

between a partition into external sensory and, for simplicity, autonomous states here.

And the areas of intersection can be read as a mutual information.

So what you can see on the right hand, sorry, the left hand side,

is that there is uncertainty still in the game, even when I know everything else.

So there is a unique uncertainty associated with every one of the states.

But if I now move to precise particles or particles that behave as if they were more classical in nature, there are

there are a lot of uncertainty disappears in the sense that the only source of random fluctuations is on the at the paths or the dynamics of the external states which means that if I knew the

external and autonomous states, then I would be able to predict precisely the paths of least action or the path that a sensory state would take in the absence of any random fluctuations.

So the unique uncertainty associated with the sensory states S disappears.

Similarly, if I knew the external states and the sensory states,

then there is no uncertainty about the path of autonomous states.

So the unique pink part associated with alpha, the autonomous states, disappears.

And that has the interesting implication that the uncertainty

about that both the sensory and active autonomous states has to be the same if you knew the external states here denoted by eta and other things.

So for example,

There is no uncertainty about active states given sensory states, which means that the active states on the right hand side have to lie within the sensory states.

And you may be asking, well, why is this useful?

Well, it becomes incredibly useful when you apply those constraints, those constraints.

Things like the uncertainty about both autonomous and sensory states given external states have to be the same, for example, and that there is no uncertainty about external states given sensory states is the same as the uncertainty of

external states given both sensory and autonomous states, for example.

All of these little sort of, if you like, constraints that ensue from the simple move from small to big particles get into an expression for the probability distribution over autonomous paths.

And it is this, these set of constraints that lead to a functional form,

for the expected free energy, which can be decomposed into what we were talking about before, which is expected information gain and the expected cost.

In the absence of those constraints, that expected information gain would disappear.

Things would cancel out in the general case.

So this is, if you like, a visualizable way of

looking at the information decomposition among the part of the particular partition in the context of the general case and in the context of precise case just to sort of visualize the constraints that lead to curious behavior so if you remember it is expected information gain that describes

behavior because actions become more likely if they increase expected or have a high expected information gain or resolve uncertainty or minimize entropy of a conditional sort.

So this is, if you like, a visual aid memoir or an unpacking of what can be quite dense and

unintuitive expressions written out mathematically in terms of information theories and expected Lagrangians or surprisals

and mutual informations.

I say that for Thomas's benefit because we've both been working on trying to get the simplest way of expressing these important constraints intuitively, just using equations.

And it's not easy.

And the reason it's not easy is that in these information diagrams, when there is no uncertainty,

When the uncertainty reaches, the entropy reaches its lower bound, the area disappears, at which point for discrete systems, the entropy is zero.

So when there's no uncertainty, area is equal to zero.

H, the uncertainty, the entropy is equal to zero.

That's how it should be.

The problem is when Shannon wrote down entropy for continuous systems, that no longer holds and you get negative areas.

So there is no lower bound.

on the entropy of a continuous, in a continual differential entropy.

So you really have to go around the houses to recover an area that disappears when in fact it's lower bounded by minus infinity.

So that particular bit just was for Thomas because I've just emailed him today about that particular.

And James saw this problem with Shannon's differential entropy decades and decades ago.

and try to repair it using something called continuous entropy and limited density of discrete points.

So all of that worry and all those delicate issues just disappear if you just stick with these nice information diagrams where you know that if the area isn't there, it's shrunk to zero.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

It's like you could be 110% sure about something.


SPEAKER_03:
Let's go to... I haven't thought about that yet.


SPEAKER_00:
Figure 5.

What is happening in Figure 5?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I think Figure 5 is showing more or less what we've seen on the previous figures, but now just interpreted in the context of neuroscience.

We've got the same action-perception graphics we were talking about in Figure 2, or the same equations.

where the free energy is here being interpreted in terms of accuracy and complexity components.

So that brings us back to what we talk about in terms of interpretation of free energy as a means of estimating marginal likelihood or approximating marginal likelihood in a Bayesian model evidence.

And the models should be both as simple as possible while accurately accounting for some data.

And I think that's here really to emphasise that interpretation of self-evidencing that we've spoken about before, the idea that by minimising your free energy, you are implicitly maximising the evidence for some internal model.

And by putting this explicitly in terms of the brain, we're now talking about the kind of model that the brain might implicitly hold about the outside world and the kind of models that might be required for sentient beings.


SPEAKER_00:
appearing behavior and again a nice ring to suggest a knockoff blanket and put here explicitly many questions for another time about the order of the action perception loop and whether perception precedes action

in principle or in different computational implementations how different aspects of the timing of the execution of different stages might converge upon similar outcomes and might not just noting it um in figure six we have sentient behavior and action observation so what is being shown with the brain and with these three graphics beneath


SPEAKER_02:
So this is a nice example of what's actually a slightly older version of active inference now and is a slightly different implementation than what we might use.

But I think it's a nice example in that

it highlights the transition from behaviour in terms of continuous differential equations through to something that's a bit more sequential and behaves in the way that we might actually think about plans as being one move and then the next move and then the thing after that and an implicit discretisation in time.

And so the plot shown in sort of the upper left where we've got

series of lines that are kind of overlapping, the red line in bold, exactly that one there, is showing what is more or less a sort of predator-prey-like relationship that creates these sorts of sequences.

So if you can imagine that you have an alternation between a predator and some sort of prey, whereas the

prey population increases in size, the predator population will also increase in size behind that as the predators have more to feed on, which will in turn cause the prey population to drop, followed again by the predator population dropping as food resources become more scarce.

And this is known as, as you've written here, winnerless competition or as a Lotka-Volterra type dynamic.

And the generalization of this, you can have many such sequences where one thing follows the other and you get this sequential set of peaks in what's going on here.

Now, if we were to interpret each of those lines as representing the probability or the log probability or some mapping to the probability of one of several alternative discrete states,

categorical states, so here imagine we're talking about blue, green or red, then we end up generating a sequence of blues, greens, reds, depending upon the underlying dynamics.

So we have a continuous system that now has the feel of something sequential.

And what's happened here in the graphic on top of the brain here is to associate each of those discrete categories with different points in space.

So we're now saying that if we're looking at the blue points, then that's going to be associated with this sort of upper left location in space, or sorry, there's a light blue as well, bad choice of colour to choose on my part.

And so each of those sequences is then associated with a generative model that says, I expect that when the blue state is present or the red state is present, that my hand will be drawn towards one of those states.

And I predict that it's as if there is some sort of spring attached from my hand to where that location is.

which means that as I infer this sequence, I'm sequentially drawn to, or I believe I'm being drawn to each of these locations in turn.

Now, if I'm predicting, if my free energy or my marginal likelihood says that the most likely states are the ones that would occur if my arm were really being drawn in this direction,

the actions that then minimize the free energy are those that fulfill those predictions.

So all I have to do is predict where the kind of proprioceptive or visual data I might get based on where my hand is at any one point in time, or predict the data that I would obtain if my hand really were being drawn in this direction.

And the resulting action fulfills exactly that and creates this sequence of movements.

And so what we get out is a relatively complex motor trajectory that has an almost autonomous type feel to it, simply by predicting that I'm going to be drawn to each of these points in sequence.

And this is being used in this particular example as a way of simulating handwriting or something that appears to be like handwriting simply by moving the piece of paper underneath where my hand is moving so that I end up with this sort of repeated pattern.

And you could imagine that in real writing that we may implicitly have a series of points that we would associate with different bits of the letters that would effectively draw our hand around those letters as we write them.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And categorical shifts at the letter scale, at the word scale, and so on could be modeled in a hierarchical way.


SPEAKER_02:
Absolutely.

And that's sort of exactly the point in terms of this move from this formulation of active inference that used to be used now to explicitly writing down a series of discrete categorical states and

As you say, putting that together in a hierarchical model where you can now mix predictions of a discrete categorical sort with short trajectories in a continuous state space.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

We'll complete our lightning tour of the last three figures.

So here's figure seven.

Just for reference, we looked at figure three.

We saw some faces and names, and now we're seeing figure seven.

What is being shown here?


SPEAKER_02:
So here, I think we're dealing with what is a limitation of what we saw on the previous slide.

So when we were thinking about these fairly complex trajectories that had an almost autonomous feel to them, it's still only a relatively simple sort of behavior.

Implicitly, it's just dealing with the replication of some potentially quite complex or even arbitrary pattern.

But to become really autonomous, to behave in an intelligent like way, really what we need is to be able to select between alternative sequences and alternative patterns.

And what this slide is showing us is this idea that one way or the way that we appear to evaluate different patterns

trajectories or the probability of pursuing those trajectories is in terms of this expected free energy functional which can be decomposed in a similar way to what we expect with the free energy functional.

So you can see in blue the free energy functional being decomposed into our complexity and accuracy terms and various other decompositions.

But in the upper panel, we're now looking at the decomposition of the expected free energy into analogous type terms, and we've spoken about some of those already.

So here the intrinsic value is equivalent to the information gain we were speaking about before, whereas the extrinsic value is more like our expected utility or the

the degree to which we prefer a particular outcome.

And just as on the previous slide, each of the faces relates to different ways that that can be interpreted under specific circumstances where particular parts of that expression are irrelevant or don't matter.

So in the absence of ambiguity, we end up with behaviours that are entirely risk driven.

And so we might get back to things like KL control type formulations.


SPEAKER_00:
Any notes or we'll go to eight.

Okay.

Here we are in eight.


SPEAKER_02:
I thought for a second that we'd seen this before, but it's a subtly different reworking of one of the previous figures, isn't it?


SPEAKER_00:
Here's 5.


SPEAKER_02:
The expected free energy, yeah.

Correct.


SPEAKER_00:
F in 5, and then just an A path, and now we have an 8G in the top.


SPEAKER_02:
I suppose this is the move that we were talking about before in terms of when the active states are effectively hidden from the internal states and become something that are themselves inferred.

So you can see here the absence of any arrow connecting A to the variational free energy box, which is implicitly saying that the action itself is something that we have to draw inferences about.

And here the expected free energy is the way in which we can do that.


SPEAKER_00:
its inference on action about action about the causes of action just many ways that have been highlighted for how inference and action are weaving together and different model architectures that might be more didactic more illustrative more pragmatic for a given context or a given type of thing that has a certain sparsity to its coupling

And to close on Figure 9, and then we can have last thoughts.

What is shown in Figure 9?


SPEAKER_02:
Figure 9 is a nice example of the application of this information-seeking aspect of the expected free energy to a task in which there is uncertainty about the orientation of the face that's presented to the active inference scheme.

And the alternative trajectories, the alternative paths of autonomous states that can be selected here are the alternative eye movements or saccades that can be performed.

And so choosing or evaluating the probability of each saccade depends upon evaluating the potential information gain associated with those, which is effectively the information gain I get in terms of the eventual orientation of the face.

I think in practice this, if I remember rightly, this formulation focused very much on the ambiguity term and I think has subsequently been updated in various ways, but again it kind of focused on the continuous schemes and provides a nice early example of how information gain was worked into the active inference type formulas and so we tend to use practically


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

In our final few minutes, we look at the questions that we've looked at at the end of every live stream, and it would be awesome to hear where things go from here.

From this recent preprint, from the textbook, what are some of the areas that any of you are interested in or that are now possible to head in?


SPEAKER_03:
I'll go first, then I don't have to go last again.

Difficult question to answer.

There are so many ways you can take this.

I think it's gone beyond the capacity of any single group or person to really pursue all the directions.

So nearly every field that we've mentioned is probably the focus of at least one, if not several groups around the world at the moment.

Small embryonic groups, but certainly working earnestly on the different levels of application.

Technically,

Thomas and I, no, that's not quite true.

One thing that Thomas and I have been doing is trying to write the next simpler paper.

So the free energy principle made simpler wasn't that simple in the end.

So the idea is now to work towards a four page paper that has everything you need to know to understand the free energy principle.

The most recent one is down to about eight pages.

And what it does is it just drills down on the path integral formulation.

And in particular, the simplifications afforded by not worrying about non-equilibrium steady state densities and just looking at the densities over paths and just taking away all the unnecessary equations and just drilling down on what matters.

And to me, what really matters is in the last sentence here and implicit in the

last figure that you were discussing, which is curiosity, which I think is the key thing that distinguishes current AI from AGI and true intelligence and understanding, resolving uncertainty about your sense-making understanding of a world and understanding the mathematical imperatives that describe that kind of behaviour.

So this is, I'll end where I started, which is all about curiosity.


SPEAKER_00:
Excellent.

Thank you.

Thomas?


SPEAKER_02:
As Carl says, it is a really difficult series of questions to answer.

I think there are always more interesting directions to go in than there is time to pursue them, which is why, again, as Carl says, it's important that there are so many groups out there who are taking an interest in focusing in on these issues.

Certainly the idea of making things simpler, I think, is an important direction to go in.

I think it's also...

For me, one of the interesting things is also thinking about application in the setting of disease processes and trying to understand how different disease processes can be framed in terms of alternative priors, just as a way of, I hope at some point, providing useful clinical characterisations of different kinds of pathology, different kinds of trajectories and different kinds of study states.

and understanding how different therapeutic options might change the path through some space of prior beliefs at various different temporal and spatial scales as we've spoken about.

So for me, I think that's one of the areas I'm particularly interested in seeing how things develop.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Luke?


SPEAKER_01:
As I was saying the other day, I'm really starting to think of active inference the way that like in every, in every situation and in every circumstance that I find myself in, I find myself wondering how can I formulate this in an active inference model?

And I did the same thing when I was in art school and learning how to draw in a very realistic way.

I was learning to draw people and objects in the way that I saw them.

And now I'm,

I'm looking at situations that I find myself in and, you know, where before I would be in conversation with someone looking at their earlobe, like wondering how could I best like represent that on a piece of paper?

Now I find myself in situations like wondering how would this fit into the active inference framework?

So I think that there are many, that the horizon is very broad and there are many avenues where we can tread.


SPEAKER_00:
art and science of curiosity so it's an excellent conclusion carl and thomas thank you for joining these discussions and everyone who is listening thank you and we hope to see you in actin flab or in any other fractal aspect of what we're all doing so thanks again everybody thanks blue and see you in the next discussion