## N3WUpVH8-D8

SPEAKER_01:
It's life.

Okay, it is.

Hello and welcome everyone.

Thank you to joining the Active Inference Lab.

It is October 1st, 2021 and I'm Daniel.

I'm here with Blue and we're going to be talking about this paper, How to Count Biological Minds, Symbiosis, the Free Energy Principle, and Reciprocal Multiscale Integration.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can be improving our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for livestreams.

We are heading into October and the number 30 paper about biological minds.

We currently have the author Matt Sims scheduled to come on the October 5th discussion, and then we'll have the 30.2, another participatory group discussion.

So check out the calendar here, as well as these other series if you want to join or suggest somebody who we can invite.

Today in Actum stream number 30.0, the goal is to learn and discuss this paper, How to Count Biological Minds.

And it's by Matthew Sims.

It's from 2020 in the journal Synthese.

And just like all the other .Zero videos, this is just an introduction to some of the ideas, some background that Blue and I whipped together literally leading up to the time of now.

So it's just an introduction, and if you want to go deeper into an idea, then come to the discussion.

We're going to go over the aims and claims abstract roadmap of the paper and then the figures and so on.

So let's just get started with the introduction.

Greetings, Blue.

And what makes you excited about this paper?


SPEAKER_00:
You know, Daniel, I'm always interested in studying intelligence and how that scales from the subcellular to the systemic ecosystem level.

And so this is kind of an interesting take, and it echoes a lot of what we talked about in the discussion of Mike Levin's paper, The Computational Boundary of the South, back in July.

So I was excited that Matthew agreed to come on the livestream, and I've been excited about this paper just because it takes active inference, the multi-scale aspect of active inference,

in a really enhanced integrative direction.

How about you?

What did you like?


SPEAKER_01:
I liked that it combined some general ideas and questions in philosophy, philosophy of biology, and then tied it to the natural history of a specific species.

So it's all good to, you know, make claims about distributed systems or the microbiome and the host in general, but then tying it to a system that can be studied and has a cool ecological history is a good approach, kind of grounds the paper.

here's the paper and how to count biological minds symbiosis the free energy principle and reciprocal multi-scale integration i'll read the first aim and then blue you can say something or read the other ones to support the notion of symbiotic minds and the notion of nested biological cognizers that falls out of it this paper will develop and deploy the notion of reciprocal multi-scale integration from within the free energy principle

Reciprocal multiscale integration describes the case where each of two or more cognizing systems uses the other to provide evidence for its own model of the world and itself acting in that world.


SPEAKER_00:
As a case study in support of the notion of symbiotic minds, I will look at the symbiosis of Vibrio fischeri bacteria and the bobtail squid.

I will argue that the Vibrio squid assemblage constitutes a functionally integrated cognitive whole.

the Markov blanket of which constrains those of Vibrio and the squid.

And in showing how the notion of a symbiotic mind can be supported by reciprocal multi-scale integration within the free energy principles, this paper contributes to the philosophy of cognitive science, demonstrating that our folk psychological conception of what cognizers are require rethinking.

Moreover, if the account of symbiotic cognizers presented is tenable, by bringing it to relief and accounted for at least one possible transition in cognition, this paper contributes to a more complete understanding of the evolution of cognition.


SPEAKER_01:
So, cool claims, and again, the kind of two halves to it of the general argument and the specific.

And...

symbiosis and ecological association have been approached in the free energy principle framework, but I think this reciprocal component, it's approached a little differently here than probably in some works, but we'll get into that.

Okay, I'll do the first abstract one.

The notion of a physiological individual has been developed and applied in the philosophy of biology to understand symbiosis, an understanding of which is key to theorizing about the major transitions in evolution from multi-organismality to multicellularity.

The paper begins by asking what such symbiotic individuals can help to reveal about a possible transition in the evolution of cognition.

It makes me think about the transition from a solitary insect cognition to a colony.

So there's the change in the level of organization, and then is that purely cognitive?

Do cognitive changes precede it?

Do they follow?

What is the relationship between the evolutionary, the physiological, and the cognitive changes is what the first part is getting at.


SPEAKER_00:
The second part, such a transition marks the movement from cooperating individual biological cognizers to a functionally integrated cognizing unit.

Somewhere along the way, did such cognizing units simultaneously have cognizers as parts?

Expanding upon the multiscale integration view of the free energy principle, this paper develops an account of reciprocal integration, demonstrating how some coupled biological cognizing systems, when certain constraints are met,

can result in a cognizing unit that is, in ways, greater than the sum of its cognizing parts.

And yeah, this paper just shouts out a lot to Seth Mary, or Seth Mary, I can't say his last name, and Maynard Smith, and the major transitions in evolution, which is, if you haven't read that book or thought about those transitions, I mean, you can even probably pick up a summary, but it's really amazing to think about the evolution in terms of

the transition from single cell to multi-cell and, you know, from asexual to sexual reproduction.

And there's, you know, I think seven major transitions that happened in the course of evolution.

And I think that this kind of is hinting at a cognizing evolution or cognitive evolution, which, you know, we'll get into a little bit later.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, perfect.

Symbiosis between V. fischeri bacteria and the bobtail squid is used to provide an illustration of this account.

A novel manner of conceptualizing biological cognizers as gradient is then suggested.

Lastly, it is argued that the reason why the notion of ontologically nested cognizers may be unintuitive stems from the fact that our folk psychology notion of what a cognizer is

has been deeply influenced by our folk biological manner of understanding biological individuals as units of reproduction.

So that's a really cool point because it involves how our understanding of biology and models of biology influence the way that we see the world, which just kind of sounds by definition, but it's really interesting because people have thought so many different things about different parts of biology, about animal biology,

all of evolution, all of things we see.

So then how that intersects with our understanding of cognition and what cognitive levels exist, what levels of individuality exist.

Cool topics.


SPEAKER_00:
So just a thought here.

So what a biological individual, like what a cognizer is, has been influenced by our understanding of biological individuals as units of reproduction.

So is a cognizing unit a unit of cognition?

Is there a corresponding to cognitive evolution as corresponding units as there are to biological evolution?

Sorry.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

So those are the main pieces.

The roadmap, not that many subsections, starts with an introduction and goes through a nice description of the free energy principle, which we're going to use in multiple slides here.

There's a distinction drawn, which we'll also go into,

about mirror versus adaptive active inference.

Multiscale integration will be discussed and different kinds of multiscale integration come up later on.

But then there's two sections about this specific bacterial squid symbiosis.

And then that symbiosis is returned to with this enhanced background on the unidirectional and the reciprocal multiscale integration.

So that's kind of the overall roadmap.

Keywords or anything to add on that, Blue?

Keywords were free energy principle, active inference, symbiosis, nested Markov blankets, multi-scale integration, cognitive evolution, emergence, and physiological individuals.

So let's start with symbiosis.

So the quote from the paper was, symbioses are cooperative heterospecific associations in which each symbiont partner mutually benefits from, e.g.

gaining nourishment, shelter, et cetera, from the presence of the other partners.

So heterospecific means different species,

And this is a graphic and also those interesting the footnote that just said kind of talking about the positive mutualistic form of

co-living not commensalist or parasitic forms of co-living or co-existing but even just looking at pairwise interactions before more complex loops are taken into account there's a whole game theory space of interactions so what should our models include cooperative interactions adversarial interactions uh which which one of these edges or relationships

have what game theory, what cognitive theories.

So it's a cool approach to take on symbiosis that respects all the ways that different systems like a lichen versus a eukaryotic cell with a mitochondria, all these different co-living styles.


SPEAKER_00:
So just a thought on that.

All of these co-living styles are transactional, whether it's through a voluntary transaction or just straight theft.

these kind of associations remind me of how we're starting to scale into studying cities and states and thinking about debt, right?

So like the debt that we have to each other, like I borrow this or you borrow that, or I benefit you in this way and you benefit me in this way.

And that scales from the very basic biological unit all the way through ecosystems, so.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, physiological individuals.

So we're gonna come back to this idea of what's an individual, but one wrote in is this quote.

So one way philosophers have addressed this question of individuality is by conceptually developing and applying the notion of a physiological individual.

A biological individual of this kind is a highly integrated functional unit, the heterogeneous parts of which cohere together through regulatory processes, like metabolic, immunotolerance, etc., so as to maintain the system's integrity and resist environmental forces of decay.

And the citation to Perot 2011 looks at the role of the immune system and the interaction with the foreign, with the other during development and uses that

relationship to explore the notion of the interface between the organism and the environment and looks at like the physiological story involving the microbe and the social niche and all these other components can come into play and that that is in some cases a better explanation or prediction or description of a certain scenario so just cool another cool topic what do you think blue


SPEAKER_00:
So this, this is cool.

The end of this quote, I reject the idea that there's no possible distinction between the organism and its environment.

I just want to point that out.

Because we'll come back to that in, in two slides, actually.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, it's a qualification of the interface and the system, but it's not the rejection that we just give up.

So it's towards useful partitioning of the system.

Okay, so two models of individuality more generally.

There was a quote in the paper that said,

The theoretical apparatus that falls out of the free energy principle may be used to arrive at an account of the kind of enrichment of living processes that are required for those processes to qualify as cognitive processes ascribable to physiological individuals.

So that's linking the cognitive perspective with the physiological perspective of individuality, making good on the project of strong life-mind continuity.

So what models of individuality exist?

We have physiological and cognitive,

We have the view that is going to be implicitly described as like folk biological, which is the Darwinian replicator evolutionary.

Just a few other ones that exist.

There's like the teleological concept of individuality, which is the end directedness and the Kant's definition of the organism as an end in and of itself.

And that's when things are acting at the organismal level

but there's probably a lot of distance between what was that simplification and what was written.

The information theory of individuality, which I know, Blue, you have something to add on, and then integrated information theory, as well as pluralism.

and a sort of historical perspective that looks at shifting boundaries of the conception of individuality and then tries to find some organization that doesn't even use that as a central divider.

I mean, these are just some of the ways, but just also cool, like, you know, species, but then there's so many species concepts, but individual seems like that's the one that you can pick out, but then it's not always that way.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, and I guess we'll come back to that.

remark when we talk about Markov blankets here in a little bit.

So the information theory of individuality, I absolutely love, love, love, love this paper because for many reasons, but I just wanted to highlight in this paper, they talk about how individuality can be nested and it requires a bi-directional information flow.

which I think that this distinction is important, right?

So there has to be like control from the top down and from the bottom up.

So information has to go both ways and that is what describes an individual.

So, you know, if you have, I'm trying to think of like a non-individual, like, okay, you can have someone broadcasting instructions

through a megaphone, you know, right?

Like shouting, you know, like, please move to the right, please move to the right.

Like, so that's like top-down control, but there's no feedback from the crowd.

Like the right is blocked, there's a path here, or there's, you know, a gap here, we can't walk through it or whatever.

If there's no, you know, feedback, then that's not an individual, right?

So you have this, you know, top-down control, but nothing comes back.

So in an individual, there's always that reciprocal flow.

And then the forms of individuality that they highlight in this paper are an organism, which is like you and me, a colonial form of individual, which is like a biofilm, right?

And then a driven form.

And this is the part that goes back to that quote about, I retract the idea that, you know, there can be no stuff or that

An organism is not distinct from its environment, and so in this in this is environmentally driven.

And that's this last form of individuality that they highlight so so where like the nature of the individual is entirely dependent upon the environment and allowing for this type of individual to exist.

really allows the formation of life in the very beginning.

Because if you just have collections of molecules, you know, without a boundary or a barrier, that's environmentally driven.

And so without that organism being able to arise from its environment, you don't get the origin of life.

And so I just wanted to highlight that.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice, great points.

The next keyword is the free energy principle or FEP.

And this is from actin live stream 14 from the illusion that Carl Friston made to the wood lice and his kind of observations of nature leading eventually to an integrative approach.

that includes some of these areas like considering how multi-scale systems work and how collectives work so how things work laterally within a level like across the nest mates and then multi-scale like the colony inside of the ecosystem information and thermodynamics and control theory and action selection as a type of inference we're going to

hear it here from the author and look through the four main points that they drew out of the FEP.

So this is again coming from the SIMS 2020 paper.

So read for more detail.

The free energy principle starts from a particular view of life that is grounded in statistical physics.

So that's an introductory claim, interesting way to start.

And again, just pulling a few highlights out to get at this first key point.

A biological system is one that self-organizes to a limited set of attracting states that is far from thermodynamic equilibrium.

So there it's like our body temperature is kept above the room temperature, far from the sort of naive chemical equilibrium, and that's being maintained despite dissipation being prevalent in the universe.

And that resistance to falling to equilibrium is called the non-equilibrium steady state density.

Importantly, the nest density, towards which an organism's dynamics flow corresponds to its phenotype, i.e.

its regular patterns of behavior, morphology, and physiology, to find itself in its characteristic or phenotypic states, provides the organism evidence that its behavior is countering dispersive effects of random fluctuations.

So even static seeming phenotypes like the length of your femur, it's actively maintained by cells being renewed and the turnover rate and so on.

So sometimes it's easier to think about some phenotypes like cognitive phenotypes as actually embodying parametric values that are being kept away from equilibrium.

Other times for more static components of phenotype, it's not that way.

But it's just a cool way to think about phenotype as just these measurements that are stable over some timeframe about the world.

And the persistence of those measurements through time represent the implementation of some strategy that resisted dissipation.

Hence, the maintenance of a non-equilibrium steady state through some kind of strategy.

Anything to add, Luke?

No.

This brings us to the second primary feature of FEP, the Markov blanket formalism.

This is used in the context of FEP to describe a particular kind of statistical organization of a system relative to that which the system is not.

Namely, it describes the statistical partitioning of internal states, and then using just the variable named as they are here.

Internal states R, the external states phi, and the sensory states S, active states A, these latter states being in the Markov blanket, which are the sensory and the active states.

So what about this blue?


SPEAKER_00:
just i mean we've talked um well on the live stream a lot about markov blankets and how they can be used to describe um or or individuate individuals so really or to delineate the boundaries of an individual and technically the the markov blanket um defines conditional independence so like under what settings or under what settings are these two systems conditionally independent


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, so there's some interface that is being used and there's a conditional independence across either side.

But yeah, a topic that's come up many times and I'm sure this is not the end of it.

This brings us to a third essential feature of FEP, the notion of a generative model.

A generative model is a probabilistic model that describes how the evolution of sensory states of a Markov blanket could be caused by external states.

It captures prior beliefs in the form of probability distributions about unobserved external states and a likelihood mapping external states to the evolution of sensory states.

Such models are, quote, implicit in the dynamics of internal states.

Palacios et al., 2020.

So the mapping between external states and the evolution of estimates of internal states is this A matrix that is connecting the observations being made through time to the S matrix.

So that's a bi-directional relationship with the generative and the recognition model.

That's the tail of two densities.

But that's the signal processing,

sort of sampling the external world and then having an ongoing estimate of world states, which could be just unobserved world states or causes in the world.

Then there's how those states change through time, B, how policy interacts with how those states change through time, pi, D, the prior over the states, and then the decision-making of pi with the C, G, and the E. So this is the partially observable Markov decision process.

the POMDP framing.

And it's not the only way we can look at it.

But this gets like many of the key variables down, which is why we and there's uncertainties on all of these as we've found.

So this just gets a lot of the key pieces down.

The generative model could have a different structure, though.

This is not the only structure.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Good.


SPEAKER_01:
So here is from the paper.

You want to read this one?


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

Importantly, a system's generative model may be cast in terms of its non-equilibrium steady state.

To see how this is the case requires understanding the notion of dual information geometry of self-organizing systems.

And he gives several citations, one of which I guess is this one.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

So this is just giving the first description, not like first in literature, just like a first introductory description on this dual information geometry.

This dual aspect concerns the intrinsic information geometry of the probabilistic evolution of internal states.

So that's like the actual, if there's a million neurons and they can each take 10 states, that's the geometry of the internal states.

It's like that many neurons can take on that many values.

That's the internal true state space of the actual internal states.

And to separate,

in extrinsic information geometry of probabilistic beliefs about external states that are parameterized by internal states so that n neurons could be fitting a binary model is the light switch up or down or it could be a three-state model is it up down or not either or both whatever it's specifying that is a lower dimensionality than

the actual state space.

So it's like, there's a lot of decisions in the whole computer, but then there's this external realized component that's a smaller state space.

the extrinsic information geometry.

We call these intrinsic, i.e.

mechanical or state-based, and extrinsic, i.e.

Markovian or belief-based information geometries.

And Wanja has come on to discuss several papers, so definitely look at the work by all of these authors because it's an interesting topic.

We could probably learn more about that.

And I know there's people who are listening who know more about it.

Okay.

Here is those intrinsic and extrinsic information geometries being used in, I think, the Sims paper, but I'm not 100% sure, actually, but we can see either that or it's in this previous Friston paper.

So there's the probabilistic flow of the system states over time.

That's the intrinsic geometry.

And that's that.

Yeah.

What?


SPEAKER_00:
I think this is the first in paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Okay.

And here's the extrinsic.

So then basically this is just a visual showing the higher dimensionality of the actual components of the system that can project onto like just two lower areas.

Okay.

The fourth part of FEP in the SIMS paper, this brings us to the fourth primary feature of FEP, active inference.

I'll read the other and then you can give a thought on where you think Accident fits in.

FEP proposes that living systems are able to resist the second law of thermodynamics in virtue of avoiding sensory states which are deleterious and actively bringing about those sensory states which allow them to maintain their structural and functional integrity.

It is by engaging in this coupled process of active inference that an organism minimizes not only current free energy encountered, but expected free energy, i.e.

the free energy that would arise were a particular action policy selected and followed.


SPEAKER_00:
So instead of giving a thought, I'm going to give an author's thought on this.

Just to read a quote from the paper, the reason for using the free energy principle to investigate and argue for symbiotic mind is not only because the quantity free energy provides a measure of cognition across spatio-temporal scales, but because the free energy principle and its various corollaries suggest a plausible criterion for identifying biological cognizers across various spatio-temporal scales.

So that's why they pitched the FEP, just for that reason, which I thought was nice.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm going to ask a nice question from the chat from Steven, wrote, is there a dual information geometry between intrinsic and extrinsic states of active inference and another dual information geometry between action states and niche spaces?

Can I give a first answer?


SPEAKER_00:
Please.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
I would say that the total state space, which includes the variables for the internal, the blanket, and the external space, that's the shape it is.

And then there's going to be sub-shapes.

Like you could only look at the blanket and the internal states.

That's the particular states.

So that's partitioning the system of interest away from the niche.

Or you could look at it in a four-way or...

There's probably a lot of other ways, but it seems like the full model is the full geometry, and then there's gonna be some reduced geometries.

And then Steven clarified, i.e.

a dual information geometry in relation to the generative model and what it is modeling, and a dual information geometry between what actions are happening and the niche modification.

I think that gets at also that sigma mapping function in the DaCosta paper with like, okay, after there's conditional independence,

of the kind that the Markov blanket partitioning provides, there's still some internal state partitions in the world that maybe do some prediction about or anticipation about external states.

So it's as if they're estimating external states.

Let's talk to somebody who knows information geometry.


SPEAKER_00:
That's it.

I was going to say, my guess would be it depends on where you put the mark on the blanket.

But definitely, I think anybody out there who's listening that knows a lot about information geometry, I'm curious to take a deep dive down that path.

So I encourage you to get in touch and contact us.

Come talk to us about information geometry because I would like to learn some more.


SPEAKER_01:
there was a distinction drawn in the paper between adaptive and mere active inference so I actually don't think that this has come up we've we've seen several distinctions like instrumentalism and realism in terms of the interpretation but this is I think another relevance distinction FEP falls short of making the claim that all Markov blankets draw a line around cognizers

It has been suggested that what determines whether a living Markov-blanketed system is cognizer

is whether or not it is the kind of thing which engages in adaptive active inference, rather than mere active inference.

Kirchhoff, 2018.

Adaptive active inference requires that a system autonomously engage in active inference, maximizing sensory evidence for its own existence.

So there's been a coupled oscillator model, as well as the flywheel governor model, another classic kind of mechanical regulatory system.

And...

as well as the discussion, well, does a rock have a Markov blanket, that type of question.

And so this is from the Kirchhoff 2018 paper, just drawing the distinction between mere active inference, which is like the ability to draw a partition around a system at all, to distinguish it from its niche and its interfaces.

And then its generative model could be like nil or boring or just a coin flip.

to contrast that with adaptive active inference, which is actually the inactive sensory motor affordance semantic coupling, I'm a strange loop type system.

What do you think about that, Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
So I wonder, you know, when we talk about active inference and adaptive active inference, adaptive active inference

implies more than just mental action or maybe mental actions is sufficient but but i think um i feel like adaptive active inference implies that there's more of an action component and you know we've talked about situations where where you can have active inference occurring without necessarily taking an action or maybe a mental action you can actively infer what's happening in the environment without

Performing some kind of action that's adaptive to it.

I don't know.

Maybe that's that.


SPEAKER_01:
Exactly.

Action and non-action.

It can be adaptive to not act.

So is that mere waiting?

Good question.


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right, right, right.

And also like you can have adaptation that's occurring in the brain.

Like you adapt to a noise in the environment.

Like it's super loud and sounds super loud, but then eventually your brain adapts.

So are you still, is that mirror or is that adaptive?


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

So emergence, do you want to read whatever or say whatever you'd like to say about emergence?


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

So this is just the Wikipedia definition.

So I'll just read it.

Emergence in philosophies to systems theory, science and art.

Emergence occurs when an entity is observed to have properties its parts do not have on their own.

Properties or behaviors which emerge only when the parts interact in a wider whole.

And I just included these references.

So that definition kind of echoes integrated information theory of

consciousness, which again, implies that like consciousness is this emergent property when the parts are interacting and create something that's bigger than the whole.

And then, um, both of these, um, wait.

Oh yeah.

So both of these papers, um, the Rosas paper, and then this paper by Varley and Eric hole, um, start to get into the mathematics of emergence and they use similar, um, metrics.

It's like they use the partial information decomposition.

over the phi metric that's used in the integrated information theory of consciousness to kind of quantify emergence.

Like what is this, how much is this emergent property, or to what degree is this an emergent property of these parts?

And then this is a strong and weak emergence paper that you included, Daniel.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, yep.

So I just, I saw it was really cool that first that you...

Chosen papers from people in the active inference community and that their recent papers like within the last year or two.

So just shows that there's development on these topics.

And that's interesting to think about.

And then I just thought to throw in a third, like two truths and a lie, but like two newer citations and one older one, just the qualitative distinction between strong and weak emergence was influential by Mark Badao from 1997.

And, uh,

That paper says, I conclude that the scientific and philosophical prospects for weak emergence are bright.

And so it's easy to be like, oh, I want like the best version of whichever thing.

But in the paper, it distinguishes between strong emergence as being sort of the metaphysical discussion about how holes take on meanings greater than the sum of their parts and sort of all versus none, like snapping into existence in this kind of semi-magical way.

versus weak emergence like the ant colony the city the actual complex systems that can be modeled and so that kind of operationalized emergence while allowing a channel of metaphysical discussion like you just mentioned consciousness and other people bring up emergent properties consciousness all the time like integrated information theory it's an integrated information theory of consciousness so it's kind of just interesting how there's like a metaphysical thread

in what this integration means, as well as an operational and a more empirical side of this discussion.


SPEAKER_00:
And I also saw a recent 2021 paper, I can't remember the author, but dealing with fMRI and emergence in fMRI, which is kind of interesting.

I didn't include it, but I thought that that was cool.

It was 2021.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Best to mark all blankets, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
That's it.

So again, this came, this comes from that, uh, here cough paper, 2018.

Um, and you know, this, this figure is cool blankets all the way down.

Um, so, you know, here they show a single celled organism and they predict what they, they, they illustrate one Markov blanket.

I model the world.

Um, and then you have multi-cell organism, a blanket of blankets that says we model the world.

And then here it shows a pontiff that shows blankets within blankets.

We model ourselves modeling the world.

And that was something interesting that David Krakauer actually said at the Summer Institute this last summer.

He said, you know, humans, one of the things that makes us uniquely human is that we build models of our model.

We build models of our models.

So I thought that that was interesting.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

And then on the right side, so there's the PPP example, protozoa, plants, pontiffs.

And then another cyber-physical way that the Markov blanket concept and the partitioning of systems this way is being used is in...

digital systems.

So this is like a team member, and then there's a certain type of blanket that they're interfacing through in terms of sense and action.

And the database can also be thought of as having different kinds of sensory and action states, as well as internal generative model.

It's dealing with a different external set of states.

That's from the Vyotkin et al.

2020 paper.

How about multi-scale integration?

You can go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
So I'll just read the yellow here.

And so this is from the Randstad et al.

paper 2019, which I think that that's where this figure is from.

And then there's also the Hesp et al.

2019 paper.

It says, the multiscale integrationalist view is a pluralist theory about cognitive boundaries.

It uses the notion of nested Markov blankets to demonstrate that cognitive systems have a plurality of ontological boundaries, each relevant to the study of cognition.

According to this view, each of the spatio-temporally nested components of this cognitive system may be ontologically picked out by deploying the Markov blanket formalism at different scales.

And that's what we were talking about earlier.

We talked about individuality at different scales, and we talked about the Markov blanket individuating systems.


SPEAKER_01:
So this is just...

one way that multi-scale integration can be approached.

But before the Markov blanket even was an idea, there was other approaches to partitioning multi-scale systems.

So let's just go right to the author's distinction in the paper of what uniscale integration

is and how it relates to the adaptive versus mere active inference discussion and this is a question steven also raised in the chat so multi-scale integration so that's that nesting of systems within one another just not i'm intentionally not adding any adjective just any kind of nesting systems

Multiscale integration of living systems that fail to possess the high degree of autonomy required of adaptive active inference, and hence fail to be cognizers, continue to engage in mere active inference at fast timescale, e.g.

a mitochondria in a cell.

So that is visualized here before returning to the quote, like the circular nodes on the bottom, let's just say are doing mere active inference.

They're simple sensors or actuators.

and then they sort of just in a very clean way lead to increasingly weakly emergent behavior that starts approximating adaptive active inference.

So for example, you have a Python script that is adaptive active inference, just so we don't have to even debate whether snails or birds are doing it, just you write a script that is adaptive active inference, the sub functions within it, even though they might have an input output structure,

and even a generative model, they're going to be a lot more mechanical or simple or linear, not displaying the properties of the actual active agent in the Python script at the higher level.

So that's describing this process of uniscale integration.

And then just the paper describes more about how adaptive active inference at the slower scale of the cognizing system, that's the thought bubble here, drives the continued integration of the nested Markov blankets at scales below it and not vice versa.

So the pythons...

variables drive the patterns of the computation of the lower level functions, but those don't meaningfully feed back into higher level properties.

So adaptive active inference at the high end, and then that's just being merely explained mechanistically by unidirectional integration with systems that are decreasingly cognizer-like on some continuum of cognition.


SPEAKER_00:
So I like the term that's used here, and I think I'll highlight why when we come to the nested cone slide.

But he says, the behavior of constituent nested Markov blanket systems are enslaved to the slower dynamics of the autonomizing, cognizing organism.

So I like this concept of enslaving the subroutines.


SPEAKER_01:
OK.

Cognitive evolution.

Do you want to say anything?


SPEAKER_00:
Sure, so this is, I'll just read this little excerpt from the paper because the author didn't technically use the term cognitive evolution and I thought that it might refer to a couple different things, but I'll read this quote because I think it maybe highlights the point that the author was getting at.

So this is a question about the kinds of physiological individuals that we can reasonably ascribe the term cognizer to.

It's a question about how to count biological minds.

The significance of this question lies in the fact that its answer may be used to shed light upon possible major transitions in cognition.

Perhaps there are many such transitions, the move from reflex behavior to sensory motor coordination, the move from non-sentience to sentience, the move from individual intentionality to group intentionality, which this again echoes the major transition of evolution.

So cognitive evolution, I thought about it in a couple of ways and we're coming to the cone slide next.

So maybe we can flip there.

Let's flip to the cone slide.

So, you know, I thought that that's one way that we can think about cognitive evolution from like the transitions in evolution from say multicellular to, or single cell to multicellular.

But here, this is from Mike Levin's paper, The Computational Boundary of the Self.

And you can see this is like the cognitive cone.

So this is the cognitive cone of an individual, the light cones that were inverted and used in this way.

But you can see that the cognitive cone of a tick is much smaller than that of a dog, is much smaller than that of a human.

And so perhaps this cognitive evolution is, you know, in terms of

scale of the organism or, you know, cognitive capacity of an organism.

But Mike here uses this idea of nested, kind of this multi-scale nested cognition.

And here it's shown here, the cell, the organism, the colony to represent these compound intelligences.

And when we talked on the stream back in July, we talked about the warping of the cone, the bigger cone.

So the colony enslaves the behavior of the organism, enslaves the behavior of the cell.

And so this goes all the way down.

And that's why I liked what Matthew Sims, his term enslaving in these nested Markov structures.

And the idea that if you were to grab and twist the top of this cone, you would grab and twist all the cones in it, depending on how tight you twist it, right?

So I like this idea of enslaving the behavior, and this was a good visual to kind of tie that all together.


SPEAKER_01:
That terminology also arises from synergetics, from Haakon, not Fuller, as they say.

And this is footnote 10.

An order parameter is a notion taken from synergetics and used in dynamic systems theory.

It denotes a measure of a global system's macro scale, unstable, slow dynamics.

That's like the sleep wake.

that enslaves the fast dynamics of microscale component systems, that's like the EEG rhythm, and results in a globally emergent pattern.

So it's about multi-scale systems organizing, but synergetics

Hacken, not Fuller, approaches it from a dynamic systems.

Fuller approaches it from a geometric perspective.

So there's other ways to do this partitioning.

Markov blanket is not the only partitioning out there.

But this was cool about also Levin's partitioning, which we just got to learn about.

All right, on to the squid.

So I don't know if these are the exact right species, but...

one of the key empirical examples of the paper, the one that's followed up on.

Do you want to describe the system?


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

Well, so, I mean, the Vibrio fischeri are the bacteria that colonize the squid.

And yes, it's the Hawaiian bobtail squid.

And shout out to Michelle Nishiguchi and her lab that was the lab underneath my lab when I was working in a biology lab.

So the juvenile squid recruits the Vibrio fischeri into what's called a light organ and the bacteria are bioluminescent.

And so it becomes essentially like inoculated with these.

And so then it says, I'll just read this because it's easy.

It's probably a better description.

So it's a nocturnal predator of the shallow reef that buries in the sands during the day and hunts at night.

So it's always, whether or not it's preyed upon, it's always influenced with this association with these bioluminescent bacteria.

So the juvenile is inoculated into the light organ through seawater, and then the host promotes the colonization of Vibrio fischeri, and only Vibrio fischeri, through the production of mucus, which is bacteria in food, the elimination of competing bacteria through hemocyte defenses of its innate immune system,

and the eventual shedding of the ciliated appendages and swelling of the crypt membranes, preventing further entry into the light organ.

So the switch sucks up the Vibrio fischeri.

It says, we want you, we only want you.

All of the other bacteria, we're not going to allow them.

We're just not going to facilitate that interaction.

And then it says, following gradients of chitin, which they feed upon, Vibrio fischeri migrate deeper into the crypts of the light organ, colonizing it and causing a biochemical reaction

resulting in their emission of bioluminescent light.

This occurs just in time for the bobtail's nightly hunt for prey.

Something else I thought that was important for this cycle is that they're expelled every morning.

They just get out.

The bobtail squid colonizes and sucks up all the bacteria.

They multiply and divide inside of the squid.

And then it shoots about, so they're back in the seawater and they're available for recapture by other squid.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

So we're going to return to the Markov blanket partitioning and then consider that squid system and how using the Markov blanket partitioning, we can distinguish between unidirectional and reciprocal multi-scale integration.

So the nomenclature in this paper, R is the internal states, maybe because there's R in the word.

Then S and A are the usual words for the state of sensory sense states coming in to R, and then active action states going out of R, influenced by.

So these are like the set of isolating nodes

from which, knowing them, you're knowing as much as you can about R, the internal states.

And then here, phi, or phi, I don't know which one it is, is the external states.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
It's both.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

Okay.

Figure two is where we turn to these two different kinds of multi-scale integration and directly compare them using kind of the nomenclature and the contribution, I believe, of this specific paper.

So to understand the difference, I will deploy the terminology of users, you, and resources, R.

Users are living systems, the internal states of which inferentially generate sub-personal predictions that allow them to use other Markov-blanketed systems that are external to them.

So here is like the spider making its web.

So it's a user of this extended cognitive resource.

And so we can imagine that there's a Markov blanket partitioning that's around these entities.

Like, we don't need to deny that there is a partitioning between the web and the spider.

We can think about it using this U and R. Maybe this U and R is a partition we can ask the author.

Like, is it a partitioning of just Markov blankets from each other?

Is there going to be some sort of interface?

Is that the niche?

That's the unidirectional case.

The bidirectional case is where those two interacting systems

in the same way that the spider can be thought of as the unidirectional user of the resource of the web, that the two interactants are sort of using and benefiting from each other as an extended cognitive resource.

So that is one of the main points of the paper, looking at that difference between kind of mere multi-scale systems and then ones where it's not just like a ladder, it's almost like a conversation that is giving some new emergent outcomes.


SPEAKER_00:
Very cool.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

next slide just shows some more discussion on the new u and r relationships that arise and then how the new non-equilibrium steady state density arising from that interaction

then in the synergetic sense acts as a ordering parameter for u1 and u2 so the constituents are part of a new ordering regime because of the bi-directional relationship to be clear each constituent biocognizer continues to engage in adaptive active inference acting in ways that ensure it remains statistically separate from its environment

So again, in the unidirectional case, it's mere active inference on the bottom that becomes increasingly cognitive as you go towards some level of autonomy, like a pyramid scheme.

This is like a different structure where there's increasing levels of autonomy of different kinds of interacting systems.

And then there's sort of a bigger wrapper around that.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

It's like the interaction creates a new cone, a new tent.

It builds a tent.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, makes sense.

So then this slide.

brings this emergence from the functional, because it's one thing to say that the functional, you know, these two brain regions get coupled together.

Now there's a functional difference in their firing rates.

That's kind of a low mechanistic bar.

The higher bar to pass is this concept of ontological emergence.

Like it really becomes a thing in and of itself.

And the author writes that that's related to these two ideas.

that first, that some properties of the macro system cannot be reduced to the structural properties of the component parts and their governing microdynamics.

So that's sort of anti-reductionism or holism.

Where that exists, there's a strong argument that you're kind of losing something if you keep on dissecting.

And then two, because of this irreducible properties, a macro-level system has ontological status, e.g.

is an entity in its own right.

So that just is a good question to think about and to ask the author.

Just which systems are unidirectional integrators?

Which systems are bidirectional?

How do we know?

Why does it matter?

Those are just all good questions to ask.


SPEAKER_00:
So another question that I have is,

to what degree do these new properties have to exist?

Like if we're gonna quantify emergence in the very quantitative sense, is it any number greater than zero?

Or where are we drawing the line at what number of emergent properties or what quantity of new properties creates a new system?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it comes up with integrated information theory and a lot of other quantitative measures of integration and consciousness because it's like, okay, so if this system's one and this one's 100,000, are you going to have now a second level theory like 500 is the cutoff?

Or is it true that I could trade one of these for 100,000 of these?

Once you start putting everything on a numerical value and then that becomes your action selection metric.

Oh,

If it's worth the square root of this, then it's worth this.

So it sets up a market for action based upon these metrics, which is pretty interesting.

That's a bidirectional emergence.

Figure three is using the Markov blanket partitioning to look at the squid system.

So the squid is like user one, resource two.

So for species one, it's the squid, bacteria, system.

So species pair one is the squid and its first user and second resource.

V Fisherize, you two are one.

So these show the two kinds of interfaces, like they're encircling each other.

So it's kind of like embedded, one is embedded within the other from a causal perspective.

They're the niche for each other because even though when you put them on the two-dimensional map, they're all just like flat there on the plane, their nearest neighbors are either themselves or the other one.

So that's kind of a cool way to expand the topology of just the histology of the tissue.

and then pull out like, hey, actually, you know, each beta cell in the pancreas is surrounded by other cells that aren't beta cells, something like that.

And the other ones in a weird sense are also surrounded by the other kind of cell, even though there's a lot more of this non-beta cell type.

So just a cool way to look at tissue interactions from the Markov blanket perspective.

Anything?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, definitely.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
No, no, I'm good.


SPEAKER_01:
Four?

You want to describe four or what?


SPEAKER_00:
So here in this figure, it shows the squid cycle, which we have talked about.

We just kind of talked about it.

So it shows at time zero, the squid is resting after venting.

So there's some Vibrio fischeri left inside of the squid.

They're not like, you know, sterilizing themselves.

And so there's, this is the repopulation.

of Vibrio fischeri.

And so then after 12 hours, there's a high density of Vibrio fischeri.

And then it shows this degree of... So on the y-axis, this degree of integration is the degree of biocognitive individuality.

And so right here, when there's the most squid inside Vibrio fischeri, that's when there's the peak of integration.

Presumably because the squid with, you know, three vibrio fischeri inside of it is not going to light up.

But when it concentrates and has a whole lot of the vibrio fischeri inside of the light organ, then that's when it's luminescent.

And that's when, you know, the novel properties, so like the, you know, well, the, you know, vibrio fischeri alone wouldn't be sufficient to be, like there's not enough of them to be, you know, luminescent.

And then the squid alone without the Vibrio fischeri doesn't light up and then is not capable of predation in the way that it normally does.

And so it's the peak of integration happens right before the sun comes up.

And then at dawn, the Vibrio fischeri are expelled and then the bioluminescence is over.

So that's kind of when there's no integration between the two or limited or minimal integration between the two species.


SPEAKER_01:
thanks for the explanation so a few things on this it's like there's no single cut off this dashed line it's kind of like how many grains of sand in a heap like one is usually you know too few but a hundred maybe you're getting there so it's this continuum of

cognitive embeddedness and of emergent function.

And there is an actual time that that is most functional.

And that's just because the world has an actual structure where there's a certain time where there's the most light and it's the darkest outside.

And then there's a time where it's ineffective.

So if we can discount it when it's ineffective and low density,

and we can say that this is like the peak of that natural variability when it's the most bright of the bioluminescence and the most dark outside, there's something that's varying between those two levels

And so this was just a cool way to show that, that there's a smooth increase and that it's a little bit like model specific where we choose to draw the line with who's the biological cognizer.

So this was a cool pattern and to include the environmental variation in the cognition.

So it's not like, here's when you're good at taking tests or not.

It was like, here's the environment as it changes.

And then here's how the organism is.


SPEAKER_00:
This reminds me of like,

you know, building a nightlight out of fireflies.

So I don't know in California, do you guys have fireflies there?

When I was a little kid, they were everywhere on the East Coast.

And so we would catch fireflies, but like how many fireflies does it take to make a nightlight?

Like you can't have one fire, well, it depends on the size of your jar.

And how many can you catch?

Like you can't create a nightlight with one firefly.

Like there's just not enough light.

But if you get like, you know, 20 in there, then you have a good like nightlight.


SPEAKER_01:
So true.

How many make a party?


SPEAKER_00:
Right.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

This is fun.

Philosophical implications of the Vibrio squid symbiosis.

So just a nice argument by nature approach that I'm sure we could learn more about that.

How do you go from an observation in the natural world?

Oh, this bird, you know, the one with this chromosome set does this for this long.

Ergo, this is possible, or this is something about nature in general.

So there are three philosophical implications that are exposed by this striking association between the vibrio and the squid that are significant to the account of symbiotic minds which follows.

So the first one is that the vibrio squid is a clear example of a symbiotic physiological individual.

And that's distinguished from the other non-physiological individual systems like collections of physiological individuals.

You know, if I eat food, the other person doesn't get the nutrients, but then you go, okay, but one person eating does provide the nutrients for another person.

So it's gonna be a continuum and there's all, that's like sort of the complexity of it, but it's a great example of integration.

Like I like it.

And then the second one is physiological individuals are matters of degree.

Over time, the same living system can be more or less of a symbiotic physiological individual.

So I think that really takes that almost unsaid criticism of the first point and immediately builds on it to say like, yes, it is a continuum.

And that's the whole interesting part is you can see how the system's

cognitive interfaces change through time.

And that's the interesting story.

Like for humans, certainly our ability to do something alone in a room is gonna change through time.

When we're born, it's very low.

And then there's an age range where you can do some task alone in a room.

And then eventually there isn't.

So it's like, that is something that varies continuously.

Just like there's the daily rhythm, there's a likely rhythm to some cognitive elements of all systems.

So it's not reducing them or explaining them away.

It's actually looking at that variability and what it says about the system.

And then the last philosophical implication may be thrown into relief when asking the critical question, what is it that produces the bioluminescence?

The squid, the bacteria, or the temporary assemblage of these organisms?

So is that a thing that deserves a noun of itself?

Because we have nouns for assemblages of other things of one type, like a barrel of oil or something like that.

But is there a unit and a noun?

Or are we left to describe this only with a process and then default implicitly back to the Darwinian replicator of

oh, the squid is just trying to reproduce and the bacteria is doing competition.

So they're the individuals, ergo, it's a tenuous relationship, or it's an inter interaction ecologically, but it's not a thing in and of itself, because it's not the replicator.

So those are great questions raised by the author.


SPEAKER_00:
So questions that I maybe have for the author.

So the bioluminescence is there in the Vibrio fischeri.

It's just

self-detectable by us or presumably by the prey that the Vibrio fischeri is hunting, right?

So I think it's, again, like it's a continuum.

It's not there is bioluminescence or there's not bioluminescence.

There's like more or less bioluminescence or detectable bioluminescence that occurs at, you know,


SPEAKER_01:
ex lumens right so so what is the the um the the line there that is drawn good question so here's one of the last points in the discussion today it's again integrating cognitive

and functional and physiological individuality together and then um what is in the background of you why are those when we say individuality and we have to qualify it by saying well i mean informational or i mean physiological what are we qualifying it implicitly or explicitly against

I think the materialist worldview might suggest that the individual is like just the one corpuscular entity, like the one thing that can be separated out, like the ant is the nestmate worker.

Now, there's an argument for the ant being the colony and the nestmate being a tissue, but people say, oh, I saw 10 ants on the windowsill, not like I saw...

a thousandth of an ant on the windowsill.

So there's, I think, a pure materialist argument for just separability and that having the more noun-like characteristic.

And then the author is arguing that there's this folk biological concept that sometimes prevents

thinking about physiological individuals as real uh bona fide individuals and that's this like evolutionary individualism model

uh which can even have a collaborative or optimistic bent to it but it still draws lines around what levels of individuality exist in the world because they're the ones that most cleanly resemble darwinian replicators so not the systems that grow slowly outwards or transfer through different media in the same way and then the argument is that fep

and its corollary active inference, the mirror and adaptive and the continuum between like we talked about offer an ideal program for bringing our folk psychological intuitions in line with the way nature has carved its own joints over evolutionary timescales.

So that's an interesting claim.


SPEAKER_00:
Definitely.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Last slide.

This was like a William Blake

that I thought of when I saw the unidirectional, the bird, a nest, the spider, a web, man, friendship, people, friendship.

So it's a great description of kind of this modification.

And I think it's getting at this idea that there's niche modification

in nature and we do it, that's sort of the unambiguous part.

We change our environment, but then we're also our own environment.

So then there's some dynamics of like culture and communication and being each other's niche.

that are very different than the bacteria changing the pH of a solution.

It can go up, it can go down, but it's still pH.

But then there's this different boundedness to what can happen with humans working together.

So that just brought a close to these few questions like, where is the multi-scale integration happening?

And then how do we identify the unidirectional components and the reciprocal components and a great paper.


SPEAKER_00:
So just a final thought and something that I've thought about a lot in terms of reading this paper, because it's this colonization of the squid by this bacteria.

I think a lot about us and our colonization.

I mean, there are more non-human cells in the body than there are human cells, which is fascinating.

So but we also have the ability to manipulate our niche, our internal niche, the niche of the microbes that reside within us through taking antibiotics.

But there are lots of other things, probiotics and not just antibiotics, but but just even what you eat and where you go and how whether you're breastfed or not or go through vaginal birth or not.

And all of these things contribute to your own.

inoculation or how you inoculate your children and this is something that you can do like literally you can change the composition of your microbiota like through your lifetime so is that niche modification is it what is that exactly i think it's one reason why a um not neutral or um unbiased but flexible


SPEAKER_01:
integration model, like being presented here, we can just say, okay, rather than wondering whether it falls on one side or the other of a binary classification, like, yes, it's symbiotic or not.

We just have a descriptive framework first, and then you can think about the implications later or separate them somehow.

But we hope that if you're listening in the right time, you'll join us for the 30.1 and 0.2, because

The author hopefully will join for at least the first one, and it's cool topics, and we can do a little bit like we did in 29.2.

Let's think of some systems.

Are they unidirectional?

Are they reciprocal?

What reciprocal systems could exist?

Like, what does that mean?

So...


SPEAKER_00:
Sounds good.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

Thanks, people who are listening and Stephen for the questions live.

Thanks, Blue, for collaborating on the slides here.


SPEAKER_00:
And thanks to the author, too, for providing us such great food for thought.


SPEAKER_01:
Totally agreed.

So thanks and see you later.

## 5H164LqEwiA

SPEAKER_02:
Hello and welcome everybody.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

Today it's October 1st, 5th, sorry.

Greetings, Shannon.

And 2021, we're going to be discussing this awesome paper, How to Count Biological Minds, Symbiosis, the Free Energy Principle, and Reciprocal Multiscale Integration.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on this slide.

This is recorded in an archived livestream, so please provide feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams, like muting if there's noise in the background and raising our hand so we can all speak.

At this short link, you'll find the calendar of

past and future live streams.

The first tab is the regular Tuesday live stream with two weeks per paper with the dot one and the dot two.

But then we have a few other series of streams related to different topics.

So go to that link to check out what's upcoming and see if you wanna participate in one of these streams.

Today in number 30.1, the goal is to learn and discuss

this awesome paper on counting biological minds.

And we're really honored and appreciative that Matt Sims is here to discuss it with us.

So we're just going to

introduce ourselves and walk through any of the figures, any of the formalisms.

We also have a few other ideas and questions that lab participants have raised.

So this should be a great discussion.

Thanks everyone for joining.

We'll just go around and say hi and introduce ourselves, either just an introduction or feel free to say something that you were excited about with reading the paper.

And then all non-authors will go, and then we'll let Matt just provide a little context here.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a postdoc researcher in California.

And I think I'm looking forward to drawing out some of these threads about collective behavior and the timeless questions about collective behavior with some of the new approaches that are discussed in this paper.

So I'll pass it to Shannon.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi there, nice to see everyone again.

I'm Shannon, I'm a PhD candidate at the University of California in Merced.

And I've blurred my background, but there is a dog rolling around, so hopefully it's not too distracting.

I will pass it to Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Stephen Sillett.

I'm based in Toronto.

I'm doing a practice based PhD through the UK and around sort of psychological perspectives on practices, particularly around social topographies and spatial meaning making in participatory theatre and the arts.

And I'm really interested in this paper.

I like the

folk psychology questions that it brings up.

And I like this idea of a folk biology, which I found really interesting and the way that we have assumptions around that.

It sort of ties in maybe with some of the folk quantum that came up in some of our previous sessions about what people think that is.

So I'm really excited to see this folk idea being extended because I think that could be really useful.

So thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Stephen.

And to Dave.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_07:
Dave Douglas, I'm retired from programming machine translation software.

Now I get to get really busy working on a history of cybernetic learning theory project for a professor at Carnegie Mellon and all this good stuff here.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Dave.

So Matt, thanks again for joining.

We'd be really happy to hear some context and we'll just take it from there and anyone can raise their hand or type in the live chat if they have a question.


SPEAKER_05:
Fantastic.

Thanks so much for having me.

So the context in this paper, I suppose, it's like I wrote this paper during my PhD over at the University of Edinburgh.

I was supervised by Dave Ward, who's an autopoetic and activist, Andy Clark, who I'm sure all of you know, and Julian Ketterstein, who's up over at the University of Amsterdam.

And the focus of this paper was pretty much my obsession on the notion of collective intelligence and what collective intelligence might be and how cognition has developed, say, the evolution of cognition with a background of taking into account the fact that cognition is, in its most basic form, something that's going to be collective in the first place.

So it does pull at, there is this kind of immediate tension with how we look at cognizers and how we look at cognition in the kind of folk field with typical cognitive scientific kind of research, I suppose, or traditional, should I say.

And the point of this paper was to look at the kind of evolution of cognition, if you will, through a particular lens, using some of the conceptual tools that were provided by R.S.

Murthy and John Bennett Smith, and see exactly how this can be formalized and looked at through the perspectives of the free nature principle with the process theory act of inference.

So that's pretty much it.


SPEAKER_02:
Very concise summary.

Major transitions, which is the Zathmiri and Maynard Smith line.

Big qualitative changes over evolutionary history.

And then just like you kind of brought

to at the end, how do we land that plane with maybe quantitative differences or structural differences in a microprocess theory, maybe active inference under the free energy principle.

So Shannon or Dave or Steven, feel free to raise your hand.

Otherwise, maybe

a first question that came to mind for me was like, how do we research or understand these folk beliefs?

Scientists are folk too.

And is this like sort of the mythical average citizen?

What are these beliefs and how do they come to be that way?

Why are they the way they are?

These folk beliefs about biology, because that sets up a lot of the discussion and what's relevant of the contributions of the paper.


SPEAKER_05:
Absolutely.

It's a very good question.

Very good question.

Folk beliefs, we have kind of obviously kind of folk psychological beliefs that take the form of actual folk psychological notions that take the form of, say, beliefs and desires.

And these things, I think,

give us a very good manner in which to actually approach the notion of folk biology also, with beliefs and desires being particular type of constructs which play an explanatory role, a psychological explanatory role.

And these are successful in, for example, explaining or predicting behavior on a certain level.

And I think on a kind of first blush level, so to speak, and I think folk psychology and folk biology are kind of bed folk in the sense that folk biology is going to be based upon what we initially see via...

like in our everyday experience of the world, for example, is what we initially see.

So we're going to base the notion of an individual, for example, on the ideas of things that are going to be easily individuated and like biological systems that are going to be specifically reproducers.

And this is where you come into the notion of kind of the kind of Darwinian individual, as it was called by Peter Gladwell Smith.

uh where individuals are going to be demarcated by their ability to be categorized under under three different types of with that combined or joint three different three different kind of categories which are going to be uh they have to involve variation uh heritability and uh some type of differential fitness which is just natural selection right and uh

And this type of individual has been kind of, we've invested into this notion of individual and the biological sciences.

up into a certain point, because it helps us approach certain questions and make certain inferences about systems over the long run.

But it falls short, and I think this is again one of the grounding points of the paper, it falls short in explaining certain types of associations.

And these associations, namely, are going to be symbiotic associations.

And this is a quite important, I'd say, transition, as we spoke about before, for the simple fact that without symbiotic associations, we don't really have a manner, I think, of explaining multicellularity.

The transition from single-cellularity to multicellularity.

Now, we've had various theories, and I think one of the theories that kind of, one of the theorists that started this was Lynn Margulis over at the University of Madison, Wisconsin.

And her research was fundamental.

And when she suggested that, for example, you have two prokaryotes, one enveloped the other through some type of phagocytosis, and they create some type of relationship over time that's just thought as ludicrous.

And it did really push against this notion of Darwinian individual.

However, over time, we've come to accept something like this.

And I think this is like the idea that you have some type of bacteria that was enveloped by an archaea.

And in order to explain, in order to actually think about what we have in terms of this particular type of unit,

we really do need the notion of moving beyond, moving past our winning individuals.

And two ways of doing that, obviously, I think that the paper tries to point out this, and these are not the only two ways.

But one way of doing that is through kind of the metabolic individual, which is something that Peter Dr. Smith himself kind of tips his hat off to.

Which is just to say that metabolic individuals are individuals which they can be delineated by their metabolic machinery and having kind of autonomous metabolic machinery and other individuals can play a part of that machinery.

And thus you have two systems that may be metabolically coupled to one another, making one system.

And that's one way to go about it.

The other way to go about it was introduced by Thomas Pardue.

And this is kind of the immunological version of an individual or a physiological individual.

Now, again, these are only two types of individuals or two ways to delineate individuals outside of the kind of more traditional folk biological notion of individual, but maybe that's something that we can talk about.

Perhaps there are other ways that it might be interesting.


SPEAKER_02:
great points and so interesting how the map replaced the territory the map of the sort of darwinian triad defining an individual in the darwinian sense and then people project that back out and say reality is explained by this partitioning scheme yes so very cool steven uh with a raised hand than anyone else in here or in the live chat go for it steven thank you


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'd be interested.

I think this is really good points about these different ways once you start to have...

these interactions and these reciprocities across, you know, then pluralism starts to come into the picture.

And I'm wondering how you see this moving between fields of practice, because I wonder if, like, people in the biological sciences and maybe those who work with agents would really...

be getting this right and then people who have a theory about thinking they know what biology is maybe physicists who maybe think they know what everything is um then have you know they have a they have a folk biology understanding of biology

just like maybe other people have a folk physics understanding of quantum physics.

So I'd be interested in that.

And this might even bring up some work of Chris Fields that we had on here as well in terms of other ways of approaching this multicellularity.

But I'd be interested in your thoughts first about that tension even within the sciences.


SPEAKER_05:
That's a really very good point.

I do think this is, before I hit that point directly, I do think this is a call for interdisciplinary work.

It's an absolute call for interdisciplinary work.

This is something that's, I think, trying to actually...

use folk psychological notions or folk biological notions or folk physics notions, we will have some success doing these things.

However, once we run up, there are going to be certain constraints with doing that, and we'll run up to problems, run into problems.

These problems, I think, can only be...

can only be avoided or actually addressed when using various disciplines together.

And I think this is one of the things that the Free Energy Principle actually offers.

It's an opportunity to work interdisciplinarily on various phenomena, various processes.

And you're absolutely right in saying that, like, okay, well, how can, for example, in biology, you might have a typical assumption about what cognition is.

So we'll have a lot of biologists, for example, there's a...

There's a type of, as we were speaking about before this, there was a notion of basal cognition that has been kind of pushed within the last 15 years.

And a lot of various kind of research programs, scientific research programs, whether it's going to be plant biology or microbiology, has kind of fed into this, which is, it's a lovely program in the sense that it's questioning how we actually look at cognition

And these biologists that are kind of taking these cognitive terms and using these cognitive terms, one of the things that I think that pushes against this is going to be kind of a traditional psychology that refuses to, with lack of better words, I suppose, refuses to actually engage in some type of interdisciplinary discussion.

So it's a psychology that's happy using, for example, more folk traditional and folk psychological notions.

And with these kind of limitations, I think, we're going to actually be stuck.

We're really going to be stuck.

So I guess to summarize the point is that

It is a call for interdisciplinarity.

It is a call for questioning or putting aside the fact that we can give satisfactory explanations.

But whether or not our satisfactory explanations are actually the explanations, or if there is just one explanation,

That's the question.

That's the question.

And I think that the whole notion of the whole idea about biological individuality is that you can be, once you take into account various angles from various disciplines, it's fine to be a pluralist.

It's fine to be a pluralist.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks.

I was thinking of just a pluralism of what the word folk even means.

Some people might think, oh, folk chemistry, that's being wrong.

That's the middle school level of understanding chemistry.

And then the experts, they know about chemistry.

That's folk versus expert.

But also, it seems like folk is being used in a way, appeal to first principles, like appealing to directly intuitive, observable processes.

And what is active inference if not a first principles approach?

So there's a way to bring in some of the technical expertise, the computational backbone, but also fully retain the conversational and the casual approaches that appeal and spread to people in their understandings of different sciences.

So Dave with a raised hand and then anyone else with a, and then yes, go for it, Dave.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, there's been so much good work done by people outside their specialties.

I guess Erwin Schrödinger may be the most well-known in that.

But Björn Merke, the Swedish neurophysiologist, wrote a lovely little paper from about 1999, I don't think it was ever published, about...

how the development of the mobile eyes in one extremity of the early vertebrates has forced neurological developments that have resulted in consciousness.

Simply because having mobile eyes creates such an enormous burden on us

sensation that you can't just use a simple nervous system.

Otherwise, it's just overwhelming.

Have you looked at any of America's work?

No.

Okay, I'm going to have to send you that.

Please do.


SPEAKER_04:
Please do.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, yeah.

And also Mark Solms, who's a direct collaborator with Professor Friston, just wrote a popular account of...

active inference from the viewpoint of his own work with Merker and Jock Panksepp and Antonio Damasio on the affective foundations of consciousness and especially his own thesis that

In Freudian terms, it is the id that's conscious and the ego, the cortical and the neocortical processes only deign to become conscious when it really has to because it's so expensive metabolically and in terms of distraction.

And he's one of the few people who's actually aggressive enough in trying to go out and market his dissidence

from the received wisdom.

And he's also did an amazing update of the original project for scientific psychology in terms of Fristonian active inference.

So first word to last word of that 1895 Freud essay is in 2017 terminology.

but still in exactly Freud's order of presentation.


SPEAKER_02:
Wow.

Yes, please do send me that paper.

I would love to read it.

Awesome.

So, Stephen, with a raised hand, then Shannon or Blue, welcome, and anyone else in the live chat, of course.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just also...

this this idea of the folk psychology and i agree with your point about interdisciplinarity and it's i think it's really interesting is how the experts perceptions of the world then gets translated into a folk publication which then becomes the kind of landscape

which pretty much everyone then starts to incorporate.

And one that I found really interesting with active inference is I was looking back at older ideas of vision before they discovered the retina and the image on the retina.

And they actually thought of the eye as projecting out and sort of feeling the world, if you go back like 500 years.

And then we were told by the experts how it is with the retina and an image projected like a camera.

So then folk psychology moved to that or folk perceptions moved to that because the experts said that.

But actually it turns out that the original folk psychology or the original perceptions is actually more accurate now that we're looking at saccades and all of that.

So this is an interesting what is folk and what's expert and where does it come from?


SPEAKER_02:
absolutely it's a it's a both and because it's not like the retina emits the photons that it then senses back it's not doing echolocation but there is a tale of two densities there's a generative model and a recognition model and there's a process that's a conversation which we're going to get to with the users and resources distinction so it's like there is that bi-directional conversation and then if this direction is folk and then that direction is expert then

in certain social contexts which direction is going to be prioritized as an explanation and the other direction is going to be seen as a counter current literally going against the stream mainstream so how does pluralism allow us to recognize both directions in that case yes stephen yeah that's a good point daniel um that i do a bi-directional and one question i i wonder sometimes


SPEAKER_00:
I often work, I'm sort of connected to people who I'm seeing in the world of coaching and psychology as well in a way, and the arts where these things like Bayesian brains sort of did come through there about 10 years ago in a very, but it's normally come from

research which has been interpreted into a book by someone from that field which then gets picked which is still quite technical which interpreted by someone into something else and by the time it's rolled down into some other areas um these notions can be quite quite watered down you know um so yeah this this question about how to

you know, have that conversation when some of the stuff is quite cutting edge from even people in the fields themselves, um, and how to get it used in the real world is, is a big one.


SPEAKER_02:
Absolutely.

Very true.

So Dave with a raised hand and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_07:
I think it's in the panda's thumb where, um,

There's a rather exasperated essay about how you'll have an innovator, and if he's really lucky, he'll have a few people that work with him that fill in the gap.

But typically, he doesn't even have one level of competence.

It just immediately goes into the folk press and becomes just a complete mush with almost all the original valid insights just buried under folk foolishness.


SPEAKER_02:
possible so i guess just we paused on this slide because this concept of individuality is a central one here and we mentioned a few of these different

ways of looking at individuality and kind of contrasted pluralism the idea that multiple perspectives can coexist and that that's okay versus i guess absolutism or monism that one of these or some other unlisted criterion of individuality is like the the broader category or the right one um

What is on the table with definitions of individuality?

Like why would it matter in a technical capacity or for just all people?

What is being discussed or what matters depending on how we approach this question of individuality to Matt first and then to...


SPEAKER_05:
Right.

I think there are a few things that we can say why it matters.

One thing is that before we engage in some type of investigation about a particular type of phenomenon or process, it's quite good to know how to individuate what are involved in those processes or what that process belongs to, the relations between elements in a network, pretty much.

And in order to understand those elements or to locate those elements, we have to have some type of criterion in order to actually even think about the kind of larger structure of a network and the relationships between them.

And I think this is biological individuals.

They actually play this role.

And I'm reminded by something that Gregory Bateson said.

that in order to actually understand what the mind is, we have to actually understand how to delineate things with minds.

But those delineations are going to be completely dependent upon the processes that we're studying.

Those delineations are going to actually involve the processes.

So it's going to be a process-dependent or a phenomena-dependent individuation

And that doesn't mean that these kind of individuals are going to actually, they might contrast or conflict with one another in any type of logical manner.

But it's just putting in place a type of pragmatism in terms of where we delineate things.

And I think biological individuals provide us with a manner of

talking about, for example, specific phenomena.

Now, if we're talking about replication, or we're talking about, for example, competition with respect to something like replication, then we might want to actually focus upon Darwinian individuals.

However, if we're talking about the evolution of cognition, or we're talking about the evolution of multicellularity, or these major transitions in evolution, we might want to think about individuals in a different way.

So that's what I think.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Matt.

Lou, and then Shannon.


SPEAKER_01:
So hi, Matt.

It's nice to meet you.

I love this paper, found it super inspiring.

And I think that the concept of an individual is closely related to maybe the concept of autonomy and also the concept of emergence.

And so as, and especially, I mean, it's also of course related to the concept of a cognizer, but cognizer aside, so I've heard a lot of definitions thrown around and an individual,

I liked in the paper how you described emergence with the circular causation because that echoes a lot of, I mean, it's the information theory of individuality paper by Krakauer and that group.

And it just echoes a lot of, I mean, what's required for an individual.

So I just am thinking about...

and it's one of the things that, I mean, it depends how you define it.

And in like the artificial intelligence world, there's no such thing as an autonomous system.

I mean, really we program in,

whether we want it to learn whatever it wants to do.

But I mean, they just don't, little baby robots aren't just set free with no goal.

There's always a self-directed or a human directed goal kind of programmed into this system.

Or maybe I'm wrong.

Maybe there's examples where it's, we just create robots for fun or artificial intelligence just to create it.

but like an artificial intelligence system doesn't really have that same autonomy, or at least I don't think about it.

And so I just am kind of curious as to, you know, in the paper you kind of hinted at, or I don't know if you said explicitly, I was kind of flipping through looking for a quote, but you know, you hinted at like maybe a cell doesn't also doesn't have that same kind of autonomy.

And like, so I, um,

I want to challenge that.

In terms of active inference and the FEP, I think about it always as a scale-free architecture and a continuum.

And so why is a cell not autonomous, but an organism is?

Or maybe an organ is.

Is an organ autonomous?

Or where do you draw the line?

And why are you making a line in the sand around a system like that?


SPEAKER_05:
Fantastic question, and I agree with you.

I agree with you.

That's one of the things in the paper that I think that I pushed.

I did draw a line.

I didn't try to draw a line that was too deep in the sand.

And I think in one of the footnotes, I do say something like, OK, well, I'm not suggesting that a mitochondria is going to be something that's non-autonomous.

However, autonomy is something that also varies in degree.

that I think there's a certain level of autonomy that it's going to provide a different degree of, say, degrees of freedom with which some system can interact with its environment in ways.

And that environment provides perturbations

enough perturbations, enough surprise,

such that whatever that system is has various strategies.

It has to have various strategies, behavioral strategies, or we can talk about this in terms of active inference in order to actually adapt to that particular environment.

Now, this gets us into this notion of adaptive active inference versus kind of like the non-adaptive active inference.

And I think the way that Michael and Julian have thought about, if I'm not mistaken, have thought about adaptive active inference is that it is based on a certain level, a certain degree of autonomy.

And with respect to cells, I do agree with you.

Cells do have a certain level of autonomy.

However, cells are, again, dependent upon other cells

in a way that other systems, other more autonomous systems, aren't dependent.

Now, you'll say, of course, we're dependent upon our environments.

We have to have oxygen.

There are certain constraints in our environments that we have to, we really have to kind of like, our environments have to be a certain way.

So we are dependent upon our environments.

But it's the distinction, I think, between being dependent upon other systems

And cells, for example, bodily cells are dependent upon other cells, not only say the plasma, but other cells in order to actually maintain themselves.

And I think there's a difference in degree.

And I shouldn't, again, I should impress upon this idea that I'm not saying that cells are not autonomous.

But most certainly, I think there's a difference in degree, and that difference in degree does matter.

Cells might even be cognitive to a certain degree.

And this is something that someone like Michael Levin suggests, and I agree with him.

But I suppose the notion of adaptivity, there's a degree of adaptivity that comes along with the emergence of a certain amount of degrees of freedom.


SPEAKER_01:
So cells are dependent on other cells, but aren't humans dependent on other humans?

I mean, we're born as an infant and completely reliant upon our parents to provide everything for us for many, many, many years.

And even as adults, I mean, still, we don't exist in a bubble.

I mean, perhaps we can go off to a cave and exist in isolation.

But I think humans are dependent on other humans as well.

So maybe it's a degree of dependence or not, or...

I mean, I really feel like there's a continuum here, even in terms of adaptive active inference and mirror active inference.

I mean, and I fall in with Mike Levin in a lot of the ways that I think, so.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, yeah, I think that's right.

I do think that's right.

I think there's a distinction to be made also, though, between kind of developmental dependence and homeostatic dependence.

And I think homeostatic developmental dependence can have an effect on homeostasis, most certainly.

But those are two things that might not actually always, always overlap.

And for example, sure, we as humans, absolutely, we have a long developmental period in which we're absolutely dependent upon our parents or being reared by some other human or some other animal.

Absolutely.

And it happens that when we actually, when we get older, we probably are dependent also.

Absolutely agree with that.

But there isn't any kind of development with a cell that can be mapped on to dependence or non-dependence.

It's always dependent.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Matt.

Shannon?


SPEAKER_03:
That actually flows really well into my question, Blue.

I know in your paper you specifically say we might want to talk about humans or groups of humans, but we're not going to in this paper.

But I'm going to ask about humans.

And so when you're talking about this squid and its bioluminescence,

and they form a temporary unit in which they are together an individual, and then it sheds the bioluminescent cells during the daytime, and then they breed again afterwards.

I'm wondering if there is a time, like a critical time period at which units would have to be, have this,

symbiotic relationship with each other, or if there's a necessary strength of the coupling or a repetition of how many times the organisms need to meet up.

And if that would change for this animal compared to systems of humans.

Because there's a certain way in which the humans that you interact with in everyday life, or if you're co-living with someone, even your metabolic states become co-regulated by your sleeping patterns with each other, or stress and hormones between different humans are affecting each other when you're together at a fairly regular rate.

And so I wonder...

if we might define individuality or collectives slightly differently depending on the system we're looking at and the type of coupling that's occurring?


SPEAKER_05:
I think that's a great question, Shannon.

I would say yes.

I think there has to be some, obviously, you know about the empirical literature in terms of entrainment.

And I think that's a really good point to make in terms of having those types of interactions with humans.

For the bobtail and vibrio, there's a chance that after the vibrio actually colonize the light organ, they're typically not taken in again.

Once they're expelled, they might be taken in by another squid, a juvenile squid, but the vibrio that continue to colonize are the ones that are left over.

And it might be the case that the ones that continue to colonize for that shorter period of time

might become, the relationship with the squid might change to a certain degree, but I don't know any empirical evidence, and I'm ignorant about this point, that suggests that's the case, but I think that's a really good question to ask, a very good question to ask.


SPEAKER_02:
So, Blue, and then I'll make a question.


SPEAKER_01:
I think Dave was first.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh yeah, go for it, Dave, and then Blue.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, there's...

Dr. Alan Shore has done some, I think, controversial but really evocative work on the formation of the, not just the personality, but actually the neural functioning of the newborn in the dyadic relation, the intimate dialogue with the mother, face play, and the rhythm of moving in and moving back and

regulate each of them regulating each other's expression of interest and each other's degree of involvement.

And at a really different scale, Gerald Edelman's

topobiology talks about the cell and the tissue as being just so dependent he points out look we have almost no chromosomes we have almost no genes compared to how complex we are where does the regulation come from it comes from adjacent cells adjacent tissues right thanks dave blue


SPEAKER_01:
So Shannon, kind of what she was saying about becoming co-regulated, say if you live in an environment with someone, like is a super nice transition to something that I have really been wanting to discuss in the context of this paper, which is like, okay, you become co-regulated with someone

that you're roommates with and co-regulated perhaps by the environment, but also perhaps by the microbes that live in our environment, right?

So there's like that entire microbiome concept that is fundamental and key to humans.

And I don't know, I mean, I'm not like a huge studier of symbiosis, but

I'm not sure if the microbiome, I know we depend on a healthy microbiome for healthy brain function and just regulation of our own internal metabolism and so forth.

And so is that a symbiosis?

Or not?

Also, the concept of the holobiont, which is introduced by Fields and Levin, if you've read that paper, the scale-free biology paper.

I mean, it is like, to what?

And they talk about physiological individuality there as well.

So is that symbiosis?

Is it not?

Is symbiosis also a spectrum?

Or is it a discrete category of things?

And I also think about symbiogenic viruses.

which like, you know, the very early viruses, it's like, you know, effectively like instantiating speciation, right?

Like the viruses insert into the genome and, you know, developing species and so forth.

And it's beneficial to the virus and the host, right?

So anyway, I just wonder, like, what are your thoughts on that or if you have any insight there?


SPEAKER_05:
Absolutely.

Again, a wonderful question.

With respect to symbiosis, I think there's been some work on that and some very, I think, convincing work done by Queller and Strassman, who suggest a particular type of XY, locating symbiosis on an axis, pretty much.

So you have cooperation

I believe on one part of that.

I have to look it up again, actually.

I should look that up.

But you have varying degrees of symbiosis.

And again, symbiosis, in the particular paper that we're discussing now, I've concentrated on mutualisms, but you have various forms of symbiosis that I think you've actually pointed out previously that can be kind of modeled quite well with kind of game theoretic.

And this is going to be, it's going to reign from parasitism to communalism to kind of mutualisms.

And I think these are all, again, degrees.

And these degrees can change.

There have been quite a many theories, I suppose, and I think Qualer and Strassman have also suggested this, that depending upon the condition of a system, with respect to another system, say there's symbionts, a parasitic relationship can turn into a mutualism, and vice versa.

So these things move, these types of things move.

And if you think about, this is an automatic thing that we can even apply to this kind of cellular biology, when you think about something like the origin of cancer, right?

When you have cancerous cells, they've actually grown within a host, right?

They're part of a body, but end up being some type of competitor.

And I think this is quite interesting to think about this through the lens of symbiosis.

Obviously, that's not a symbiosis, but we can use symbiosis to think about that.

But with respect to thinking about host cells and parasites or host cells and neutralisms,

uh, there's like, there's, there's many, many different kinds of, um, ways, uh, areas of the spectrum that one can actually analyze, uh, our relationship with, uh, our own cells and our relationships with, uh, with micro microbiota, microbiota, like Scott Gilbert, obviously, you know, and Scott's work is, is, is quite incredible.

He's the one I believe who introduced the notion of the hollow biome, uh, the hollow genome, excuse me, and hollow biome.

And, uh,

I think this notion of a hollow biant is specifically, it includes symbiosis, but it includes actually a kind of community, a particular kind of community of various systems that themselves qualify as one system, can qualify as one system, or having, you know, if you were to put it in a different way, they create a stable state, right?

A steady state themselves.

And one that's kind of resistant to perturbation.

And that's the manner in which I think, it's a very easy manner in which I can think of the holobiont as an individual.

Whether or not one wants to call two symbiotic systems that are in a mutualistic relationship a holobiont, that's another question, but I think typically it's been applied to more than two systems.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Matt.

So for Shannon's questions about, you know, the co-regulation and humans and trust, it made me think about how one-off games lead to kind of community or population-like game theory, whereas repeated games over evolutionary time, like in the case of the squid and the vibrio, or in the case of the eusocial insects, that leads to organismal-like dynamics.

And then what you just described and what

Levin also got at in the paper is the breakdown of, for example, organismality into population of cell versus population of cell dynamics.

So it's absolutely a cool framework.

And then also a really important part on figure four is you have the peak of integration and then greeting Serval.

the peak of integration, and then that's the Y axis.

So it's like, instead of saying, we're gonna say which organisms are tall or short out there in the world, it's like you do the population level survey and they range from two to four feet and you say, okay, it's in the upper 50th percentile, it's tall.

Like we're renormalizing our comparison stick

Two, the maximum integration of the squid bacteria.

So we're not comparing it to some other system.

We're renormalizing and we're able to have a system-specific understanding.

Here, it's relatively more integrated.

Here, it's relatively less.

It's a second question whether the peak of integration of the squid and the vibrio is like the integration of some computer program with another computer program.

maybe it's apples and oranges maybe we'll have the right framework that allows us to transmute apples and oranges but here you can just relativize to the system itself and that's like very specific and powerful so steven with a raised hand and then anyone else yeah i'll give you a chance to get a breath because we've thrown a lot at you but um


SPEAKER_00:
You mentioned allostatic and homeostatic forces.

So you've got that difference there between something trying to maintain or trying to move forward and change.

And I'm interested in how that reflects.

So, for instance, I suppose you could have within a set of cells, you could have some cells or some cells

organs you know trying to maintain homeostasis and others say even maybe a parasite is trying to allostatically enter that world and create a niche for itself and I think that that question about you know that balance between the two is a useful divide or a useful way to think about the same cell and of course in cells they change to become different types of cells so that's something that

whole organisms have less ability to be completely completely different types of organisms you know they can't um you are what you are i suppose that's one defining thing about but you can still change your focus from homeostasis to allostasis i think that is quite common and i wonder what your thoughts are around that um and how that that itself could be a useful way to frame things


SPEAKER_05:
That's really interesting.

The manner in which I'm looking at homeostasis and the coupling of homeostatic regulatory systems to allostatic regulatory systems is based upon a more traditional idea that homeostasis might be considered more reactive, where allostasis is anticipatory.

Right.

And allostasis takes a particular form.

It's quite interesting with respect to, in the context of active inference, because we talk about expected free energy minimization.

And this is something that one can tie together with the notion of allostasis.

And when you start to think about the homeostatically coupled systems, one system with respect to symbiotic systems might be playing a larger role in being able to make inferences further and further into the future.

you've looked at previously actually on a slide, Mike Levin's cone slide that Daniel actually had up previously.

And I think this is a quite interesting manner of thinking about kind of a transition.

Perhaps we've always been allostatic systems, living systems have always had certain capacity to anticipate

However, when we start putting systems together, we have a larger capacity or more capacity to anticipate further and further in the future.

And I think one of the dimensions on this particular cone is this dimension of kind of out of static control.

This is my interpretation of Michael's work.

And I think this is very important.

And again, you'll see that there's that kind of balancing, that if one is given a type of approximate Bayesian inference that's going to be what we suggest is going on, you have to actually balance this with priors, which are going to be respective to the past.

So you have another axis on the cone.

And as these things expand, sometimes the past is going to be a bit deeper on the cone than the future.

But allostasis is on the top there.

And I think that with multicellularity, with the interactions, more interactions, perhaps we'll see a capacity, a larger capacity to go upwards in the future-oriented direction

And this is something, again, and I appreciate Blue's bringing this out.

This is something that's, again, a matter of degree.

It's not a line that's cut.

It's a matter of degree, right?

And so just simply, we know that there are certain types of microorganisms that do anticipate.

that do like, right?

And this is kind of outward anticipatory behavior, whether it's, I think it's going to be a physarum polycephalum, which is the kind of a plasmodial slime mold.

Various experiments in 2011 have suggested that, you know, physarum can actually anticipate

various periodic bouts of dryness, this type of thing.

This is an outward periodic behavior, an outward anticipatory behavior.

That's not to say that anticipation is not happening or occurring prior to that in the internal dynamics of systems.

That's just an outward manner of measuring it.

Again, I do think that it's a quite important notion, allostasis.

And perhaps all systems, again, I would be safe, at least my position now is that all systems are pretty much allostatic systems that kind of enslave homeostatic regulatory systems to maneuver and invest their metabolic machinery in metabolic capacities.

to a particular type of state that perhaps they haven't reached yet, considering a manner of trying to avoid perturbation.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Matt.

Very similar to mere adaptive inference being more homeostatic, more like the ball just in the bottom of the bowl, and then increasingly anticipatory Rosen's ecology, adaptive active inference.

Stephen, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah this this ties in actually um a lot of work around um coaching funny enough the world of coaching and um team coaching is like and team coaching so and i think this also brings in you know these other types of clusters groups symbiotic

um relationships beyond maybe what we might just think of as a system you know um so the idea of a team um in a as a in a systemic context um is really interesting because they and this might be how allostasis in a social context starts to enable that larger horizon so each even allostasis is sort of stasis and then

working together you may start to break your own need for stasis you know and it just becomes some other organization and i think it'd be really interesting and looking at how the way that team coaching either for performance because there's performance orientated team coaching or there's developmental orientated team coaching but that idea of and then the enabling context

becomes what we would call the ecological niche, I suppose, becomes as much the focus of attention as the system, if that makes sense.

And I think this might tie into what you're saying.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Steven.

So Dave, I know that you had a little bit to share, but I'll just bring up one point related to this definitions of individuality.

And then Saral, anything you wanna ask, feel free to raise your hand.

We hear a lot of terms like autonomous and self-organizing, which sort of highlight the ability to cleanly partition a system.

Like people will say the embryo, it's a classic self-organizing system.

except for the context of the womb.

And so there's sort of on one hand, the desire to individuate and partition and look at agentic systems, agent-based modeling, autonomous and self-organizing.

And then that is critiqued by the ecological perspective or the relational perspective.

So there's sort of a dialectic between like, it's all individuals all the way down and it's all relationships all the way down.

We see that debate in particle physics,

We understand it less than we might some of the biological systems or in a different way.

But it's like two pillars that we're navigating between, and it is a continuum in between.

So that's why it's such a nice discussion.

So Dave, if you're around, feel free to, anytime you're ready, you can go for the conversation theory.

Otherwise, Blue, go for it.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay, sure.

Now, sorry.

Yeah, slides 18 and 19, we inserted that into the slideshow that we prepared for Dr. Sim's presentation.

And these slides bring in some matters that he doesn't address in his paper.

So to justify that, but not to paraphrase the insertions, the free energy principle and active inference jointly constitute a relatively mature macro level framework for describing living psychological and other complex self-stabilizing systems.

As of the moment, no comparably mature micro-level framework has been both proposed for and coordinated with this macro level of analysis.

I suggest that the basis for such a needed micro-level framework was proposed by my teacher, the late cybernetist Professor Gordon Pask of Brunel University, in the form of conversation theory.

Matt's essay, How to Count Biological Minds, considers the puzzle of whether an individual can come into existence and pass out of existence repeatedly.

Matt's account of this puzzle, and please excuse me if I stray from oversimplification into parity, his solution in terms of degrees of integration is a perfectly acceptable, insightful account

at a macro or molar level.

The metaphors of quantity and elsewhere probability nicely express falsifiable common sense attributes of real-world processes.

But if one states this paradox, the paradox of emergent but transient individuals in terms of conversation theory, then one speaks of a conversation recurring over time between the same conversants.

This terminology makes the proposal more intuitive, less shocking, and more readily assimilable for readers.

Better yet, familiar ideas, attention, rhythm of discourse, punctuation of a conversation through understandings or through agreements to disagree, they all play their roles.

Now, what place would be occupied by the special disciplines that have enjoyed detailed treatment by conversation theory as a micro-theory?

During his career, Professor Pask carried out an array of experiments studying human learning of complex subject matters using configurations of software and hardware to administer and collect data from those experiments and developed a vocabulary allowing elegant description and restatement of the results of those experiments.

Moreover, he developed a theory of micro-level learning teaching as a single literally irreducible complex of activities

regardless of whether they were realized by living organisms, by machinery, or by complexes of those two fabrics.

I see many deep and broad analogies between conversation theory and active inference.

Each addresses important aspects of real-world phenomena in a systematic way, such that each treats of matters that are not so well handled by the other.

i believe that active inference and conversation theory can enrich and streamline each other by carving natural science scholarship closer to its joints very nice thank you dave so maybe matt any thoughts on that and then we'll go to blue i have to i have to say that i'm absolutely uh the


SPEAKER_05:
The cybernetic theory that I've concentrated upon and been most influenced by, it's very limited.

And conversation theory, I'm absolutely interested in seeing more of this, I suppose, analysis and understanding more of this analysis.

So I'm quite ignorant about conversation theory, and it's most certainly piqued my interest.

Yeah, let me think about this for a few minutes.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm still kind of internalizing what you've just said.

Yep, and one note on the conversation, a lot of times cybernetics falls into that individualism mode, like it's the one self-guided missile.

It's not the conversation between the flock of birds.

So cybernetics isn't just about individuals, it can be about collectives.

And it was our colleague, Alex, who told us via one of his teachers, Levenchuck, just yesterday that cybernetics died when it could explain homeostasis, but it couldn't go beyond.

So we're talking about the transition from individuals to collectives and from mere homeostasis to adaptive allostasis over developmental and evolutionary timescales.

And so it's sort of like you can have homeostatic individuals and then they can have emergence towards allostatic collectives.

And then what is that process of emergence?

It's a conversation or potentially something like that using our folk understanding of interacting pieces, which are us.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So my question is maybe technical, but also maybe Serval has some insight to provide as well.

So I wanted to ask, here in the beginning of your paper, you talk about free energy being an additive quantity.

So the free energy that arises at the macro scale is only the free energy that there is for the ensemble and may be quantified by summing the free energy associated with each constituent micro scale Markov-flanketed system.

So is that true?

And does that account for emergence?

Because I feel like there has to be some greater free energy minimization.

And so I'm not well-versed in the technical mathematics of the FEP.

Because I think about...

just in terms of the bioluminescence of Vibrio fischeri, right?

There's like a criticality that happens, like almost like a phase transition that the system undergoes to become bioluminescent.

Like after there's a certain concentration of bacteria in the light organ.

And so like, does this criticality, this phase transition, does this not like minimize free energy to a greater degree?

Like, or is it really just the sum of its parts?


SPEAKER_05:
Wonderful question, really wonderful question.

I do think that, OK, there might be a distinction in terms, here, a distinction in terms of what the free energy of the actual constituents as a group have, as an ensemble have.

And a distinction between that, for example, and bioluminescence as a particular type of free energy minimizing strategy.

I think it's a fantastic question.

I'm getting the notion of the summation of free energy from Palacios and Randstad.

And I think that pretty much the idea is that I'm not sure if there's going to be any... Well, I'd like that.

Maybe I can ask you, Blue.

Do you see that there is some type of inconsistency between saying that, for example...

free energy is going to be an additive quantity and the fact that there can be some type of emergent property that is not going to be reducible to, say, the constituent relations and the elements.

Do you think that there's some type of inconsistency there?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, so I definitely do think that free energy across scales is additive.

Like I agree with that wholeheartedly, but I don't think that it reduces to the mere sum of the parts.

And I mean, this also, it's the work, the recent work of Rosas and also Eric Hole looking at,

the partial information decomposition over the phi metric that's used in integrated information theory of consciousness.

And so this kind of speaks to that.

There has to be some mathematical... I mean, I just feel like... I don't know that there has to be, but I feel like there should be some mathematical...

quantification of more.

So it should be a greater degree of free energy reduction when the system is more than a sum of its parts.

And so I think that that's an argument that you make in the paper as well, that it can't be, it's not reducible to just the component parts.

So is the free energy then just reducible to the component parts here?

Because that to me seems inconsistent.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

I absolutely see your point.

The manner in which I'm thinking about this, though, is that,

There's a very informative paper by Santos.

He's a philosopher.

He actually deals with emergence.

And it's a really nice way, I suppose, I really like this, the paper that you suggested about kind of using the phi metric and various manners in which to do information decomposition over various time steps.

in order to think about some metric for emergence.

I think there's been various metrics for emergence.

I haven't picked my favorite metric.

That's something that I'm still getting into.

But I think it's quite interesting to think about, okay, well, what makes an emergent system?

Is an emergent system going to be more than the kind of relationships and elements of a network?

And what makes it so?

Is it going to be the relationships themselves, or is it going to be the combination of the relationships, or is it going to be the interaction between the system, the emergent system, and the environment?

And I think when you start thinking about the interactions between the emergent system and the environment, there's a distinction between what free energy is going to be minimized and the free energy of the system itself.

Does that make sense?

There's a distinction being made, and perhaps I'm wrong about this, but emergence is not something... One of the reasons why you have an emergence system is going to be for the simple fact, okay, well, you have... It's not only the interactions of the parts and the parts or the elements.

It's going to be the interaction of a particular type of persistent element

And I think this is the idea.

You have a persistence with a particular environment or with an environment.

And it's the perturbations within that environment that occur along with that system in which kind of free energy is going to be, free energy that has to be minimized is going to arise.

And I think it's like, so...

You might say, of course, that the system itself, when it has component parts and relationships between those component parts, that system can be thought about in terms of an additive or summation of the free energy of the various parts and relations in that system.

But that's distinct from that system's engagement or interactions with this environment.

Then you'll have extra free energy.

We have an additional amount of free energy.

And maybe that's another way, a manner of thinking about, okay, well, an emergence as measured, I don't know if you can measure emergence in terms of free energy, but of course you're going to be able to measure it in terms of some type of mutual information.


SPEAKER_01:
Very nice.

Thank you.

That's super helpful.


SPEAKER_03:
I think that was a question there.

I don't know if you can measure emergence in terms of free energy, like you said.

And you might have to look at something like mutual information.

And I was thinking that perhaps the free energy that's minimized by each individual system

then when they become a symbiotic unit or something, it might end up being identical.

And again, I'm thinking of humans again, but if humans are walking and they happen to start walking in step, that's going to look like an identical oscillation as they're coupling with each other.

So there might not be more free energy that's minimized by this coupled system walking in step together.

But it might look like the same free energy once they're a coupled system.


SPEAKER_02:
one thing that we talked about i think in the dot zero or around there is there's situations where the cooperation the coordination increases synchrony so just increases the mutual information of the humans walking in step but also you could imagine anti-phase relationships which is kind of like division of labor or task allocation where the emergence is not due to um copy and conform but the emergence is actually you know you go left i go right and

And so in both of those cases, there would be a change in the non-equilibrium steady state, which is what is introduced throughout the paper.

And so that starts to build the road towards quantitative discussions.

And you could take a system that

you suspect already has emergence in nature and remove a part.

That's kind of like the gene knockout approach.

So gains of functions and loss of functions and all the other ways that we study function can now have something like a common grounding, potentially using these metrics here.

So Dave, and then maybe Matt, if there's a response.

Otherwise, Stephen, thank you.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay, now Blue asks, is free energy additive?

There's an exercise that I'd suggest that should bring that question to a more bound earth and more poignant focus.

Take all the discussions you've heard of free energy and substitute for the phrase free energy the word anxiety.


SPEAKER_02:
It already is that way, Dave.

What do you want me to do?

What would that show though?

Do you think it's a natural fit or could we put any word there?

What do you think it means?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, so just using anxiety, like it totally leads to the mob mentality and like ultra paranoia and conspiracy theory.

So like definitely additive.


UNKNOWN:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Possibly multiplicative though.

Like could be exponential.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, Steve.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, there actually have been clinicians that have really used free energy, although they didn't use the term as probably before the usage was was coined.

It was William Glasser in control theory and his earlier work really has this quantum of anxiety.

that these patients had to manage.

These tended to be out-of-control criminal adolescents, so they were pretty screwed up.

And he found ways to get them to rein themselves in and control themselves.

But think about the Blitz effect, London Blitz.

You had objectively tremendous stress on everyone all the time.

But there was almost no hospitalization for shell shock among civilians, including the air raid wardens that were in digging, you know, a building beside them would get bombed and they'd rush in and try to find people and drag them out.

Extraordinarily low rates of psychosomatic disorder.

There's a certain, there's multiple paths, you know, people's brains are really complex.

There are certain ways that people actually do get shocked into rationality.

I've been in situations where the right thing had to be done right now with no hesitation, no anxiety, no blame, just do the right thing.

And there was no question, just do the right thing.

whether it puts me in danger or not.

A child's in danger, you do the right thing.

So it's not predetermined.

But typically, yes, what does happen is a thing called reorganization.

It's a technical term that Glasser uses.

It essentially means going crazy.

And in the really worst case, the reorganizations get faster and faster and faster and more and more drastic as the personality becomes more and more simplified.

And that's something that Kurt Levin or Lewin worked through in his work on driving children crazy by giving them more and more complicated tasks and under more and more anxiety.

And he was able to make the kids' personalities and thinking degenerate and simplify more and more and become more and more infantile.

And you're right, Blue, that is one of the things that happens in a mob.

It's terrifying to be in an even unified,

angry mob where everybody's mad at the same thing and they're probably not going to attack each other.

It's terrifying.

And people that keep going into that situation, things happen.

Remember the presentation two weeks ago on the mutual suppression of the limbic system, the reticular activating system on the one hand and the prefrontal cortex on the other.

You get these things that look like beliefs, they sound like beliefs, they act like beliefs, but they're not beliefs because reason has never been invoked in the biological decision, whether to incorporate this magician's spell into my feeling and my actions.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you have to have reason to have a belief, Dave?


SPEAKER_07:
Oh, yeah, in the sense that Philip Jarens uses it.

Yeah, yeah, you have.

I mean, that's kind of the way he defines it.

A belief is something where the prefrontal cortex has been involved.

It's been in the loop.

And there's a way to bypass that.

I asked him whether he's worked on the social psychology of this or the ego psychologist.

He says, no, no, no, I have enough trouble worrying about people with damaged brains and how that shows the bypassing of rationality in the formation of delusions.

But I think it works the other way.

You may have seen my shotgunning of the apothemic brawl

by Dr. Nathan Rosenberg, or rather Gabriel Nathan Rosenberg is an academic in, I think, Kentucky.

He says, look, this is what's happening.

You've got this person with a non-existent personality who's doing what the mob tells him to do through the mob's megaphone called Fox News.

Why do we like him so much?

Because he's less than any of us.

He will always obey us.

So we'll give him power, and then he'll give us what we feel like having.

Yeah, and there's no reason at all for that.

It's very much a bypass.

Yeah, read Le Bon's study and Mackey's study on the madness of mobs.

And the mass production of delusions and crazes and McCarthyism and all this unhealthy stuff.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Dave.

And that was the guest stream 10.1 with Philip Garens.

And so just to highlight one point, and then Steven, we're really talking about control theory.

Maybe the first pass, the first term in the Taylor series is about control.

I mean, come on, narrow the error.

And that's kind of definition one, control as homeostasis, even if there's a shifting set point.

But then again, it's the ecological and the relational insight and just the emergence of interactions that control takes on this broader anticipatory role.

usage to control your body temperature is to sometimes do a lot of movements that from that first pass look like a non sequitur, like sprint so that you can get into the air conditioned room.

That's the expected free energy through time.

So now we have a common grounding for talking about control when it looks homeostatic as well as control when it looks allostatic or even innovative.

so it's very important to pull out some of these threads and also recognize their cybernetic origins and other areas too so stephen and then anyone else yeah um these are all really good points i'm curious when we talk about free energy minimization


SPEAKER_00:
I think it's interesting to talk about that from a systems perspective.

However, if we want to get back to the kind of organism, so the key thing with free energy minimization that occurs at different scales, physical scales, number of units scale, time scale, teleological scales, we think about these different scales, but

That reduction, there has to be a way for that reduction to be meaningfully engaged through actions or interactions.

The metric, ultimately, what's going to be filtering through, probably in some noisy, maybe backdoor way, is that

if it's going to be sustained over time, there needs to be some meaningful engagement over time.

So, for instance, you know, the idea of the path that we walk starting to wear away the grass in our niche.

Well, it's because we walk on the path more than...

once that we have an ability to observe that you know if we only ever walk that path once it wouldn't have a way for any variation to be noticed but we notice the path being worn by agents over time so when we're talking about these different scales these variational dynamics in free energy it's not just a reduction because we don't get a number each time saying this was lower than last we just get

some new state in the world and we have to infer if it's changed from some other state in the world and we it may go up it may go down so we may infer at times the free energies has has not been minimized and we might take but over allostatic processes for instance if we have a big room that's not tidy and we have a group of people and they want to organize it into a studio space

know they may work together initially putting in a lot of extra free energy time and and then eventually they know that they will be able to minimize their sort of systemic engagement as a group while it's not necessarily that they're each minimizing free energy as a system in the so this is almost where maybe challenging to get out of the biological sense and maybe come into some other disciplines where

it's not all a system.

It might be more of a systemic context, which is then more teleological.

So I'd be interested that question, where does this crop through, this idea of being able to have a pragmatic metric that links the non-equilibrium steady state of the organism's phenotype or individual, so they're actually able to then

infer something from whatever's happening to the free energy out there or in in there or around them um and how that changes things if we if we frame it away from systems per se to something more systemic


SPEAKER_02:
Different uses of the highly polysemous word systems.

Systems of systems for some people are systems.

So that's why we increasingly will try to be exploring the active inference ontology so that we know which pieces of the puzzle we're talking about.

And then that will unpack so interestingly into different disciplinary contexts, Stephen.

So nice points.

So in the last half hour, I think there's a few different things

Let's maybe get to one of the key pieces and specific contributions of the paper, which I would love to hear, Matt, your thoughts on, which is just first, what's going on with users and resources?

And second, what is the difference between unidirectional multiscale integration and reciprocal multiscale integration?


SPEAKER_05:
Right.

Those two

notions, I suppose, of unidirectional and multidirectional, or reciprocal.

And users and resources, they're very much so connected

The idea of a user, we can think about this, and I think to use Stephen's example of an elephant path, I believe that's what these things are called sometimes.

So you see these paths that are treaded and are typically used or referred to when we're thinking about kind of nice construction, like paths for nice construction.

This is something that is in the environment that is being used, say, is a resource that's being used, and it's the effect of previous action on the environment.

Returning to the notion of, so that would be a resource used by a particular cognitive agent or an agent that's engaging in adaptive active inference.

So number one, it has to be recognizable.

And in order for the system to engage with that particular resource, it has to be recognizable as such.

And that recognition can come through, for example, epistemic foraging, or actually just applying a model to a particular type of resource that has been applied previously.

This is also the case with something like stitchmergy, right?

Where you have something that's quite lovely, where you have, for example, ants leaving pheromones within the environment, and that pheromone acts as a particular type of mediator directing further behavior by agents of a similar type, right?

And that's, again, environmentally mediated communication.

or what they might call environmentally mediated conversation between various elements of a system.

And the pheromones themselves, of course, are resources.

in the environment.

That's going to be perhaps contrast with the idea that not all resources need themselves or are themselves, they have to be limited to being resources.

They can also be users also.

So to make a strange case, we can think about stytmergy actually.

What if it wasn't actually the pheromone that was being used, but the other ant, the presence of the other ant that was being used, the interaction with the ant itself.

So here, the two, using perhaps, and perhaps you have to tell me if I'm using this wrong, this terminology, but you have two discussants, right?

A sender and a receiver, but both act as senders and receivers, and actually they're communicating something, they're having a conversation, but there isn't any mediation in between the two that can be offloaded onto, in this particular situation, offloaded onto the environment.

So the signal itself is going to be the direct kind of interaction between the two rather than a pheromone.

Now that in that case, we can map that onto something that would be a kind of hypothetical case of reciprocal multi-integration.

Right?

And again, stigmergy just happens to be typically in each cases in the way that Pierre-Paul de Grasse suggested it when he was studying termites.

This is something that's actually involving a particular type of signal in the environment that's offloaded to the environment.

So it's going to be naturally something that's going to be a unidirectional multi-scale integration between a system, between various systems.

Whereas, for example, when you have direct interaction between two cognizers or two systems, two adaptive systems, they can also, of course, use some type of resource that can be signaling.

And this is something that, of course, happens with Vibrio fischeri and the bobtail squid.

But there is also going to be some kind of other direct interaction between two systems.

And that's kind of the reciprocal multi-scale integration.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome summary.

I believe the technical term would be converse ants for that kind of a conversation.

But it's a great point how when you have an adaptive active inference agent and then a niche that's being modified stigmatically that does mere active inference, like the spider's web, that's unidirectional, but still multi-scale.

Whereas when you have adaptive and adaptive in discussion, in conversation, even again, if only in a folk sense, you have adaptive on either end and it can allow for a new non-equilibrium steady state to arise.

So not that there isn't a non-equilibrium steady state of spider plus web rather than them separate.

In fact, there will be, but it still is a different type.

It's like a double directional or reciprocal Stigma G. So just such a cool way to...

Connect that.

Blue.

And then Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
So again, this line between mere active inference and adaptive active inference, it makes me want to attack it a little bit.

I think about the niche modification that, for example, humans do is extensive and transcends generations.

And I mean, it contributes a lot to the collective intelligence of the human species and so forth.

And I also think about...

in terms of like the Gaia hypothesis, right?

Like, so if the world is one giant organism, and this is something that we talked about with Mike Levin when he came to the live stream.

So if the world is one giant organism, is the niche constantly changing?

adapting to the species that are in it?

Is this a continuous adaptive active inference?

And just in terms of transcending timescales, you think about these symbiosis, I guess they're symbiosis, but relationships that develop between

orchids and their pollinators, for example.

So, I mean, these are intense co-evolution things that happen over many, many, many timescales.

And, I mean, we can think about the plant, is the plant a cognizer?

I mean, that's debatable.

I would say to a degree.

Like, I'm not binary here.

Like, yes, no is not really a good answer.

But is the niche maybe constantly adapting to systems to a degree?


SPEAKER_05:
I think that's a great point, really, really great point.

I do think the niche is adapting to systems, absolutely.

But I would say that the niche is adapting in a different way.

And we can use, of course, we're going to have to be specifics because adaptation is a policy in that sense.

adaptation in terms of what the niche is doing.

If the niche is not itself, okay, perhaps you want to, I can be accused of being biocentrist in one sense.

If the niche itself isn't a biological system,

then we can perhaps push against this idea that it's adapting in the same way that a biological system would adapt to.

And maybe one way of phrasing this, and I'm not sure if this is going to hopefully make it a bit clearer, my point, is that

Biological systems, one way of understanding them is that they have set points, right?

Moving set points throughout a particular trajectory, and this particular trajectory might be a trajectory across a phase space throughout their lives.

So you have a moving set.

And this moving set is something that's organized around a particular type of face-based organization.

And it's recapitulated within a particular type of phenotype, defines a phenotype, but characterizes a phenotype or a generative model.

with a particular, say, a field of dirt, we might be able to actually walk across a field of dirt or a set of cement stairs.

It might actually, over time, for a few hundred years, you have these interesting stairs at the castle of Edinburgh that actually dip.

And these dips in the cement are evidence that people have walked there before, but we tend to walk where other people have walked.

And this, perhaps one might call that an adaptation to a certain degree, but I think that might be pushing the limit on the word adaptation, given that that set of stairs does not have a set point.

It doesn't have the same type of, it's not the same type, I suppose, of self-organizing system.

It's not a self-organizing system in that sense.

And as such, I would think that, okay, well,

Maybe the niche does adapt to a certain degree.

But there's an adaptation with biological systems that are self-organizing and have organizational closure.

And I think this is quite important, that it's different than, say, abiotic systems.

I would love to talk about this in a bit.

It's a question that Blue brought up in the last livestream, was the manner in which we can actually understand

systems or identify particular types of individuals that are involving the environment.

So it's not actually saying that the environment is separate from the system.

Otherwise, we wouldn't actually be able to actually talk about the emergence of actually living systems.

We can get into that later, though.


SPEAKER_01:
So I have to just push back on you.

So think about the earth and the atmosphere of the earth.

Okay, now this is not necessarily a biological system.

This is nitrogen, carbon dioxide, water, clouds, et cetera, right?

But here we are humans releasing tons and tons of carbon into the atmosphere, totally changing the set point as you described it, like the homeostatic set point

or whatever, the non-equilibrium steady state density that the atmosphere of the Earth currently resides in and has resided in for X million years, right?

So, but we are changing that and we are seeing the Earth adapt to us and the changes that we're making in, just in terms of hurricanes, storms, I mean, the weather patterns are completely, and they're destroying large amounts of humans, right?

And drought, famine, all of the things that are going to

cascade through climate change as we see it progress.

So is this not adaptive active inference on the part of the Earth?

Or what do you think of that?


SPEAKER_05:
Really interesting.

I think in order to make that particular type of assumption, one would actually have to ascribe to something like a Gaia hypothesis, like Lovelock's Gaia hypothesis, or the same type of thing that Lin Margulis was into later in her life.

And I think that's an assumption that has to be made given the fact that, okay, well, just because a response happens chemically doesn't necessarily mean that it's not actually an adaptive response.

Gene expression is biochemical adaptation, right?

So it's not about just being chemical, using chemical or something like this, composition, changing molecular structure as some type of criterion for adaptation.

But I think there's an assumption that has to be made about what the system is there.

And if you're thinking about the Earth as a system, maybe the Earth is adapting to its constituent parts.

But that would involve intrinsically the Earth being a particular type of living system, given the fact that it has living parts.


SPEAKER_02:
One other quick thought on that is as a model comparison framework, so go back to SPM, DCM, all of our categorical model comparison techniques in the toolkit, we can actually evaluate, should we have cells as the units and then organisms and then the ecosystem and then the world, or should we use a different partitioning?

Which one of these models is explaining, predicting, designing, controlling better?

Or which one is more parsimonious?

I prefer simplicity over utility.

Or I have a function that balances simplicity and utility.

There's all kinds of frameworks.

That's kind of part of pluralism is starting with and being with that multiplicity of answers.

And then knowing who we are and what we use to decide on which models to use.

So Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'm very much like to keep that ecological niche in the picture.

So, you know, if it's organism in niche and groups of organism in niche, and then watershed and micro environment or micro climate as a niche, I think that kind of becomes like a defining organism or

unit in a way is like watch the watershed what's the kind of climate as experienced by that ecosystem and then of course you've got many ecosystems around the world from the arctic to the antarctic you know and it will be in between now they might all be collectively affecting the broader carbon dioxide levels of the broader ecosystem

But how that then jumps to make the whole world an organism becomes, for me, slightly challenging, right?

Because it was always a niche up to then.

And then suddenly it jumps to be an organism because we look at it from space and we see a nice round ball.

And it sort of looks alive.

So I wonder whether there's a... So one of the things I'm really interested in is

is like you're saying how things get into ascribed to the niche.

And we, we talked about the path walking on the path and in a way like that dispersive thing, animals can sort of also intuit some of that as well from the affordances and the directions.

And again, bringing stuff in from systemic design type approaches is one thing that's interesting is if you then say humans like humans, what we do is,

as a child and maybe some apes do this, but not many is we point at something as a child and then we went to the parent and that's becomes it's in the niche, but it becomes what they would call a boundary object in systemic design.

So you're trying to bring together a team around something which is beyond one discipline.

So what you need to do is you say, okay, we can't just use the variational free energy landscape of this

domain ecosystem, which we have all attuned to in our sort of own way, because now people are running by different rules, right?

We're running by the physicists and the biologists, right?

They're just going to be, so you get a boundary object, which you point to.

So it's something in the niche, and then you sort of work to that.

Um, so anyway, I just think there's something quite interesting then about like Daniel was saying there about, you know, what sort of language in do we use, but this scale problem comes back every time.

But I, I wondered, um, like the difference between a boundary object or something which can be defined, which I'm not sure if other animals can really do.

in the same way, maybe a dog when it urinates up a tree.

I was just thinking about that.

Does that become a boundary object in their world?

I don't know, but yeah, it's something that comes to mind.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Stephen.

And with transdisciplinarity,

In cancer biology, they've recognized the niche, the tumor and the stem cell niche and the micro environment.

And there's so much more to say on these very interesting topics.

Just in the last few minutes, we can go to a few of these final points.

In the dot one, it's always awesome to have the author and unpack some of the ideas.

And so this is kind of our little fractal dot two, setting us up for our discussion next week and thinking about implications and how does it influence how we act moving forward and what kinds of questions we're looking at.

You wrote about some of the implications for thinking about individuality from a cognitive perspective.

say it broadly.

And it'd be awesome to hear your thoughts on the folk psychological notion of the cognizer and where does the FEP come into play?

Right.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks for the question.

So the folk psychological notion of cognizer, again, my argument is that it piggybacks on

upon this idea of the folk biological notion of the individual.

And once we kind of free ourselves from thinking about individuals specifically in terms of replication dynamics, that opens up a space for us to think about cognizers that are discontinuous with replication or replicators.

And I think that's going to be very important, again, when taking this particular route of thinking about the evolution of cognition, when thinking about, for example, OK, if cognition goes all the way down to a certain degree,

then what part does it actually play in the construction of larger systems?

And why would the construction of larger systems actually be some type of adaptation for each of the systems involved?

So when we're thinking about, for example, I think one particular thing that is quite important, will be quite important to think about this for is, okay, the manner in which we

think about artificial intelligence, for example.

One way, of course, or two ways, of course, of doing this is we go for various specific tasks

whether it's going to be kind of computer vision or GPT-3 type tasks where we can actually analyze a large corpus of text and kind of recapitulate that.

That's one thing.

The other thing, of course, is the task general or kind of domain general notion of AI.

And I think in order to perhaps tread into the department or tread into that field of more kind of task generality, we're going to have to think about even simpler questions as to how can a system actually start maintaining itself according to its own tasks.

And again, we come back to this notion of how can we actually set a system up to have its own intrinsic motivation.

And one way to do this is perhaps to piggyback on living systems.

So you introduce a living system to an artificial system and have them communicate in such a way that's analogous to some type of symbiotic system.

And this is something, again, perhaps that Michael Levin has been thinking about doing, actually, in his lab.

And I think this is quite an interesting kind of method to think about the importance of symbiosis in developing artificially intelligent systems.

A system that can identify, go to a room, an embodied intelligent agent that can like,

traverse a room and identify all the dogs, that's great.

With an accuracy, a high accuracy level, that's fantastic.

But if they can't respond to the dog knowing that a dog is going to actually dismantle it, I'm not sure if I would want to call how intelligent that system would even be in terms of having basic intelligence.

And I think that FUP, an active inference, allows a particular type of perspective on the notion of basic intelligence or intelligence that's surrounded or

Yes, that's grounded in the notion of kind of a nest density or grounded in the notion of a type of a moving set point that's equivalent to a homeostatic moving homeostatic states and allostasis supporting states.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Matt.

Shannon?


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks for that.

How important, sort of drawing on what Flew said and Dave and Stephen, I think also earlier, how important some sort of affective or emotional state or awareness is in knowing and cognizing and

like how important that is for a symbiotic relationship to be called a cognizer and whether, you know, like the neural network that is working with the human, maybe to compose a piece of music, how important it is for that neural network to have cognizing capabilities of its own, or maybe some sort of effective awareness or some sort of effective processing

that it is able to develop in some way on its own or maybe only in symbiosis with a person

Um, and I don't know if, if this bobtail squid and the vibrio, like, do they have sort of effective awareness together?

Or does the squid seem to, you know, experience something like pain, I suppose would be one of the most basic effective states we might have.

So how important would basically is effective processing in delineating individuals or cognizers?


SPEAKER_05:
Great question, Shannon.

I'll take a go at it.

I do think that at a certain level of complexity, affective states play a huge role.

But because I'm...

I suppose I'm making an assumption that cognition goes all the way down and not every system is going to be an affect, have that capacity to have some type of affectual awareness.

One might actually think about some other type of sub component that plays a similar role as affect.

And perhaps that just might be something like, you know, something that grounds,

that grounds a particular type of motivation to stay in homeostatic states or to remain in particular homeostatic states.

And this can be, oh, Pamela Lyon has written about this just recently, actually.

And it's not affect necessarily, but it's valence, negative and positive valence that might not, and it has less to do with awareness

or sentience in that sense, but more to do with actually a particular type of organism or particular type of system responding in ways that, again, are responding in ways that keep it centered.

And whether or not that kind of valence, a bacteria might climb a gradient of glucose, for example,

But bacterium might not have any type of experience of that glucose gradient.

But somehow, we might say that bacterium is actually positively valenced.

It's something that it's attracted to.


SPEAKER_06:
Mm-hmm.


SPEAKER_05:
And maybe in simpler systems, you have something more like the notion of valence rather than affect, but a certain period of complexity after a certain perhaps degree of complexity arises.

Affect is very important.

And I think particularly when it comes into multicellular systems that perhaps that have to actually compute

much more information, has to compete much more information and has to interact in their environments.

Their environmental niches are much more, using a term by Kim Struell, much more opaque.

So affective information, the manner in which we can use affect and how that affects cognition, I think it becomes quite important.

But I'm not exactly sure.

Number one, there's probably not a line.

It probably develops.

But just what that function is, is a different story.

I don't know.

Do you have any ideas about that?


SPEAKER_03:
I don't have an idea about where that would start, but I feel like it would fall off.

So we might have the small-scale, like our bobtail squid and vibrio, who might have something like valence that they're responding to.

And then as we get slightly larger organisms, you know, dogs, people, then affect will play a lot more of a role.

But then as we have bigger systems, like multiple humans, what is the affective, like...

state of a crowd of people like we can ascribe like they look angry or they sound angry but they as a crowd are they feeling something as a crowd kind of like group intentionality is there a group effective state it might kind of start falling off again so you might have this sort of u-shaped curve of where valence matters and then somewhere here in the sweet spot effective states or emotions really matter


SPEAKER_04:
That's super.

Definitely something to, absolutely something I want to think about.


SPEAKER_02:
wool and also reminiscent of the discussion of affect as well as higher order parameters in deep parametric active inference where we even talked about which states were opaque or not whereas opaque usually meaning like you can't see it you can't see in but actually the opaque mental states are the ones that we do experience so that was in the sanved smith paper and um whether

Other systems feel things.

What is it like to be a squid?

What is it like to be a symbiosis?

That's the phenomenology and the metaphysics.

But what is it like for us to model that system as if there's a higher level control parameter?

We can know what that's like.

It's a lot like this conversation.

So just...

Everybody can provide a last comment on this awesome discussion.

I think the takeaway for me is that in a post-Darwin biology, it's easy to use the simplified trifecta of evolution by natural selection, phenotypic variability, heritability of the phenotype, fitness correlation, and variation in fitness.

and then project that onto all the kinds of individuality cognitive the rights and responsibilities the economic unit the sentient unit all of those as just simply under the coattails of the darwinian replicator and i think pluralism and a bevy of other perspectives suggest that that's just not the case blue and then anyone else with a last comment


SPEAKER_01:
I just wanted to say thanks for coming.

I really enjoyed this discussion and I just started reading your paper, your 2021 paper with Pizzullo, the modeling ourselves.

And I hope you'd consider coming back to talk about it with us.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks so much.

It's been a really incredible conversation discussion.

So thank you all for inviting me.


SPEAKER_02:
Shannon or Steven or Dave, any last comments?

Awesome.

Well, all participants, thank you so much.

And Matt, especially for writing the paper and coming to talk about it and seeing the .0 before.

So peace out, everybody.

See you next week.

Bye-bye.

Bye.

## VXLNOfkH5Rg

SPEAKER_06:
Hello everybody, welcome to Act-Inf Lab live stream number 30.2.

Today it is October 12th, 2021, and we're having our second discussion, group discussion, on the paper of Matt Sims, How to Count Biological Minds, Symbiosis, the Free Energy Principle, and Reciprocal Multiscale Integration.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for livestreams.

At this short link, you can see some of the past, present, and future live streams in the lab.

And in the first tab, you'll see the Tuesday numbered live stream.

So every Tuesday, we have a participatory group discussion, two weeks per paper.

And then there's the dot zero video, which is just sort of a contextualizing video.

And then these other tabs like guest stream, model stream and math stream are opportunities for just one-off events on any topic that people think is relevant for the lab.

So get in touch if you want to join one or co-organize one of these streams.

Today in 30.2 we're going to be continuing to learn and discuss this awesome paper by Matthew Sims how to count biological minds and we're just having fun and discussing last week we had Matt join which was a great discussion and we look forward to everyone's input and if you're watching in the live chat or if you're leaving a comment later look forward to continuing the discussion

Today we're pretty much just going to introduce ourselves and say hello, and then we will go wherever we feel relevant and explore different questions.

People can ask about a figure or a section of the text, and then also Blue and others have prepared some discussion questions to get into.

So we can start with the warm-up and introductions.

So I'm Daniel and I'm a researcher in California.

And I think the thing I'm excited about today, just like with many DOT2s, is taking a lot of these cool ideas that came up in the paper and in the DOT0 and the DOT1, and then

synthesizing and consolidating and then asking okay well now what next how do we go from this conversation theory users and resources reciprocal multi-scale integration and then apply it to different systems so i think that will be a fun topic and i'll pass to stephen


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Yes, Stephen here.

I'm in Toronto on a nice sunny day.

And I'm really interested as well, actually, in building on these ideas.

I'm really excited that the folk psychology and folk biology was brought up.

And I think that gives permission, I think, to build that further and maybe extends into how our phenomenology connects to our folk psychology.

Because our folk psychology allows us all to be

inherent psychologists of ourselves maybe so that's interesting and we just enjoy it analyzing our own reality so i'm going to pass it over to dave um yep i'm in the mountains of the philippines and uh it's the end of the rainy season and so we'll have no weather until next year


SPEAKER_04:
I am pumped up about the multiple disciplines that are coming together in the discussion of the paper that we're doing now and also about Bobby Azarian who is not afraid to jump down into the trenches and face the lunatics with their machetes and even less pleasant arms and getting a note together to him to suggest some topics that we might want to


SPEAKER_06:
talk about well two two things one off a question about bobby but first was when you said there's no weather it's kind of like what steven said about folk psychology

no experience, you know, just like, well, now I'm awake and now experience is going to stop.

It's kind of like weather stopping, like weather's always happening.

It's always changing in different ways.

And our experience is also always happening and always in different ways.

But just like weather sometimes only gets studied or discussed in the context of catastrophe or pathology or of extremely unusual events, there's this like baseline weather that's just the climate.

and so that's very interesting about our day-to-day felt realities and then how everybody is in the driver's seat with respect to their experience so sort of the mundaneness of weather the mundaneness of experience but also it's something that can be really unpacked steven


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, exactly.

The mundaneness is interesting, especially when you think of the priors that set things up.

Because in some ways, it's like the psychologist in psychology gets to decide on the modeling that's going to be used to look at people.

Whereas in folk psychology, this is the implicit modeling that we are framing ourselves around.

And, of course, the same with the folk biology, which this paper brings up, and maybe the folk physics and the whatever.

So these kind of implicit priors, you can't get away from them.

And maybe, in a way, it brings us into this interesting, are those priors, how much of them are psychological, or are they more like practice-based phenomenological questions?

So it's an interesting balance there.


SPEAKER_06:
Cool.

And then the second question.

So Bobby Azarian is going to be doing a guest stream in November.

We have a few guest streams coming up, so there's multiple.

But Dave, what made you excited about his presentation or work with the universal Bayesianism?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, it's not so much that particular approach.

It's that he's been doing a lot of work on

cult formation, cult dynamics, the growth of violent cults, especially in the U.S.

right now.

And that directly ties into Philip Guerin's work on the neuroscience of delusion.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay, very interesting.

And so I'm just showing on the screen, those are the dates.

November 19th is with Bobby, but we'll have...

Greg Henriquez on the 11th, or on October 22nd for number 11.

Then Martin Boots for 12 on October 25th.

Adam Saffron on November 8th.

And then November 19th.

So cool guest streams coming up.

And of course, everyone's always welcome to join.

So let's return.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I didn't notice you'd gotten Boots.

Great.

I am very pleased.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

Sometimes people just sneak in there, you know.

Okay.

So let's...

return to 30.2 and uh i'm sure blue will join so let's just save some

tasty pieces for her that she added in.

And then otherwise I think we can, maybe let's start with these questions on seven.

So blue in absentee, asynchronous blue, our favorite shade contributing to the discussion.

So let's see what we think and if we can connect it to some of the ideas or sections or figures of the paper.

at any given time can agents act autonomously as long as there is a defined prior and then I think maybe that's connected to the second question is there a difference between a cognizer and an autonomous agent so how are the terms of cognition agent slash agency and autonomy how do these terms connect

if we imagine a three-dimensional space and we think okay you could have you know ten zero zero you have ten cognition zero agency zero autonomy what is the space of the possible of cognition agency and autonomy and then how are these different terms linked are one out of necessity uh leading the other or lagging the other so stephen and then dave


SPEAKER_00:
mean this question about a defined prior I mean the other option is is it if they don't need a defined prior and they can build up their inference process without having that prior so I'm not sure which way that might be the most important is it is the autonomous agent

obviously we're assuming the agent can survive, you know, this is not a bolt of lightning or something.

So it's something that can have some sort of non-equilibrium steady state over time.

Is it more about the autonomous agent being able to act and process its active influence independently of others?

And that's maybe more key.

And maybe that's the sort of thing that happens with cancer as well, you know?


SPEAKER_01:
So I don't know.

Welcome, Blue.


SPEAKER_06:
We're just on slide seven, working through some of your interesting questions.

Dave?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, on that, the first question, in the dialogue between Friston and Mark Solms, they use prior basically to mean an affect or the other brainstem resident biological imperatives.

And I think Soms would tell you that except in anesthesia, you know, deep, deep anesthesia, and perhaps coma, there's always operative priors because you really can't dissociate the homeostatic goal seeking from the higher processes since the higher processes are

completely dependent on and shaped by the homeostatic activities.

And I wouldn't even accept coma without qualification because of the, I don't know if this research has been borne out, but there are therapists who have simply proceeded under the assumption that deeply comatose individuals actually are

taking something away from their experience.

And they're finding that in recovery from coma that, yeah, if you talk to people on a daily basis or you talk about interesting things or unresolved problems, this shapes the way they're going to talk about their experience afterwards.

One thing that happens is that people's thinking becomes extremely slow.

Minutes rather than seconds.

And that if you actually speed up videos of the response of comatose individuals, you'll see response.

And just like if you slow down high-resolution videos of infants, you'll see that, yes, they're highly attuned to what's going on around them.

They do have their own priors through which they're responding to events and actually shaping them in a healthy diet.


SPEAKER_06:
interesting so i think starting with uh with stephen's point and then anyone can of course can just raise their hand or write a question live chat so the question about starting with a prior and whether we start with a very defined prior like a domain specific prior or whether that's learnt

that is reminiscent of the difference between first order cybernetics and then higher order cybernetics like the first order cybernetics of chemistry is your priors on chemistry and the second order would be your approach to learning or your dynamics of flexibility around study habits or around updating your generative model of chemistry as well as the second order generative model of learning

so as we start to sort of meet in the middle with building active inference up to describe and model these increasingly recursive and symbolic cognizers we'll start to see the movement from models that merely describe the mountain car

into models of mental action into higher order cybernetic models of mental action so that will be very cool and then um i think you mentioned the lightning bolt and so i was coming back to this this um trilemma or these three terms if there's more terms could be added like um does lightning bolt have agency does it have autonomy

Well, it sure seems to just act the way that it's apt to.

So it seems like an autonomous system.

It's not waiting for a Bluetooth connection with something else.

So it's high autonomy.

And then does it have agency, though?

And so how is there a difference?

And then cognition, especially because the example of the lightning bolt, it's electricity.

So if what we've been talking about with Professor Levin and others is that bioelectricity is sort of the fundamental, that's where biotic and abiotic cognition come together or where they blur.

So then is a lightning bolt cognitive?

And...

So that was, and then just a last comment was the speed of perception and cognition and action.

Well, active inference is about integrated modeling of perception, cognition, and action.

So then we're in a quasi computational framework.

There are computationalists among us, people who think that cognition is computation, as well as people who take more nuanced steps or reject that notion.

But this is kind of like our clock speed.

This is like the speed of that loop.

What's the tick speed of the generative model?

And that relates to the thickness of our temporal experience, like flickering images at 30 per second are perceived as continuous.

So we don't know exactly what the clock speed is or whether a clock speed is even the apt metaphor, but surely there are stimuli that are so close spatially or temporally, we cannot tell the difference.

So it was just cool to hear like that different ages and different conditions might have different, um,

parameters for their internal generative model and perception action loops.

Blue, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_02:
So going back to whether or not a lightning bolt

has agency, it certainly seems that if there is a defined prior, like for a lightning bolt, there's a defined prior state that the dielectric constant has to break down for the lightning bolt to be able to occur.

So as long as there's that defined prior, then yes, the lightning bolt acts autonomously.

But does it have agency?

Well, what's the goal of the lightning bolt?

Is it to minimize the electricity buildup in the cloud?

Or what would the goal of a lightning bolt be?

And so that's kind of what you think about, or what I think about,

When it comes to like cells, okay, the goal of a single cell organism is to maintain homeostasis at some, you know, set point or within some range.

So, but a lightning bolt, really, what's the goal of a lightning bolt?

And so I think about that.

I don't know.

So does a lightning bolt have a goal?

And that's kind of where the sense of agency comes into play for me.

And yeah, if you define the goal in an autonomous car, your goal is to safely transport people from A to B without running anyone over or getting smashed.

That's very simple, I know, but obeying all the traffic rules and so forth.

you can establish a goal for an autonomous car, but does the car come up with its own goal or is that like a human driven goal?

And is the car then a tool for the human?

So, so there's like some fuzzy boundaries here that kind of always point toward the life mind continuity thesis, which I think we probably haven't gone to yet, but maybe we'll get there where life has to happen at some degree for, for,

cognition to occur, maybe, or maybe not.


SPEAKER_06:
Very cool.

So the goal of the lightning bolt.

So let's think of a few physical systems we know and love, like a ball rolling down to the bottom of a bowl.

It's minimizing its kinetic energy differential.

That's one description, not to say that's the explanation, but it's minimizing something by rolling to the bottom of the bowl without fail.

Similarly, when there's an electric charge buildup between the cloud and the ground or between two electric components inside of a electronic device, there's like a zap of electricity that can also be understood in terms of minimizing some energy differential.

That's what's interesting about active inference is we're also thinking about minimizing differentials of information

And so what stories are explanations or descriptions of the ball rolling down kinetically or the lightning strike electromagnetically?

And then are we gonna have the exact same template of explanation for action of biological entities?

So that's a, and where does teleology and directedness, like is the ball rolling into the bottom of the bowl?

Is that end directed?

Or is it just directed only by approximate teleology, like a next step only?

So people say evolution has no end.

It's just a local optimization process, for example.

So it was behavior along those lines.

And then the second point, then Steven and Dave was like,

is the system of interest the primary cognizer or is it being used in an extended or an instrumental fashion wasn't sure on the answer there but that speaks to

Matt's paper with the users and the resources.

And so there's cases where you have like an adaptive active inference agent utilizing a mere active inferencer as a tool.

Like you could be using a thermometer as a tool as you investigate the cave.

But then there's this other reciprocal case where actually the primary cognizers are sort of adaptive on both sides.

So there's a lot to explore there.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, the idea of things being either...

frozen at a certain state or having the ability to be a whole to stay in that state I think about well I mean on a big scale the sun right the sun has got an energy differential but it's self-maintaining right because as it keeps going it more and more material can be fused in the middle and it keeps so you get into the broader question of complex adaptive systems of which

non-equilibrium steady state systems are a subset so you've got this um you know there's an interesting point there and and when you have something which dissipates and can't form a markovian sort of boundary um you so it will lose that but there are times when you can maintain that for instance

If you have a globule of molten silica, plunge it into cold water, you can freeze the liquid state.

It's still a liquid, but it's glass now.

So it's maintaining that over longer periods of time.

But is it still non-equal?

Has it formed?

Is it just waiting to allow its energy gradient to dissipate?

Or has it now managed to hold its state more concretely?


SPEAKER_06:
very interesting has a true pattern or structural integrity been reached or are we just sort of pausing or freeze freeze thaw on the energy differential just sort of make the ball made of velcro so it's still stuck up there dave


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, there's a hilarious tour de force by Stuart Bartlett on life as a solution to the planet Earth's dilemma of having too much heat and needing to get rid of it faster.

And he breaks down all these amazing processes, culminating with the reverse Krebs-Citric acid cycle as increasing the efficiency with which

Heat can be radiated by creating just the right kinds of molecules in enough concentration to catalyze that problem of, boy, it's hot in here.


SPEAKER_06:
This it's kind of like the science fiction classification.

I don't know what class, you know, class one, class two, class three civilizations, whether their energy capacity is like less than a star, equal to a star, multiple stars, some thermodynamic perspectives on the emergence and the elaboration of life.

When we see living systems like Schrodinger or Scott David as

entropic systems that are resisting dissipation and you realize that for every unit of order that is constituted inside of the markov blanket that more disorder must occur outside you know that it can't be um free lunch and it isn't going to be one-to-one either so you're making an excess of disorder which is what pulls chemical reactions forward when you order like for every you know one pound of muscle organized on your body

more than one pound of muscle equivalents have to be dissipated.

And then it is actually this imperative that's thermodynamic for life to continue inventing potentially even increasingly seemingly inefficient mechanisms.

So that's sometimes what I think about when someone talks about the energy use of cryptocurrency.

I think, you know, if you went into the cell and you said, well, we already have the enzyme making the forward reaction, why do we need the one making the backwards reaction?

That's wasting energy.

Well, it gives flexibility to the cell and it pushes the reactions forward and it gives capacity to regulate very adaptively.

So it's not always like we can just look at the heat producing light bulb and say that that's the inefficient one.

So blue and then Steven.


SPEAKER_02:
so i wonder too thermodynamically um is like life ultimately causing like the heat death of the universe right like are we using up all of the the thermodynamic free energy that's available um with the process of life like we are like in the scott david sense um you know entropy secreting right we're the only entropy i mean life is the only entropy minimizing

thing that I can think of, but I mean, is this ultimately going to lead to the lack of free energy, thermodynamic free energy that's available to do work?

Which is just an interesting thing to think about.

And then also I was listening to some older live streams and maybe Dave actually probably has the knowledge to kind of clarify for me, but I always thought that informational free energy

was fundamentally connected to thermodynamic free energy.

And so someone had suggested that that was not the intention of the free energy principle.

It was never supposed to involve thermodynamics initially.

And I just wonder, is that some abstract bridge that was formed, the connection between infodynamic and thermodynamic

entropy?

Or is that a real concrete connection?

And so for me, it's something I've always thought about as like, you know, links through physics and statistical physics, like those two things go together.

But is there a disconnect there that I'm perhaps not aware of?

And was the free energy principle not meant to include thermodynamics?

So I would love to hear what you guys think about that.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, Dave, go for it.

And then Stephen.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, you know, I think both entropy and the free energy principle are higher order metaphors or analogies, at least.

I'm guessing an entropy is roughly a third level analogy.

You have to go up to that level of ramification to cover the various cases.

But there are people working on that.

I think I sent you a paper by Sean Carroll on the thermodynamic interpretation of... What was it?

The free energy principle?

I just sent that a couple of days ago.

I don't know if you saw that.

I dropped it in one of the chats.


SPEAKER_06:
Dropped it in the corner of a labyrinth.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

Yeah, I'm going to have to go back to my borders.

I think I've left too much in his various labyrinths.


SPEAKER_05:
Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, there's a couple of good points there.

I suppose one thing in terms of life, it's trying to stay in that Goldilocks zone.

So there's times when it's trying to...

well, in terms of heat anyway, reduce the heat, and sometimes it might want to gain heat.

But it doesn't really care per se.

It's like the niche itself will have a greater fitness.

And if there's enough fluctuations over time and enough feedback loops, in theory, you'll sort of gain the carbon dioxide levels as best can serve

the overall production of carbon mass in theory.

But in terms of the piece around, I think it's a good conversation around active inference versus the free energy principle.

Because the free energy principle, or variation of free energy,

Geoffrey Hinton's work and the recognition models and work that just takes perceptual data coming in deep minds can work with reducing free energy information but when you bring action into the game that's the interesting thing because then it's the action that brings in the energy in a way because by the action being more efficient

the the energy serve becomes part of the landscape so and whereas the perception peace you kinda tied more to if there was no action active infuse just basing inferences kind of all information up and down but once you start bringing action into the game that's when it starts to get big interesting


SPEAKER_06:
It's a lot to think about.

Information is usually framed more on the inference side than the action side.

We know there are information theoretic approaches to control theory, and there's

kinds of connections that you know 2021 we can look back at and say that have been made but information is very aligned with knowledge and inference whereas thermodynamics brings in physical constraints energy and action like what is temperature if not a summary descriptor of the actions of molecules

Whereas information tends to be a little bit more abstracted and disembodied and thermodynamics, even if it hasn't been connected to 4E cognition, extended, embedded, encultured, et cetera, it at least is closer to it.

Like the pressure volume relationships of a gas, they relate to its context and to how it is actually enacting

physics so then if we think about in informational physics first off how far can we get with bringing thermodynamics into information big topic and then where is control and action in that kind of a model Stephen


SPEAKER_00:
yeah this is interesting to bring in and also if you go back to gibbs free energy and the way it was traditionally used i mean you basically have reactants and you have products which is basically where we were in terms of an equilibrium state and where we ended up and then there's a force that's going to drive that there's an enthalpy force i.e an energy change

which will drive things and will succeed depending on the activation energy of whatever's in between, which can be calculated.

And then there's this kind of entropic force, which is basically cough, cough.

It's just inferred basically by what the reaction actually did.

But because you're only going from equilibrium state to equilibrium state, whatever happens in the middle was just like,

I don't know.

Basically, if the truth be told, it's just entropy, right?

But it's not just this black box.

In this case, it's actually all the stuff that's going on on the journeys is where active influence is sort of in the process.

So entropy or thermodynamic entropy is kind of interesting because

There is somehow this enthalpy term in terms of energy that there's an entropic force, they call it in chemistry, which is like how the entropic shift sort of pushes the reaction and gives it a force, which then combines with the enthalpy force, which is basically just whether it's going to give off loads of heat or absorb heat.

I'm sorry, I should say energy absorbable, you know, or emit energy.

So this is where the I think it's not entirely clear quite how that might mix up in.

And maybe sometimes it's safer to not make the analogy because it's non equilibrium.

And non-equilibrium chemistry has only really started to happen in any sort of coherent way since the 1990s in terms of research.

It's all been equilibrium state, equilibrium state, and hand waving in the middle.

Thanks, Stephen.

Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
So I, like whatever happens in the middle, I only had abbreviated PCAM and like this kind of makes me wish that I had more and, you know, then like a full semester of thermodynamics to really like,

be able to screw these pieces together, but maybe they don't all actually screw together with a perfect fit.

So, I mean, I think about, okay, is it an exothermic or an endothermic reaction?

Does energy go in or does energy come out?

And essentially all life is...

like all of life is endothermic, like some energy has to go in.

And where is that energy in life?

Like because we exist in this non equilibrium point, like life isn't spontaneous.

And so where is this like storage happening?

And like in

Some, like, maybe it's a very abstract link, but I think about the energy that goes into creating life as information.

Because it's essentially this DNA blueprint that we all have that carries on from generation to generation that is the catalyst for the reactions that occur that create life.

So that's just always, I don't know, how I think about it.


SPEAKER_06:
Here's one image that you'll see on your shared screen.

So this relates to Gibbs free energy.

I mean, you mentioned it, we've been talking a little bit about chemistry.

And so this is already pre-adapted to, instead of the Gibbs free energy, it's like the pain axis.

So we can quibble with the specific metaphor, but the piece that I think is interesting is the difference between the thermodynamically favored and the kinetically favored reactions.

So the green line is kinetically favored.

Like if there's a ball rolling, it's easier to climb the B hill.

So it's easier to get on that.

There's less friction, less of a activation energy cost.

And therefore it's kinetically more accessible to take the green route to get you to product D. And then that A minus D is the delta free energy.

Whereas the thermodynamically favored product, which is like A to E, this is like a complete combustion versus a partial combustion, more energy is released.

There's a bigger delta G, but that product may not be as kinetically accessible.

And so this is like classic OChem course questions.

some reactions you want to do them really hot because you just want to get over a kinetic barrier and wherever you end up is going to be okay other times you want to carry out the reaction very slowly so that you can be sure that the only high energy balls that come across are only going to take this green road and so it doesn't like combust so you keep the reaction cold and then in this example

it's already been connected to sort of behavioral economics, like making a bad decision versus making a good decision.

You know, you're choosing what to eat for dinner.

Is it gonna be something with a low barrier, high kinetic accessibility, but maybe

not healthy, but where do we transmute from the kinetic versus thermodynamics of chemicals to kinetics and thermodynamics of information and decision-making and action, and then

closing the triangle would be like, is there a bioenergetic or a metabolic account for decision-making?

Like it literally uses more glucose in your brain to make taxing decisions.

And that would sort of close the loop in an interesting way.

So Steven, then Dave.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so this is also quite a useful diagram because, I mean, you'd have that kind of activation transition state as being the kind of the hill, right?

So the higher the hill, the more energy is needed to make that transition state become available.

But it is a case of it going from left to right within reason.

I mean, there is that idea that things can move both ways.

But what's interesting is,

The more dilly-dallying, to use an English phrase, which I do a lot of, but the more dilly-dallying is not necessarily the better thing there, right?

Because the more dilly-dallying the molecules are doing, the less they're going to get over the hump.

Because it's really a case of this energy dynamic and entropy being maybe going to help because in certain cases, but normally it's a hindrance, it's something to slow it down.

But the difference is when you're dealing with variations.

See, when you've got variational free energy, now you can get information.

The dilly-dallying gives you...

variation in entropy and that can give you like entropy itself doesn't necessarily well we don't entropy is a funny term but noise alone doesn't give you any information variations in noise can give you information and variations in noise need a reference of a non well they don't i don't know if they need that but let's say they it helps to have a non-equilibrium steady state to reference against

That whole non-equilibrium piece and complex attractor states and all of that sort of stuff doesn't really feature.

It's not an attractor state at the top, per se.

It's a transition state that some molecules go to or some configurations happen to by chance arrive at.

But obviously, it's maybe not like that alone.

There's this kind of inference process


SPEAKER_06:
Yes, so this reaction would be reversible, but imagine if the ball gets to here, now it's a 50-50, it could roll either way.

It's at the transition point.

That's what enzymes stabilize, transition state complexes.

They reduce activation energy barriers.

But now if you were down here in P2,

it would be a positive delta G. So it'd be energetically uphill because this is what they call a thermodynamically irreversible reaction.

So KEQ, like the coefficient of how complete the reaction is going to proceed is going to be way to the right on this one.

But if it just looked like a hump, then in the long run, you'd get

an even number on both sides.

It's kind of like ergodicity.

And so it is, there's a lot that can be seen here.

So Dave, and then blue.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

The, uh, advertising meme for that expensive can opener that needs to be pushed that would, uh, bind to the, the hump.

And actually like you, I think you said, flatten the hump effectively.

Um,

And how does that happen?

Presumably, you're getting a reduction of cognitive dissonance.

It no longer looks dissonant to imagine, oh, spending all that money I feel so guilty about buying a $40 book the other day, how can I justify buying a $12 can opener instead of a $2 one?


SPEAKER_06:
and the point of sale oh just tap it's lower kinetic friction versus you know pull out your um your shells count them blue and then steven


SPEAKER_02:
So one critical thing when you're talking about whether or not a reaction is reversible or not, so when you have the free energy of the product and the reactant, if the free energy is the same, it's completely a reversible reaction.

But the fact that it's an irreversible reaction is driven by the lower free energy of the product, of the reaction.

And so I think about things like...

you know, even just the self-assembly.

So we can talk about self-assembly of life of cells, but also self-assembly of molecules, right?

So, so molecules will spontaneously, like, you know, salt spontaneously dissolves in water and that's driven by charge, right?

And hydrogen bonds and, you know, the polar polarity of water.

And so when you have this, um,

you know, kind of spontaneous reactions that occur that are driven by like molecular charge, is that that's, again, like an information catalyst, because the charge is information.

Is it positive or negative?

Is it a North Pole?

Is it a South Pole?

And so that without that kind of information, would these reactions push forward?


SPEAKER_06:
and one way that computers over the last hundred years have revolutionized this discussion is like if you just say well of course information has nothing to do with it we're talking about just chemicals tossing around in space and we're talking about thermodynamics there's no need to bring information into it and then someone says well i'm talking about the chemical components on my hard drive or i'm talking about the chemistry of this processor so it's like

There is an information thermodynamic link.

We are putting energy into this processor or hard drive.

There is chemistry happening.

Who will link it?

It's no longer a tenable position to say that there just is no linkage or it wouldn't even be useful.

At the very least, it would be extremely useful, if not beyond useful, to understand this nexus.

So it's kind of like that info thermodynamic link

marriage is already well in progress and we're using devices that are empirical proofs, even if the conceptual details are not quite filled in yet.

Blue, and then Steven.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Just to respond to that.

It's like Maxwell's demon is essentially can be replaced by a computer, right?

Like, so a computer can sit on top of the box and decide whether the, you know, big molecules go this way or the hot molecules go this way and the cold molecules go that way.

But then you'd have to put the computer in a fridge and you'd have to plug the fridge in.

Right.

So there's all this, like the thought experiment of, um, you know, the information separation or the information filtering taking place, um,

with computers.

And so that's also like another direct link between the infodynamic and thermodynamic, you know, capacities.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Stephen.

Yeah, this is really interesting.

Yeah, this link.

So what gets really interesting is when it when there's those endothermic.

So, for instance, actually, we used to use this when we used to do reactions in the lab.

So like if you want to get a load of ice, basically dump a load of salt into it and then your ice goes down to like minus 18 degrees.

right so now you can start doing reactions at minus 18 degrees and your beaker because you can immerse it in this so you're um well what's just happened there right you've just dropped the temperature that doesn't make sense so this is where this entropic you know the ice the whole way the ice melts and thaws and if you know if you drop the temperature very very


SPEAKER_06:
drop the temperature drop the beat drop the video chat r.i.p steven we'll continue though he'll rejoin um this slide which i just put the image up this is like in the wikipedia article on kinetic versus thermodynamic control like one doesn't have to be a chemist to see that we're taking a few very interesting esoteric symmetrical molecules

And then there's some transition state complex.

And then in the blue, if it's very cold, it's going to form this product.

If it's very warm, it forms a different product.

So the ratio and the temperature and the solvent, there's so many details to explore, but it's just an example about like thinking fast and slow.

Type one and type two, Kahneman, you know, decision-making frameworks.

What's the type one decision?

Where is it really being thought through?

You know, hey, chill out, cool down, slow your horses, make the right decision versus, you know,

Buying under pressure, time pressure for decisions, that's one of the major threats to cognitive security and good decision-making is not having enough time or spending too much time on a decision, which is implicitly taking away time

from another decision because in the lab, we can just heat things up, cool them down, but we only get one sequence of action.

So in a broader sense, we can't just perform well on single decisions because we also need to do that sort of Bayesian estimation of how much time should we be spending on this decision, Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
so just thinking about time i mean time is always the fourth axis right time is always the other other thing but i mean we have these things that we say like time is money right like so so what is the cost of time um and like i think about things like time effort energy and money as all like things that i put in to drive a reaction forward like things that i put in to create a result right time effort energy and money

and so is there some kind of um like quantifiable interchange between time and money or time and energy or time and effort or um i mean it's time always the entropy increasing thing but like so okay entropy increases with time right but

Like I put time into something, right?

So is this, am I putting entropy into something to create a result?

That seems very backwards.

And it's just cool to think about time as like, you know, something that you put in to drive a reaction forward.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_06:
And quality time, like attention.

Maybe it's like, you know, if we had a unit in erg or a calorie of attention and

You know, the calories, the temperature, heat of some metal sphere and a cloud, you know, there's different amounts of specific heat.

And so maybe individual's attention will be different.

It's different to get the attention of peer reviewer one versus peer reviewer two.

But is there a commonality for attention and does that help make decisions get pushed along the road?

Blue, maybe you could introduce this nice set of slides on life-mind continuity.


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So there's maybe the first question first, and then we can maybe talk about the life-mind continuity thesis.

So this is a quote from the paper.

It says, adaptive active inference requires that a system autonomously engage in active inference, maximizing sensory evidence for its own existence.

So this kind of is a different... Yeah, and they cited this reference, and this is from the Sims paper.

But...

I just thought about what is evidence for your own existence?

Like when I pulled this quote out, and does that require self-awareness?

Like, do I exist?

I think, therefore I am.

It's very like Descartes.

And like, that's evidence for your existence.

But like, does a little cell even, is it self-aware enough to know that it exists?

I mean, is like the desire to not be extinguished

awareness of your own existence um so i think about you know it's sensory evidence for your model or for the validity of your model so so that's kind of always how i think about it model evidence is not evidence for my existence it's evidence for the validity of my model so that's kind of how i've always thought about it but it just was interesting this um this phrasing that was used by by sims uh um because i just was curious is there a difference between

evidence for your existence and model evidence.

And just what do you guys think about that?

Or am I the only one that was like, that's kind of weird.


SPEAKER_06:
There's a lot of pieces here.

So one piece is that in active inference, the preferences are over sensory outcomes, not over hidden state estimates.

So instead of maximizing values of hidden state estimates, like making it maximally safe out there,

that situation of bodily safety would be reframed as maximizing evidence for observing our observations in their preferred states.

So one little flourish that is active inference germane is this focus on the sensory evidence rather than inferred hidden states.

And then that is an interesting question about is it the model of itself?

What is this?

How are we getting sensory evidence

for ourself and is that the imperative for action?

And it just reminded me, cause you said, you know, I think therefore I am.

this is um uh Latin post hoc ergo pro proctor hook after this therefore because of this it's like the post hoc fallacy so I think therefore I am and then of course you know Q the 50 frist and papers I am therefore I think every possible inversion like is it that thought begets

life or does life beget thought and then if we're only going to find both of them inextricably tied up in actual systems what is the partitioning or the compartmentalizing that is variously meaningful or true or


SPEAKER_02:
So that inversion is really cool.

And, and also speaks to the podcast that was released yesterday, the podcast episode where it's clipped from, I think live stream five, six point, no 5.2.

So there was a lot of discussion about change your mind, change your life.

And then the inversion of that is change your life, change your mind.

Right.

I think therefore I am, I am therefore I think it's just, that's all this action perception loop of active inference.

Um, yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
Here's the Friston paper.

I am therefore, I think he, he, he did go there.

He's been there.

This is an interesting, um,

interesting paper.

It even begins, the first sentence is, how does Schrodinger's question, which is what is life, touch on philosophical propositions such as Descartes' famous proposition, cognito ergo sum, I think, therefore I am.

And then a little, not exactly a formal connection, but this weekend is cognitio 2021.

So kind of another illusion there.

But yeah, what does it mean?

for sensory evidence of our own existence is that our um our proprioception and our our thermo perception and taste or is this referring to a higher level of mental activity like as we saw in um the sanford smith paper on mental action

the observables of one level so like the outcomes of the higher order mental model can be plugged into the priors of a lower model or the hidden state estimates of a lower model so like is observing our attention maximizing evidence for a model which we pay attention to different things where does where does that play in with life mind continuity what is that question

Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
Got to hit unmute, I got it.

So the distinction that Sims made in the paper between adaptive active inference and near active inference.

So my question is whether this distinction follows the kind of evolutionary late comer path or if it's in line with the life-mind continuity thesis.

And so we can kind of unpack all of those in the next couple of slides.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
So the life-mind continuity thesis.

So I pulled from this paper by Kirchhoff and Froese, where they asked the question, are mental phenomena restricted to living systems?

And there's several viewpoints here.

that the first one is, obviously you can answer no, and there's a couple of different ways.

And so the cognitivist viewpoint is that some cognitive systems can be living systems, but minds are really associated with computational processes

that have semantic, contentful properties.

And minds can be realized independently from life, given the right kind of artificial support system.

And so this allows mind to exist artificially, essentially.

And then there's the overly generous, non-cognitivist free energy principle

that all systems can maintain their variables within a limited range of values.

All systems that do this can be understood as having some kind of mentality or proto-mentality, given that the FPP casts any system that maintains structural integrity in a fluctuating environment,

as engaged in predicting its own future states.

And this is kind of the pan-psychic take on, you know, that life can exist in, or not that life, but that mind can exist in things like molecules that are undergoing reactions.

So there's, I mean, in everything, there's a mind.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks for this really helpful breakdown.

So huge topic, a lot of implications.

Is it okay just to throw out a cell phone that we're done using, or would that be a rights issue?

So are mental phenomena one-to-one, restricted, necessary, sufficient?

How is cognition related to life as we thermodynamically know it?

and some strong shots from the no side, which is saying, which first off is always a somewhat easier position to defend because you can just say, look, it's a Venn diagram overlap and we don't know.

So who's to say that it's restricted because maybe there's some overlap, maybe there's A but not B, maybe there's B but not A. So first it's a general claim that one can deny a restriction

by just saying, we're not sure, or it might not always be that way.

And then this is just really, it's clear and funny how you've written it, overly generous, like relative to the expectations of who, maybe someone's very stingy with their FEP interpretation.


SPEAKER_02:
Maybe someone else- This is actually the authors, how they wrote it.

So Kirchhoff and Froese, that's how, that was their terms.


SPEAKER_06:
Nice.

So maybe there's an FEP whale out there for whom this is still not generous enough.

But if it was a quote, I didn't mean to edit it.

But like there's the integrated information theory people, their flavor of panpsychism would be like, because all systems are on this continuum of integrating information, panpsychism.

Another approach is sort of this cybernetic panpsychism, which is like because all systems are on the continuum of maintaining their variables within a limited range of values, kind of like good regulator theorem.

So in other words, not because there's an information continuum, but because there's a cybernetic control continuum, dot, dot, dot, panpsychism.

So there's an information centered inference, pan inference equals pan psychism.

And here's like a pan control or pan resistance to dissipation equals pan psychism claim.

So that's pretty cool how that action and inference thread come back in different guises.

Welcome back, Steven.

Your surroundings are less...

blue but i hope that it will work thanks yep we're on 11 we just heard some of the no uh voices on the question are mental phenomena restricted to living systems and then blue who is on the other side of the table


SPEAKER_02:
Well, and then there's a couple of different views that the authors put forward in the paper as well on the yes side.

So there is the non-cognitivist FEP.

So that's the second view from the no.

But plus...

the evolutionary late-comer view.

So this is, mind but not life requires sophisticated generative neural machinery that is not present in simple forms of life, such as single-celled organisms.

And that was my question about adaptive active inference versus mere active inference.

Is that like putting mind above

Is that at a certain evolutionary point, such as like higher level vertebrates or whatever, only perform adaptive active inference if they're evolutionarily at a certain point or in a certain, as Sims kind of implied, in a certain amount of time.

So in his paper, he said that whole organisms can do adaptive active inference, but not like cells within an organism.

And so that was kind of, it's along the lines, well, it doesn't necessarily link directly to sophisticated neural machinery.

It seems like sophisticated

collective autonomy or like what was the sophistication and where was this line?

And I kind of pushed Matt on that when he was here, but I just wonder, is that linked somehow to this way?

And then, I don't know, Stephen, did you want to say something?

And then I can talk about the life-mind continuity views.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, Stephen.

Yeah, I think actually it kind of continues what you're saying, continues a little bit with the graph that we had earlier there in the sense that I was thinking when...

something goes over that graph and goes down the other side.

With active inference, like with normal reactions, right, you do it any time with the same reactants, it's the same basic curve every time, right, because it's a standard thing.

But with life, it gets a chance to,

know what the final outcomes have been and start to maybe change the energy of the hump.

It can actually change, particularly maybe as well if there's non-equilibrium steady states in there, but there's an actual ability to infer backwards.

And I suppose that ability to infer backwards, well, in real time, which in real time could be chemical time,

that that could kind of happen through enzymes or maybe through the mediation of enzymes and whether that's cognition or whether that's could be done through some real-time um you know chemical inference process um and then of course you've got that happening over longer times um and this then becomes when do you start to move from

a variational free energy into an expected free energy you know um but that ability to go backwards or forwards and start to sculpt the landscape of intermediaries um yeah i wonder i think that kind of ties into what you're saying i'm going to do a little life mind venn diagram


SPEAKER_06:
what kind of a universe or world or simulation or whatever do life and minds look like partial overlap like in this world let's make this a little different color you know in this world there's things that are having mind but not life and vice versa

So that is a strict refutation of the restriction claim.

Is it restricted to living systems?

This would be no.

But then let's just say it is restricted to living systems.

Well, it could be like that.

There's still living systems with no mind.

Or could they be the same?

So...

would we know what would be the observation or the experiments or the measurement to make especially keeping in mind or keeping in life that mind is a little bit of a uh potentially unobservable phenomena so how do we integrate sort of uh meat and potatoes with minds

in a way that's going to lead to testable predictions and optimally informative experiments.

Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, and so that is the life-mind continuity thesis is that it's 100% overlap.

So the concept of a mind is grounded in the concept of life in terms of auto-poiesis and adaptivity.

But the problem that I have with that, the whole reason I brought this up is like back to Schrodinger's questions.

What is life, right?

And so...

It's not binary necessarily.

There's some continuum between life and...

not life there's a lot of gray area there's you know obligate parasites there's viruses there's a lot of things that fall into that like fuzzy area and then also like going into the origins of life theory somehow some self-replication and autopoiesis happened in

non-life that drove the transition to life at some point in our evolutionary history.

Where's the mind there?


SPEAKER_06:
And that's one other reason that panpsychists implicitly or explicitly promote their viewpoints is there's no need for like abiogenesis, for amentogenesis, for the emergence of mind from non-mind.

You just say, nope, my belief is it's all continuums of mind.

So we're just like adding grains of sand to a pile.

There's a debate about when it's a heap versus when it's not a heap, but there's no qualitative evidence

challenge with explaining the emergence of complex minds as described in girdle escherbach

Whereas other people who are not panpsychist, implicitly, it's like saying, you do need to have an account for how minds, if you think they exist, arise from non-minds.

Or you can take the anti-psychic position and just say, there's never emergence of mind.

So not in the little, not in the big.

And so there's a few ways to be consistent.

You know, panpsychism and then elaboration of mind, mental denialism,

which is its own answer, or some sort of qualified intermediate where you think that it emerges at a developmental stage or some evolutionary development or an ecological context or some informational requirement.

You have to be this many bits to have awareness.

So there's a lot of views in the space, but this is just total fundamentals, what systems are living, which ones have mind, which ones deserve to be treated using respect.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
This also brings back the multi-scale question.

Maybe not necessarily.

I don't know if physical scale, but temporal scale, if something is

actively variationally enabling itself to maintain its steady state but it's purely doing it only at the level of maintaining a chemical gradient and that's that's the whole game

I don't know if that's a bit... It depends where... It's not exactly clear where mere active influence sits, right?

So there is a slight ontological question there.

But if something's maintaining itself, but it's just doing one thing, and it can do that maybe through chemical gradients or whatever, but then you've got this temporal depth of...

okay doing that because it's inferring that by doing that it will allow it to do something else at what point do these kind of chain of events start to become more lifelike and does there then need to be

is that in itself life and does then almost need to be a lifelike entity that is managing that and then that becomes mind and then this is this is that question that i suppose fungi raise a bit as well because they they mediate messaging part message passing and a lot of interesting stuff now are they kind of a mind or not uh i don't know


SPEAKER_06:
So we could definitely go to talking a little more about mirror and adaptive active inference, but it makes me think about, you mentioned a chemical gradient.

Well, what are neurons and glia doing if not shuttling around chemical gradients?

And so it's like, okay, is mind in the sodium ion?

Okay, you know, yes or no.

Garden of forking paths.

Is it in the system of the lipid membrane and the transport protein and the gradients?

It's like, nope, that still seems like a fairly no mind needed physical system.

Okay, well now we're going to put some other bits of protein around it.

And now we're going to,

verge towards biosemiotics with signaling at the membrane, but it's still a purely physical system.

And so it's like you start building up and is there anything left to explain?

Is that reductionism to just sort of make everything literally reduced to the explanation of the chemicals?

And it reminds me of a Sapolsky article in 2004, where he says, if free will is lurking in the interstices of the brain, then the crawl spaces are getting smaller and smaller.

Because as we get tools that help us look closer and closer, we're finding there's less and less wiggle room, degrees of freedom, tilly-lally or whatever you called it, less and less of that potentially happening.

with deeper and deeper investigation and dissection, but are we just tearing something apart and not understanding how it's actually composed?

Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
So that just reminds me of going back to the live stream that we had with Mike Levin.

It's like, if we are just...

At any given point, our model essentially like dictates our action, right?

So under active inference, we have the degenerative model, the recognition model, and constantly these are updated based on what's happening in our world.

can we in fact, or do we have a choice when presented with any given circumstances in life, in our environment?

Do we have a choice whether or not to steal a candy bar from a store or like random things that you think about?

and this also goes to change your life and change your mind so it's only through like practicing piano do we learn to play piano but do I have any choice but to sit down and practice the piano given my existing model or and so is there like at what point where does free will come in like if

right like does it play in and um mike's answer was awesome i think he said like no there's no free will but then he said okay there's some minuscule amount of free will that's non-zero but like the smallest possible non-zero number that you could have and so incrementally then you're able to affect changes on your model which then affect the decisions that you make given your model


SPEAKER_06:
so just two quick things then stephen so with a chaotic system with a big lyopunov exponent so small changes have non-linear effects all you need is a tiny tiny bit so let's not um

confused the fact that we have small potentially even infinitesimal or fractional free will whatever that means in the moment with our inability to have serious consequences through deep time because it is a chaotic massively interacting system and the second point is it's you mentioned like stealing something

That 2004 paper with Zeki, Goodenough and Sapolsky is about the frontal cortex and the criminal justice system.

And this paper is really fascinating because it's like, there's two modes to

just I believe centering on the American legal system, but replicated in many other cases, either somebody can be like a rational, sane actor, or they plead a defense, which basically amounts to being entirely incapacitated.

So like either you were fully, you should have known that the bank robbery would have gone this way.

You should have really waited it out all the ways, or

It was a situation of which there are multiple where you cannot be held to be responsible for the action, but we still need to...

It's not a get out of jail free card, but it is what it is.

And so they're arguing for a more nuanced perspective that respects all the different timescales of changes that influence our decision-making.

So it's a really, and this is 20, almost 20 years ago.

So a lot has changed in neuroscience and in law and society, but this is a little bit of an older peep.

So Steven, then Dave.


SPEAKER_00:
Now I think this is a quite an interesting point that you're making here.

I, on that slide, if you go back to that slide that has the mind on it, I'm just trying something here.

If a little idea, I've just got it.

If, okay.

So if I was to put life, you see this life there, put life over mind.

Okay.

So it's, I'll do actually, I just do that.

So it's like this.

Okay.

So say this is, I dunno, this is an idea.

So say you've got life as in the organisms body, and then you've got life in terms of the, the, the, the, the cognitive, um, neuronal life.

And they're like, they're differentiated into two types of organism in the organism.


SPEAKER_06:
the two organisms talk to each other and the boundary between the two talking to each other is mind as an emergent process something that is coming up as an idea very interactionist and relational and interfacial that maybe we shouldn't be looking for the reduced essence of atomic modular life but we should um relentlessly pursue it in the interfaces dave


SPEAKER_04:
If mind is entirely a matter of memes, and memes need material processes to live in, and material processes need memes to keep themselves from falling apart, then things become a lot simpler.

But I actually want to make a comment on the insanity plea.

I think it might have been Dershowitz who went back and looked at the statistics of successful and unsuccessful insanity pleas.

And he found that when somebody is so completely berserk that you can't even begin to empathize with them.

Juries say, he's just crazy, kill him.

But the places that people, the juries buy the insanity plea is the juror saying to himself, although he never quite comes out and says this, you know, under the circumstances, I could see killing the guy.

That's all right.

Whatever it takes to get him off.

You call that insanity?

Okay, we'll get him off with insanity.

So it's exactly the opposite of what you'd think.

You know, the supposed Elizabethan argument that, well, the guy didn't know the difference between right and wrong, so you can't hold him responsible.

American juries don't think that way.


SPEAKER_06:
Big questions about what the legal system is for and what it does.

And then there's a question in the chat.


SPEAKER_02:
So just on to like the legal system, and I wasn't like meaning to start spawn this entire conversation with the stealing candy bar, but you know, so much of our creation of the model of the world occurs when we're young and in early development.

And I think that, you know, at least in the States, the amount of unacknowledged childhood trauma that happens

for poverty and for drug abuse reasons.

I mean, there's an infinite number of reasons that people undergo some kind of abuse as a child.

All of that like really contributes to how well you're gonna function in society in later in life.

And I don't think like,

While there are people that plead insanity and there are some cases of severe abuse and whatever where the people get off, but so many of the people that are in our prison systems and go through juvenile systems have these horrible early experiences that really are...

happening when their model of the world is being solidified.

And so for me, it really, it explains a lot of the choices that are made by people in those circumstances.


SPEAKER_06:
it's helpful to think about it in terms of a trajectory we're not just um maybe taking a snapshot moment and just doing a snap judgment but we want a trajectory of healing and of um health steven and then dave and then we'll ask the question


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this idea, because we talk about people being out of their mind, you know, and in some ways, like you say, if someone has an experience or something or some biological condition, the idea is that it's like, I suppose the biological architecture means that the person's ability to

mindfully choose isn't there in some ways.

It's almost like the, yeah, either the, the somatic priors are so skewed or the, uh, the, the mental architecture is so distorted that a coherent mind isn't available.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks Steve.


SPEAKER_04:
I met a lawyer, um, who worked with the, um,

criminal justice system in Chicago on child abuse cases.

And she found a huge number of these cases of serious abuse, like a three-month-old being put out on a fire escape in the middle of winter to toughen him up.

And, you know, instead of just saying, oh, this is so horrible, you've got to put the mother in prison, they interviewed her and said, well, what do you do with babies?

And she had no idea.

She had never seen even minimally competent

child rearing from anybody and they found you explain to these folks and you give them you know the the supplemental education to understand why middle class people treat babies a certain way they think that's great oh that makes sense i just didn't know you could do that i thought you had to beat them they wouldn't stop crying if you don't beat them okay

and say you know you put them on a long time probation that is not punitive at all it's just so you can keep track of them and keep the education going and keep them away from the crazies and she says it was working extraordinarily well thanks so here's a question from the chat i'll read the question and then i'll read one response in the chat already and then um anyone can jump in and we have some slides that speak to this so joseph wrote


SPEAKER_06:
Could the extent of how conscious something is be measured on the basis of how far ahead in time an organism, cell, creature can plan or minimize expected free energy?

And then...

I know that some people will probably have things to say on that, but Tucker in the chat wrote, under this idea, then might the entropy chaoticness of the environment influence the degree of consciousness of a system.

A more dynamic system or environment would require a more adaptive agent in order to maintain negentropic coherence through time.

The more entropy, the need for a better model,

super interesting questions and responses so i guess just uh glancing off of that uh legal and choice discussion into more broader questions it's so fascinating how

especially if we're going to be locating function in the interface between the agent and the environment, maybe depending on whether you're in an unmarked room or a very interactable space, consciousness is going to be different.

Are you more or less aware?

And then the other piece that comes to mind, and then Stephen and then anyone else, is from Livestream 25, Computational Boundary of a Self.

And there's the past and then there's the future below.

And so the past cone is kind of like the depth and the breadth of what has influenced the system.

And then the future cone is about the scope of planning.

So it's a really interesting question about temporal horizon, but is it enough to just plan deeply?

Like if you just plan sparsely, but deeply over a hundred years versus a very rich system

plan very thick plan for 10 minutes which one of those is there going to be a single currency that describes or compares those two how do we think about planning in heterogeneous systems that have different affordances or have different complexities of their internal generative model so there's a lot of great questions in this area steven then anyone else yeah these are really good questions um


SPEAKER_00:
I suppose if we're looking at measures, I mean, there's also this interesting question of not necessarily what you're able to do, but how far you're able to get with what you're not able to do.

Like when someone's really working hard cognitively, it's like, I mean, you know, if I want to predict what the inside of a jar is going to be like, I can just boil the liquid and it becomes sterile.

And I know it would be like that for a long time.

Um, the question becomes when you've got these intractable kind of multifaceted things, a bit like what's going to happen to a collection of family members when they all meet together for Thanksgiving.

Right.

Um, this, that, that, that, that temple depth is, is definitely a good point.

And I suppose there's, there's that question of, um, how to penetrate

time when it's hard to penetrate as much as how much are they able to plan?

But I'm sure the two things are linked and you could do both.


SPEAKER_06:
Lou?

And then I'll have a thought.


SPEAKER_02:
Give your thought first, Daniel, because I'm going to go on a tangent.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.

I wanted to connect it to the paper that we're allegedly discussing and this user resource and mirror and adaptive active inference

model so on the unidirectional the left side you have like a more adaptive agent it's here a spider and then you have this less adaptive but doing mere active inference like a web okay so it's like a person with a thermometer or a spider with their web versus this reciprocal case where on both sides of the table there's a user

And then we've heard before about how the time horizon of planning relates to the depth or the quality of the conscious experience.

For example, the 2018 Alias interview with myself and Martin and Carl Fristen in the final question, he even talks about the temporal scope and the existence of counterfactuals as being relevant for generating consciousness.

So then it made me wonder,

What if by going reciprocal multi-integration, you actually shorten the timescale of planning?

Like if I'm going to set out a buffet for myself, it might take hours of planning.

And so there's a lot of mere active inference happening on the stovetop, but it's a very complex process.

One user and it takes hours of planning, but then to cook with a friend,

might be just a minute of planning.

We're going to agree to cook together.

And so actually the temporal explicit depth of planning in an improvisational or interactionist context, the depth drops potentially because you might not need to

explicitly prepare for so many counterfactuals.

And it's not like you're just moving pieces on the chessboard.

You just need to take that first step, listen to what they're going to say, then think about what your response is.

So then that almost challenges the simple time horizon or counterfactual basis of cognition or phenomenology, because

and it's such a helpful distinction made by matt that i know we're going to use in other papers and research that these are really different kinds of systems this left system is stigmergic and it's still a collective system with immersion properties but then this kind of double stigmergy interactionism brings us into a new territory that's very important to delineate stephen


SPEAKER_00:
yeah this and this takes us into that realm of sense making different types of sense making because it's action yeah being able to act and interact in appropriate ways

And in many ways, the more appropriate ways can be stimulated by things in the environment.

I mean, the fact that we have a very expressive face in a way puts our face out there as something we can inscribe and use in that process, right?

We just look at each other's faces.

Now, for the psychology in the world, no one quite knows.

It's all interpretation.

But the thing that I think this really highlights is the game in town is action policy.

The game isn't for us to walk around as humans with big cognitive capacities on the top of our skull or in our skull.

The game is that we can interact and sense make

um the ability to like you say to plan on our own is um is a nicety but actually it's been a bit of a we could say a wrong turn for the last 200 years because it's all been about thinking as being the game and feelings being this kind of artifact that we've

we try and minimize as some sort of side product that somehow, you know, a weakness of the human mind or something.

And it's so far from the truth because it's pretty much what it was like before we took that wrong turn.

It's actually about how to act and feel in the world.

So this is a good point.

Thanks, Stephen.


SPEAKER_05:
Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
So I'm going to go off on my tangent now, but I really just want to address the first question in the chat about how consciousness relates to our ability to plan and how far out that we plan.

And so I'm reminded of, and maybe Daniel, you can help me remember if it was deeply felt affect or sophisticated active inference.

But in one of those papers, we talked about

actually anxiety as trying to plan too far out in the future, right?

So if you're trying to plan too many time steps ahead, then that, that is like the cause of a neuro atypical situation.

So I'm not sure I will.

And then I think that they said that maybe depression was staying too many steps behind or thinking about too many steps in the past.

So, so thinking about, um,

And so my takeaway from that was staying in...

the present moment.

And so I don't know that the, that, um, just briefly to respond to Steven's comment, I don't know that, um, having this big cognitive, um, giant capacity, giant cognitive capacity is for interacting as much as it is for adapting.

Um, because humans like cockroaches adapt to, you know, infinite circumstances, right?

We live on all or are present on all continents in the world.

And I mean, even Antarctica, there's some research scientists there right now, I'm sure digging holes in the glaciers to find out how much our ocean is going to rise.

I hope that somebody is there doing that anyway.

I'm not sure who's funding that research, but but hopefully somebody is doing that.

So I don't know.

I think it's more adaptive, the cognitive capacity than than anything else.


SPEAKER_06:
And so good throwback there with the sophisticated and deep active inference and the anxiety, the parametric investigations of anxiety that we've been on before.

And one day when we have better keyword indexing, if anyone is passionate about this,

They should collaborate with us because how cool would it be to have deeply, richly indexed keywords for these papers and artifacts and discussions and have them translated into multiple human languages and computer languages and graphics so that we can be really clear.

um so i mean there's a lot to say here and the only other throwback that i was going to add in was to way long ago in number 29 active in for ants we talked about the scaling relationship of the ant brains with a larger colony having a proportionally smaller ant brain

Whereas larger mammalian societies have larger mammalian brains because mammalian sociality has to do with like memory of repeated interactions and theory of mind and the facial recognition, all these things that we're talking about here.

Whereas potentially colony organismality means that the increased scope or ability

capacity of the colony can occur over evolutionary times through a diminution of the scope or of the cognitive processing on board each ant so joseph's question it's sort of it's just such a great question so thanks again for asking it because we can sort of look at it at the

I mean, it's even asked across scales, but what if like the cell plans less because it's part of a high trust system.

So now the beta cell in the pancreas doesn't have to have a deep temporal model.

Its temporal model just has to be like one step.

but it's playing a role in a system that now has a circadian regulation of sleep or a blood sugar.

And so where do we ascribe consciousness or awareness or cognitive possibility across different systems, which again brings us back to from 25, these nested cones of cognition and their different shapes and their attributes.

Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
I just wanted to shout out to Tucker as I was like, I don't know, drawing this big thing with the last question.

So Tucker actually made the link between consciousness and adaptivity.

And I kind of just stole it.

I stole all the thunder.

But really, and are those two things linked, right?

So planning very far in the future versus having the ability to respond to whatever comes your way in one time step.

Those are really different.

Like one seems very rigid and the other seems very fluid.

And Tucker actually kind of used consciousness and adaptivity interchangeably, which is an interesting connection and thought.

I don't know, maybe resilience and that adaptivity is kind of what I would use, but it's interesting to think about.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah and also i like that point you're making and suppose it ties with that adaptivity about the pancreas um you know you if you've got the pancreas gives you the affordance of modulating stuff in the body as do these other organs but like you say these cells and if i have a crude or multiple ways of

mindfully or livingly, I don't know if that's a word, adapting that, you can do something, but you got no pancreas or you got no cells that give you an affordance to actually change it.

You can have all the...

computational cognitive modeling whatever it is you can't do anything it's literally a conceptual framework without any way to do that sort of control so you know the more important thing is to have something which can follow through at these across the scales

and change how they are maybe cybernetically integrated than it is to have the, like I say, it's not all about cognition.

It's about action policies.

And I think that's really interesting.


SPEAKER_06:
so earlier we had just those three right just cognition agency and autonomy and then that was um being inspired by just some of the quotes from the paper where those terms were used but we're thinking about that three

Then we've talked about like adapting and being flexible and learning over developmental as well as evolutionary timescales.

We can think about the past and the future, like the time cone illustration.

To what extent does memory matter?

I mean, can you have a memoryless awareness or is awareness requiring memory?

Or can you have awareness without planning?

Some meditation practices might lead one to think so.

Or is planning vital?

What about the capacity for interaction?

If we don't have interactions highlighted, paging Dean, are we falling victim into a modular reductionist nightmare?

Or how do we hold interactionism,

at every step.

What about kind of complex systems properties like resilience or anti-fragility or hysteresis, phase transitions?

Those are descriptors of various systems.

And are those just coming along for free with these?

Do they grant the ability for these?

Are they correlated dimensions?

Are they uncorrelated?

And then

the million dollar question maybe we need to scale that for inflation you know the 10 bitcoin question where does consciousness come into play and is that something we can ever get a handle on or is consciousness always going to be at the fringes of our explanations and some of these more accessible or opaque features will be amenable to quantitative descriptions whereas this um might be always in a different category so blue


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I think that they're quantifying consciousness already.

But memory is really what I wanted to talk about here, the keyword that's on this list.

And so...

I mean, I don't know, I think about memory, right?

Like there's the ROM and there's the RAM and is memory or to what degree is memory required for a generative model?

And so I just wonder, like, I mean, all of the experiences contribute to the formation of the model and what is contained in the model is

effectively like our action course?

I mean, what's in the generative model?

Does anyone know?

I think about it like what is the action?

I think about it like an action course or like the response.

I don't know.

I'd love to hear what other people think is in the generative model.

What's inside of that?

And also whether or not memory is required.


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen?

I think this also, you can bring in there, affordances coming.

So like you say, interaction capacity with affordances.

I suppose you could say memory is an interaction capacity with the affordances to whole priors.

So there's an interesting sort of

dynamic here between these processes and the affordances and normally affordances are well for practical purposes are normally thought of or used in terms of something a bit more concrete and at the human scale but when it kind of is multi-scale as well isn't it


SPEAKER_06:
You know, if we're gonna talk about mental action and thought as mental planning, then absolutely,

there are mental affordances in the model as formalized by Sanved Smith and others.

And then to Blue's memory question about where it's related to the generative model.

So I thought of a few different options, not exhaustive.

So the generative model could have an implicit onboard memory like that D prior, that could just be a summary variable that summarizes memory.

So you can just say the past moments temperature, here's my prior on the past moments temperature, or

the past sequence of temperatures could be explicitly represented as like, kind of like a list or a vector.

So there could be onboard memory, like within the internal states, the internal generative model of the active inference agent could either have just sort of a snapshot summary, implicit memory,

which is good enough in many cases.

So we might just model it as if anyway, or there could be this explicit, just like a policy is a sequence of actions.

You could have a multi-time step prior over previous states, AKA memory.

But then the other thing

Option is like this extended or stigmergic memory with a recognition model.

Like, do I remember what I looked like at that one family dinner when I was three?

No.

Would I recognize the picture?

Yes.

Would I know where to look for the picture?

Yes.

Physically?

What about asking somebody?

So we're thinking, okay, affordances, social affordances, spatial temporal location of extended cognitive process, recognition model.

But do I remember that?

or am I merely remembering or preferring certain affordances that bring me to the edge of that abyss?

And then the recognition model takes over once the picture has been physically presented.

That's the stigmergy.

And then just using Matt's distinction,

There's you in the photo library.

That's the unidirectional multi-scale inference integration.

And then there's the conversation where we actually spur each other's memory.

And that's where we get that sort of next level of reciprocal integration to kind of bring it back to that idea.

Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
Really nice with the extended stigma G recognition model.

Um, and, and I think that like, there's some like Ram, some kind of Ram is required for any generative model.

Like, like I think about the generative model a lot, like the software that we're running and in order to have software, you have to have some Ram.

Um, but, but is the long-term.

Memory required also?

Or is the long-term memory just what goes into creating the generative model and then all of that can be forgotten?

And when I'm thinking about that, I'm thinking about people that have lost their memory for whatever reason.

So cases of amnesia, like the person can't remember anything.

I think about the old movie Memento.

And every day I can't remember anything, I can't remember anything, but I still know how to brush my teeth.

Or I still know when I wake up in the morning, I need to brush my teeth, or I need to shower, or I remember what food is.

So I don't need to try this or that to see if it's edible again.

So there's some things that are maybe stored in the generative model, and maybe some things are irrelevant.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Blue.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this ties into...

the action policies of remembering.

Like, if all memories is an act of imagination, is an act of recapitulation, then what needs to be present, as you're saying, is a way to evoke affordances.

And you could say that the affordances of

remapping sensory states you know maybe where you look with your eyes and maybe when someone's amnesic it's not that they haven't got the priors or the knowledge they haven't got the action capacity to recapitulate from whatever priors were there i mean this is a bit speculative but uh anyway


SPEAKER_06:
It reminds me of the neuroscience on taxi drivers and spatial reasoning and general relationships between spatial memory and practice there and cognitive

capacity and preventing cognitive decline and memory palaces like memory palace is kind of this weird quirk i mean how weird you can imagine a place with file cabinets and walk around it and have stories about that place and remember you know pi to 5 000 digits or remember the iliad how weird oh wait mental action spatial cognition narratives of action it's like

you can build that physical palace and have the photos there, or you can update your generative model to include a spatial context where those cues exist.

And so it's just a very interactionist way of thinking about

architecture, including mental architectures.

Like you just need to have the exit sign.

And then when somebody wants to leave, they're going to recognize it and walk towards it.

And then the next step will be there.

And so the architect puts the next step there safely and accordingly to function.

But when we're the interior mental designer or architect, we can make spaces that also prompt us.

And so it's not like we're storing the memory itself in that location.

were remembering a very compressed version of the cues that interact with us to then generate upon demand.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's a good example, the memory palace, because is the question that when something's laid down in such a palace, if you go to visit the palace and you get this, whatever sensory cues that come up, it's...

it's solid enough that you will come back up with a particular answer.

You know what I mean?

You will remember X, Y, and Z from that.

So it appears like you've remembered the thing, so to speak, but actually it's just that that combination of Bayesian inferences

will lead you to act to recapitulate it in the way.

Now, obviously, the average person can't do it as well as these trained experts.

And they can actually do it in a very sophisticated way.

Because in terms of pure floating ideas, it's that whole, they say, six plus or minus one is all you can keep in your brain at any one time in terms of just a concept that's floating.

But obviously that isn't what's the case when you can start to use memory palaces.

So it's a very different thing going on.


SPEAKER_06:
It reminds me of one class as we go to our closing notes, a class where just each week the homework and class was to memorize a poem and then recite it.

That's kind of how education has often proceeded.

And it's something that...

is just fundamental for oral cultures and has been a skill that is less emphasized in literate cultures and uh there's that dense cross-linking of like rhyme and narrative and tonality and rhythm so that you really don't need to keep

50 things or 80 lines in your working memory in your ram with a computationalist metaphor what is being remembered or recalled or prompted and that investigation well if it's not being just stored as a text file what is it

And then it's just so cool how it dovetails very nicely with deontic cues and ostentative cues in active inference and conversational theory and a lot of other areas.

Blue, and then we'll have last comments here.


SPEAKER_02:
So just what you guys were both talking about reminded me of Cal Newport's book, Deep Work.

If you haven't read it, I highly recommend it.

It's awesome.

But in that book, he talks about creating a memory palace and learning how to memorize a deck of cards as an old skill that people just don't have anymore.

So you construct the memory palace, you learn to have a set of cards, memorize a set of cards.

So you can literally...

memorize 52 things in your memory palace anytime so you can memorize the order of a deck of cards just like he says to build this as a skill because it's enhancing of memory and I wonder if this isn't going to be something you know as we're becoming more and more illiterate

which is, it's an interesting, I think we've reached like the crescendo of literacy, at least in the US.

And have we reached this crescendo because of technologies like this?

Like, I don't need to read that paper.

I'm just gonna listen to this group of people talk about it.

and get the key points out of the paper and their summary and their discussion.

And then I'll have some interesting things to say about that paper.

And so is it art kind of technology that's paving the way for illiteracy again and will memory become increasingly important?

It's great to think about and I'll just give my final thought here.

Thanks for the interesting discussion today and to Matt also for the provocative paper and I'm looking forward to reading and discussing more of his work.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Blue.

Stephen or Dave, any last comments?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I do.

Quickly, thank you again.

Really good conversation.

And yeah, I think there's definitely something here around

Maybe the idea of adjacent possibles as well.

So was there something about the memory palace that one thing is then an adjacency to the next thing?

When you have to hold something on its own, it's going to have to be supported by its own infrastructure, I suppose.

And that's quite an overhead.

So yeah, because there's also this thing of how long you can hold something in your memory without having a way to ground it.

it just sort of fizzles maybe for some people quicker than others, but so yeah, all very good.

I'll have to go back and think I was a number of points came up here that we could expand on in the future.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Steven.

Dave, any last comments?


SPEAKER_04:
Nope, just got to follow up on these references.

Thanks all.


SPEAKER_06:
Thank you.

Well, to Matt Sims for writing this great paper and joining our .1 and watching the .0.

For Dave and Blue and Steven for joining and for helping in different ways on the .0.

That brings us to the end of...

30.2 and next week's at this same time we're going to be in 31 non-equilibrium thermodynamics and the free energy principle in biology by patricia palacios and mateo colombo so at least one author will join at least one week uh stay in touch let us know if you want to join for 31 or beyond and see you all later