## skcKoCcAQJI

SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Hello and welcome everyone.

It's ACT-INF Lab live stream number 46.0 and it's June 10th, 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab everyone.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at links here on the slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

Head over to ActiveInference.org if you want to learn more about live streams at the lab or other projects that are ongoing.

all right we are here in the first discussion the dot zero for background and context in stream number 46.0 we are learning and discussing the paper active inference models do not contradict folk psychology by ryan smith maxwell ramsted and alex keifer

and the video just like all the videos are is an introduction and a contextualizer and an appetizer for some of these ideas it's not a review or a final word we're going to say hi and give introductions then we'll be covering the roadmap and abstract claims and aims and then we'll head through some of the core sections of the paper and just get some of the key arguments down and

during the dot one and the dot two in the coming two weeks we'll have open space for asking a lot of questions for those who want to participate live and ask questions as well so on we go

We'll start just by introducing ourself as much or as little as we'd like, and if we want to, mentioning something that we're excited about in the paper, like what brought us to want to contribute to this.zero.

And I'll start.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and I think the title says it all, though there's still more to add, and it speaks to many of the hottest

and brightest debates in Active Inference, which is the rubber hitting the road with mind and brain and body and psychology and previous and different conceptions.

I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Daniel.

I'm Dean.

I'm up here in Calgary.

I think

Well, a couple of things.

First of all, one of the first active inference that I was on was a paper that Ryan had written.

And so I was kind of impressed with that paper.

And I knew that if I sort of invested some time in this one, that I would become previous.

And the primary thing that came to my mind was looking at active inference from the decisioning and the movement standpoint.

sort of seeing that looked at from a higher order and the lower order type of processings.

And that, by the time I got to the end of the paper and started looking at the mind-to-world and world-to-mind piece and seeing where the

the potential connectors were between sort of coming into it, not necessarily knowing that there would be different things of active inference, much like I didn't realize there was an extended active inference until I read Axel Constant's paper.

That was kind of helpful and I'll pass it to Jacob.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi everyone.

I'm Jakub.

I'm a student from the Czech Republic and I'm excited to reduce my uncertainty about the

new formulation that was introduced in this paper, or at least it was the first time I came across it in the active inference literature.

As you mentioned, Dean, about the different higher order and lower order descriptions and how they conceptually map to the different mathematical formulation and also

to the full psychological ontology and overall just discuss what that means and what it might mean for other applications as well.

And I'll pass it on to Ryan.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, thanks.

So I'm Ryan Smith.

So I'm a research associate professor at the Laureate Institute for Brain Research.

um you know so i'm the the first author of this uh this paper so you know obviously i was sufficiently excited about the ideas to write about it um or sufficiently motivated at least to try to clarify some things that i um you know from my perspective are sort of common misconceptions um so um yeah i mean you know i'm i'm probably more gonna sit in the background here i'll just be here to um you know answer questions or clarify anything um you know if something comes up where

something in the paper wasn't sufficiently clear because I didn't do my job well enough.

So, yeah.

So I appreciate you guys being willing to talk about it.


SPEAKER_00:
thanks well an overall comment was we really appreciate the clarity of the argument and the writing and the weaving together of the the math and the formalisms with the argument the rhetoric and the ontology that's that's prime time so we'll just jump right in and of course anyone is welcome to share their comments so dean would you like to help us contextualize with a big question


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I think that there's some questions surrounding, and I'm just going to take some of the important quotes that I lifted from the paper.

The concern that active infants also

psychology because they do not explicitly include terms for desires or other cognitive constructs at the mathematical level of description.

So given that distinction, that there are active inference models with motor control which need not have desires under folk psychology and active inference models do have desires within folk psychology then, the worry is that if those models can


SPEAKER_00:
Dean, could you, I think when you're talking, you like turn away a little bit or move back, it kind of cuts the audio.

So maybe, yeah, we'll try that.

Continue from the given.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

So given the, there's a distinction in active inference models of motor control.

which do not have desires under folk psychology and active interest models of decision processes, which do have desires with psychology, or so it's argued here, then the worry is that if active interest models can explain cognition in

without appealing to constructs that can be mapped onto the common sense notion of desires, and that's how I explain what that is, then this could be seen as threatening our intuitive folk psychology of ourselves as agents.

Such a situation would also pressure the traditional belief, desire, intention model of folk psychology that is prominent in philosophy.

The BDI model is a model of human agency that explains what it means to act intentionally.

So for me, I was introduced to the BDI model as well.


SPEAKER_00:
yes great and and one way that i kind of saw this big question even pulling back a layer is like is active inference recontextualizing reframing augmenting building on what is already familiar in a sense though there are many folk psychologies and i think that could be something we go into or is this the displacement of some

cherished framework for some other construct and the way that people speak like i want the cup of coffee or something like that are we going to need like a different word for an active compatible folk psychology and linguistics so jacob any thoughts on that well um


SPEAKER_01:
I guess one question I perhaps had was, even this formulation of the initial statement, given this distinction of motor control active inference and decision processes active inference, then we have this issue.

Well, one thing that I was a bit uncertain about was whether this distinction was made to fit the distinction that's within folk psychology, like there is some kind of ontology for motor control and an ontology for decision processes, so therefore we try to split active inference into these two parts.

or whether there is actually, whether this distinction follows directly from the same mathematical formulation of active.


SPEAKER_04:
Great.

I think one thing to clarify is I think the way that this kind of given the distinction followed by then here, I think could be leading to a little bit of a misunderstanding.

You know, so the

The idea that there's a concern about a threat to folk psychology comes not from that distinction.

It comes from the fact that at the mathematical level of description, it doesn't look like there's anything in there that's desire-ish, right?

I mean, that's where the worry comes from.

The worry doesn't come from the distinction between motor control and decision processes.

Right, the distinction between motor control and decision process is actually one thing that by making that more explicit, it actually helps to resolve the concern or it shows why it's not really a concern or that part of the concern stems from a failure to make that distinction explicitly.

So just to kind of clarify that.

So I think the order of the thought process here is a little bit different than the way it is in the paper.


SPEAKER_00:
thanks helpful times and we'll clarify and and go through the argument in order to so uh briefly just the aims of the paper as they present it are to provide a brief review of the historical progression from predictive coding to current active inference models

and show that despite a superficial tension when viewed at the mathematical level, the active inference formalism contains terms that are readily identifiable as desires and related cognitive constructs at the psychological level, which is downstream of that clarification of the distinction that Ryan just mentioned.

And then they discuss the additional insights offered by active inference and the implications it has for current debates about active inference.

Any other aims you'd want to add, Ryan?

I think this is fine at the moment.

I mean, I'm sure things will come up.

Great.

And then claims.

Jakob, could you read the claims?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so firstly that the apparent problem posed by purely doxastic-looking constructs simply is not a problem.

There do not appear to be cases where the phenotype-consistent prior expectation in DAI, often called prior preferences, will ever conflict with or make distinct predictions than a traditional folk psychological account in which beliefs and desires are integrated to find intentions.

The second claim is that what we have referred to as DAI, the Partially Observable Markov Decision Process Formulation of Acton, is a corollary of the FEP, and it can be implemented using prediction error minimization, but there are many other aspects of the FEP and many other theories that fall under the umbrella of predictive processing.

And in some, there are beliefs and desires in the active inference framework.


SPEAKER_00:
And those are just a few claims that we pulled out, but many other declarative sentences will also be claims.


SPEAKER_04:
I wouldn't necessarily call those the primary claims of the paper.

I mean, there's certainly statements that we make, but I think the idea that the apparent problem isn't a problem, I think that's a claim.

And that there won't be a conflict with

with an account where you're combining beliefs and desires to form intentions.

That's true.

This idea about what falls under the predictive processing umbrella, I wouldn't necessarily say that's something we're arguing for in the paper.

It's just something that matters when you're trying to correctly frame this kind of debate because predictive processing is just a very

generic term, right?

Like it doesn't refer to any particular mathematical formalism.

It just refers to a really broad idea that in some way the brain's doing some sort of predicting, either with respect to resolving problems in perception or problems in decision-making and motor control.

So there really isn't, there's not enough, there's really just not enough mathematical specificity associated with predictive processing as a term to really even test any predictions that it would make.

Right.

So, I mean, I mean, what you, what you need to do is pick, you know, whatever specific mathematical formalism, what actual hypothesis you're talking about.

Um, and you evaluate and test claims with respect to that.

Right.

So there's, there just aren't, there's aren't clear, uh, like what even, uh, it's just a pretty good processing is just too general and vague is the point.

So, you know, we can only really say, look under,

under the current models used that are called active inference, right?

So these, you know, partially observable markup decision process models, you know, that minimize expected free energy as a way of making decisions, right?

Those arguably count as one particular, right, theory or class of models under the predictive processing umbrella.

And we can evaluate claims with respect to that model.

But, you know, what's true of that doesn't need to be true of, you know, the other

you know, 20 things out there that might, you know, might also fall under a predictive processing umbrella.

So, I mean, the main point is just we need to evaluate, you know, claims and predictions and things like that with respect to a specific model, not with respect to a kind of vague general category of models.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Okay.

So just rapidly through the abstract.

Active inference offers a unified theory of perception, learning, and decision-making at computational and neural levels of description.

In this article, we address the worry that active inference may be in tension with the belief-desire-intention model within folk psychology because it does not include terms for desires or other cognitive constructs at the mathematical level of description.

To resolve this concern, we first provide a brief review of the historical progression from predictive coding to active inference, enabling us to distinguish between active inference formulations of motor control

MAI, which need not have desires under folk psychology, and active inference formulations of decision processes, DAI, which do have desires within folk psychology.

We then show that despite a superficial tension, when viewed at the mathematical level of description, the active inference formalism contains terms that are readily identifiable as encoding both the objects of desire and the strength of desire at the psychological level of description.

We demonstrate this with simple simulations of an active inference agent motivated to leave a dark room for different reasons.

Despite their consistency, we further show how active inference may increase the granularity of folk psychological descriptions by highlighting distinctions between drives to seek information versus reward.

and how it may also offer more precise quantitative folk psychological predictions finally we consider how the implicitly quantitative components of active inference may have partial analogs i.e as if desires in other systems describable by the broader free energy principle to which it conforms here's the roadmap so

the dot zeros, all of them in the world, wouldn't be enough to hit every stop.

So we will go through roughly in order of these sections.

And the section titles are listed here.

But Ryan, what was the thought going into the ordering or the structuring and why there was such a comprehensive historical and preliminary consideration section?


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, a lot of

I mean, the vast majority of these sections are just kind of building up background, right?

I mean, sufficient background to kind of see, right, where the, you know, both I think historically where, you know, potential misunderstandings might come from, you know, and also just enough of the, you know, providing enough of the formalism, you know, one part of the formalism does kind of build on another, right, to see why the, you know, to see why the apparent problem just isn't there.

Right.

So, I mean, the vast majority of these sections are just are just preliminary, just kind of building up so that the reader has the information necessary to understand the argument.

I mean, only only the last couple of sections that really really are the meat of the argument itself.

I mean, so so, you know, for example, just section two, you know, there are what we just said from the predictive coding active inference is just kind of highlighting how, you know, these initials of.

brain as implemented through predictive coding was, you know, purely a model of perception, right?

So then, you know, so then when people, but a lot of times you'll see, especially in the, you know, older literature and philosophy literature, you know, predictive processing somehow both refers to predictive coding, but then also is talked about as though it's as though it's the same thing as active inference, you know, or there'll be these kinds of ideas where

if you just extend predictive coding as kind of the way it's talked about as a kind of way of thinking about what the whole brain does, you know, then all of a sudden, you know, controlling the body ends up also just being something about predicting what the body will do.

But, but, and especially when described that way, right, it sounds like something like desire and motivation and goals and things like that are just kind of completely out the window.

And it's very hard to make sense of what,

how a system like that would even work.

Right.

Um, and so it's, and, and part of that I think is because there's, you know, some, um, you know, some, uh, the way that certain things are written in some of the literature can be a little bit, um, confusing or it's not too, it's not too hard to understand why, you know, these sorts of, um, you know, these sorts of misunderstandings could, uh, you know, could happen.

Um, but, but, uh, but the, you know, section two, there was really,

really is to show how, you know, initially, right, when you're trying to move from predictive coding, again, which is purely a model of perception, it's not about decision making, it's not about action selection, you know, it's not even about motor control, right?

It's just a Bayesian, just a theory of how the brain can do approximate Bayesian inference and perception.

You know, how that was initially just extended to say, hey, like, if the brain works this way, then, you know, how do you get a system that actually controls the body using the same generic architecture?

Right.

And so then, you know, the story that Carl Friston, you know, um, and, um, you know, some other people started trying to put together was the story about how you can use predictions, you know, descending predictions, um, if weighted appropriately, right.

As a way of essentially setting the target states of the body, right.

Like, like, is this kind of, you know, the way you'll see it talked about is, you know, I predict that my arm will be here, but really it's down here.

But if I wait that correctly, then it'll kind of like,

know you'll kind of control the set point and reflex arc to you know so your arm kind of moves up with the correct position right but but that's just a theory about how you can use a descending prediction signal to essentially act as a motor command signal right there's nothing in that at all that that's deciding what that prediction ought to be right there's nothing deciding what that what which motor command should should be the one right that's getting sent down in in a you know in in the

with the form of a prediction, right?

So, so again, so even there, it's just a theory about how you can use predictions as motor commands, right?

Like there's no, there's a very big distinction between that and whatever the system is on top of that, right?

That's deciding, okay, what motor command, what, what motor prediction, right?

Do I send?

And so just making, you know, making, making that clear, right?

Because around 2015, there was this big shift, right?

From these, from these,

where from active inference being talked about as a, just kind of a motor control process, right?

Like a story about how you can extend predictive coding to, you know, also do motor commands, right?

Like from that to, you know, these larger, more comprehensive decision-making models, which are the current, right?

And those, you know, which was what we aim to show very explicitly, you know, have something that, you know, in the mathematics,

It just does, right?

It specifies the goals of the system.

It's pretty hard to get around the fact that you need something, a system needs something like goals, right?

Because it has to evaluate somehow why one decision is going to be better than another, right?

The only way it can really do that is with respect to how likely it is to get whatever the system wants.

So it's just, I mean, in my view, it's very difficult to see how you could ever get

a system to be able to evaluate one action as better than another without having some sort of target state.

And so you can call, right, like the target states in active inference a type of prior belief.

But at the end of the day, its functional role is to specify what observations are better than what, right?

So, I mean, you can really think of active inferences as using this kind of trick in a certain sense, right, of specifying

desired outcomes in the form of a probability distribution because that helps keep everything fully Bayesian, right?

But it's not playing the functional role of belief, right?

It's encoding higher probability just means, right?

Like the better, more rewarding outcome.

So a lot of it is just kind of working step-by-step through both kind of the historical progression so you can see where the misunderstanding could come from

and then also through the current formalism so that you can see exactly where the goal states are encoded in terms of something with the form of a probability distribution.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

The keywords are active inference, poke psychology, predictive processing, Bayesian beliefs, and desires.

So now we're going to jump in.

And some of the slides have a lot of text topically arranged.

So we won't need to read all of the text on many of the slides.

But especially if somebody wants to pull out one of the highlighted sections and bring it to our attention, that would be awesome.

So, and also Ryan, thanks a lot for that great historical overview.

And I think there's so much more to be going into about what happened before 2015 and what happened in the last seven years.

In fact, I think you covered many of the key points in what you just described here, which had to do with the development of predictive coding framework into understanding brain and body.

Is there anything that anyone else wants to add about these points?

Great.

All discussions and dot zeros are like a two-way street where some people with active inference familiarity are learning about new ideas and frameworks, and also people who might have familiarity with a broadly used area outside of Act-Inf are learning about Act-Inf.

For both directions on that freeway, it's important to understand what is the target non-ACT-INF framework that's being juxtaposed and found concordances with active inference.

So the article is addressing the worry that ACT-INF models may be in tension with the belief-desire-intention model.

And there are some consequences to that worry.

In other words, given some priors, it's a founded worry.

Would anyone like to summarize what the belief, desire, intention model is?


SPEAKER_02:
I think you should, Daniel, because I think you put this slide together.


SPEAKER_00:
Ryan, what led you to select the BDI model?

And I wondered about almost this tension or paradox with like, it's folk psychology.

It's about what the people think, but we're gonna do a citation and one specific academic acronym for what people think.

So is this like the main game in town for folk psychology from an academic perspective or what is the BDI and what led you to select that?

rather than a small portfolio of alternate folk psychologies?


SPEAKER_04:
I think that the belief-desire-intention model is just a very generic but also widely known account of trying to capture folk psychology.

It's a major target of a lot of discussion within

you know, like philosophy of mind.

But I mean, it's just very generic, right?

I mean, it's just this idea that, you know, what are the necessary ingredients to make a decision?

Well, you know, I have to have some beliefs about how the world is and I have to have some desires about how the world I would like it to be.

And my intention involves integrating those two things, right?

And then if all goes well in terms of translating intentions into controlling the body, then I'll act out, you know, something according to my intentions

Right.

I mean, simple, you know, like the dumb example that you'll often hear is just, you know, something like, you know, I desire some ice cream, you know, I believe that there's an ice cream truck, you know, down the road, you know, given those two things and, and necessarily those two things, right.

I can inform and touch it and form an intention to go, you know, walk over to the ice cream truck and buy some ice cream, you know?

So, I mean, the question is how else, you know, are you going to explain,

why I went over to the truck to buy the ice cream.

That literally just is, you know, that is the general sort of thing that when we're reasoning about other people's, you know, decisions, other people's, um, you know, behavior and we're trying to figure out, okay, why did this person do what they did?

You know, if we're assuming it's a voluntary action, right.

If we're assuming it's not because like their arms spasmed or, you know, because they have some like really highly ingrained habit or compulsion or something like that.

Right.

And we're talking about voluntary behavior.

Um, that is just the way.

that we tend to reason about how people do what they do.

Either when somebody does something that we think is weird, then usually we have to explain that in terms of, okay, well, they just believed something that was incorrect.

Or they had some really funny desire that I don't relate.

It tends to be one of those sorts of things.

I don't know a lot of other separate

uh, both psychological models that would, uh, entail anything different than this, um, you know, at, at a very generic level.

Um, and it's also exactly the sort of thing, right.

That, that people try to contrast active inference with where, where instead of, you know, belief desires, beliefs and desires coming together to form intentions, instead it'd be something like one kind of belief and another kind of belief come together to form an intention.

which again, for a lot of reasons is confusing and rightfully so when it's presented that way.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, Steve.

So Ryan, when we've had some conversations with other authors and other papers where we've talked about the scale three formalism, and we've also talked a little bit about the sort of scale friendly times when you have to find that history.

and that context.

What you just mentioned was sort of the generic, generalized sense that the BDI umbrella provides.

You're not saying that scale-free quantification and a generic way of modeling something are the same thing.

But what I think, without putting words in your mouth, are you saying that the scale-freeness, as it moves to something more

scale friendly sweeps up some of that generic big tent idea or model and now moves it along it allows you to sort of parse and be specific and precise precise but also be able to generalize as you move through those you know quantifications of the distribution and density and such because that's kind of what i was reading into it i just want to make sure that i got it i was kind of maybe you can help me clean that up a bit


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, I really don't know that anything that we're saying really depends on or even gets into a lot of those sorts of specifics.

I mean, really, really all we're saying is, is that, you know, if you want to take a model, like the current active inference formalism, the current kind of like vanilla formalism, right?

So in terms of interest to standard one level POMDP, or, you know, if you want to scale it up hierarchically, it doesn't ultimately matter.

It is if you want to use

the vanilla active inference framework to actually model some sort of voluntary decision process in a human, right?

So, I mean, a lot of my work has to do with people, you know, modeling behavior on decision-making tasks, right?

Often have to do with, you know, the person, the person has the goal of maximizing, you know, how much money they win or, you know, maximizing some sort of social reward, something like that.

The idea is just that when you're trying to, if you're going to take an active inference model and you're going to use it to model,

successfully model actual human behavior when they're making decisions, then there's always going to be a mapping between the different elements in the active inference model of voluntary behavior that whatever the prior preference distribution is, you just check that so that it just shows the level of reward associated with it.

So there's really nothing about

any scale or anything like that this is much more generic it's just if you're going to use active inference to model voluntary choice then um it will always have something analogous to a belief and a desire because that's just what you need right like to model to model voluntary behavior um it's true that you know that's probably if you're if you actually were going to try to capture something uh kind of like more of the actual architecture in the brain as opposed to just

this kind of like voluntary decision process aspect.

I mean, I'm sure there's a lot of kind of hierarchy below that under the hood, right.

That's translating more abstract policy selection processes into whatever the dynamic signals are that, that end up controlling, you know, moment by moment muscle movements and things like that.

Uh, but the point is, is the below, below this kind of top level where you're doing policy selection, um,

you know, at that point you don't really need the desires anymore, right?

You just need the policy to specify whatever the motor commands are going down that can take the form of predictions.

Um, so, so I don't, I don't know if that helps, but it's just, it's just that there's a certain level in any kind of hierarchy of a model that's going to actually be applicable successfully to human behavior.

And, um, at the level of policy selection, um,

Prior preferences will just include the desired outcomes.

They'll just encode the goals that the agent's trying to reach.

And the policy that's chosen will be evaluated as being the most likely policy because it's the thing that's predicted to have the highest probability of generating the desired observation.


SPEAKER_01:
If I may also comment on that, and I'm not sure if this is answering your question, Dean, but the way I thought about it when I was reading the paper was that

Part of the reason why the belief-desire-intention model works well for mapping the active inference ontology to the folk psychology ontology is because it's a discrete model in that it separates these different parts.

And I think that also might have motivated the choice to consider mainly discrete POMDPs and describe the decision active inference in that way as well, because then this discrete model can be more easily mapped to, say, the discrete model of the POMDP that's described like a factor graph.

Um, I'm not sure.

I was wondering how this would map to continuous tasks as well.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I mean, I mean, I think the, I mean, part of the, I mean, uh, you know, part of the, part of the reason why you need something discreet, right.

Is, is because actions is discreet, right.

I mean, there's either one or there's policy two or there's policy three.

Right.

So those, those just are sort of necessarily different.

right?

I mean, you get, you know, continuous state spaces work well or are appropriate, you know, at lower levels in a hierarchy, you know, when you're talking about kind of dynamics and motor movement, you know, dynamics in the set point of some reflex arc or when you're trying to estimate something in perception that, you know, just as a continuous quantity, right?

Like brightness or, you know, orientation or things like that.

But at the level of decision-making,

Um, models that are necessarily right.

It's free.

Um, I mean, I mean, there is, you know, there are, there are kind of hybrid models, right.

That are out there in the literature, you know, like Thomas Parker, for example, you know, has published several papers using these sorts of models where the kind of policy at the higher level, which is, which is an industry model, um, generates right.

Some observation that then sets the set point, right.

For some continuous or some continuous lower level model.

that then, you know, can end up in a, in a way that's kind of like this kind of story, you know, like move the eyes around the God to different locations and things like that.

Um, so, um, so I, I, I kind of think that, that the, the discreteness is the, or the, the, the reason why, um, things move to a discrete state space architecture is just because of like the necessary, um, what's necessary with respect to a model of policy selection.

because it is kind of all or none.


SPEAKER_00:
Just to keep the .00-ish, we're going to move a lot faster through the following slides.

And there's many important questions in the chat and also arising.

So we're just going to carry on more rapidly so people can...

pick up on these key points in the zero and we'll have a lot of time to explore soon.

Section two, from predictive coding to active inference, traces the history and the development from various fields.

And just one sentence here that Dean and I both highlighted on, and then Dean, I'll let you describe the button, was that

Crucially, for the purposes of this paper, the first generation active inference was not a theory of decision making.

It did not explain how we decide or plan where to move our body.

It only explained how body movements can be executed using the predictive coding apparatus once a decision has been made.

So how did you connect that to the bottom right?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so if you're on some sort of a website and you have to pass through to something, my question was based on that statement, when the expectation is to know that you've actually crossed a threshold, you've moved beyond one page and there's an expectation that there's something that you validated or confirmed or whatever, is the feedback that you received, does that happen?

how does the person who's actually expecting that they're on the other side, what kind of feedback mechanism do they need for that confirmation?

Is tactile feedback enough?

Do they need some sort of a visual confirmation as well?

Like what is the, what's the,

Is there, because we're talking about thresholds, is that different for every single person or is there sort of expectations built in depending upon the kind of situation that you're dealing with?

I do know that with the idea that like changes are saved or links are copied, sometimes the click isn't enough to give people confidence that in fact that process is carried through.


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, I would say that, I mean, a lot of those questions are really empirical questions as opposed to modeling questions.

I mean, in terms of how you would model that sort of thing, right?

You just specify what observations count as tactile, you specify what observations count as visual, and what ends up being thresholds for sufficient evidence and things like that just have to do with the way that processes just have the dynamics naturally unroll in the model under whatever the model parameterization is.

So you'll hit a threshold faster if the mapping between

whatever observations and states is more precise.

For example, I mean, there's, you know, in relation to that, when we're doing policy selection, right, we also have to check and see whether things are actually going as we expected them to go, you know, under a choice of policy, right?

So it's possible that you choose policy one and you start to get the subsequent observations and they don't actually match what you expected, you know, given that you had chosen policy one, you know, in which case,

you'll update your beliefs through perceptual inference, and that might influence how you act going forward.

So, but the specifics about, you know, what's enough and whether it's visual or tactile or anything like that, I mean, those are really just empirical questions that would have to be answered in studies as opposed to something about model choices.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so there was really not a good enough thing when you did the darkroom aspect of it?

Like the risk that you were prepared to take on, right?

Like somebody was prepared to take on the risk because they really urgently wanted the ice cream versus the person who was like,

eh, I'm agnostic, right?

So that's maybe, that's kind of what I was, because this was on the second reading of your paper, right?

So I was kind of now backfilling from further down in the paper.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I'm into that.

We'll go in the order of the paper because we're mentioning things that we haven't brought up yet.

But let's continue on and we'll return to that.

And Ryan, I also agree that in any specific case, it's going to be a model parameterization.

Some of these are very difficult to...

answer in the abstract model selection setting um here the uh distinction between motor active inference and decision active inference is introduced and um I'll allow Jakob to just convey one pass what is the difference between motor active inference and decision active inference


SPEAKER_01:
So I'm not sure whether I can say much that hasn't been said yet, but briefly, the motor active inference does, well, as already mentioned, it does not consider desires in both the active inference and folk psychological sense as was then connected in the paper, but

Also, it is my understanding that the motor control version of active inference is modelled continuously, like the models of the movement of individual muscles, which does not entail decision-making, so it's modelled with continuous time rather than in discrete time.

And the decision-making act in, as Ryan already said as well,

is all about decision-making.

So it describes the discrete process of decision-making with prior beliefs and preferences.

And it can be modeled at different levels of cognition as well, which is one thing that I'm still a bit uncertain about how we can move through these different layers while still keeping the same mathematical formulation.

but I think we'll probably get to that in the other slides.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, we're going to continue with this distinction of MAI for motor active inference and DAI for the decision active inference.

Here, we're showing some key sections from the paper and some citations.

i think we will continue on without going into this in depth but it describes some of the specific model quantities that are being described in active inference formalism and we're going to come to them when we look at some equations in the coming slides um in section three preliminary considerations

Two broad points are introduced and we might show a second one on a later slide.

How can we think, Ryan, about what is said here that decision-making AI models are largely taken to describe sub-personal, non-conscious processes?

And also it was asked in the chat, not that we have to address it now, by Duvid, has active inference produced a single reasonable model of a qualia?

So when we're thinking about this first broad point that was made here, where is experience and what is the distinction between the personal and the sub-personal in DAI?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I mean, so there's a couple different questions you asked there, and I don't necessarily think they're synonymous.

So, you know, when you said, I think the first question you asked was something about, um, uh, has active inference provided some sort of, uh, explanation or, or model of, um, of qualia that would be satisfactory, um, in the strong sense.

So in the sense of the sense of quality as an explanation for like the hard problem of consciousness, then I think active inference is in the same place as anyone else in the, no one has a good explanation for, for, you know, how to deal with the hard problem of consciousness.

Right.

I mean, like,

massive literature out there, but I think everyone thinks it's just as mysterious as ever.

So no, right?

I mean, on the other hand, I mean, you know, myself and others, you know, have published multiple papers showing how you can successfully use active inference models to model conscious access processes, right?

So the distinction between when the brain is representing something unconsciously versus when it's representing something consciously, you know, in that it can, you know, self-report

right, what it's representing, um, can use the information to make voluntary choices.

Um, and we've shown that those sorts of models are able to, um, you know, reproduce, uh, like empirical results and like EEG studies and fMRI studies and things like that.

Um, that, and that also can make novel neurophysiological predictions.

Um, some of which seem like they, um, you know, in some subsequent work, uh, you know, have, um, like empirical support for those predictions.

So in terms of providing what seems like a useful account of the processes associated with what people self-report that they consciously experience and the brain basis for that, I think active inference has at least the starting point for being useful and explaining those sorts of things.

But why one little posterior inside a model versus another posterior in a model actually corresponds to like,

the experience of red versus blue or something.

I mean, no, I don't, I think active inferences is not any better than anyone else, you know, any other model for that question.

I guess the second thing, you know, that you asked had to do with this kind of like related question of, you know, why it's the case that one level has to do with a conscious process versus unconscious process.

And the best I really got there and, you know, what falls out of the models that we've, you know, shown.

really just has to do with temporal scale.

You know, so there will be a certain level of temporal representations in a hierarchical model that integrates enough and represents regularities over a long enough time scale that it can contribute to, you know, sort of prospective, it will be sufficiently compact to generate things like self-reports, right?

So, I mean, think about how complicated and temporally extended reporting and choosing to report something like, you know, I see something green and

me, right?

I mean, it's a very complicated and really deep, um, you know, type of policy to select and it requires integrating a bunch of information from stuff at lower levels that's happening over faster timescales.

Um, so at a minimum, right, you just need to be at a level of representation where the regularities are sufficiently, uh, sufficiently long and, um, especially temporarily deep and then have access to all the relevant information you need to integrate to be able to generate, um, reports like that.

Um,

Whereas much of the other kind of little pieces in the model, right, like, you know, the generated, say, like, expected error for, like, variational free energy gradients and things like that, that, you know, people might call, like, surprise, right?

I mean, no one's claiming that, and often they will not relate in any way to people's conscious reports about feeling surprised, because conscious reports about feeling surprised will have to do with representations of surprises in states, right, as opposed to, you know, some sort of prediction error, like,

you know, gradient minimization process.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
Also in section three, there are several clarifications and some seeds that are planted, namely if computational and folk psychological predictions converge,

and no other available theory can account for behavior equally well this could entail the mathematical structure of dai as more than a convenient tool instead that it corresponds to the true information processing structure underlying and enabling folk psychology and related abilities and this is really nicely put here that the crucial point remains that one should not conflate mathematical and psychological levels of description

However, DAI models might nonetheless offer more detailed information about the true form of folk's psychological categories and processes.

And then they add that their aims are to demonstrate that there's a clear isomorphism between the elements of DAI models and those of the BDI model, and then show how

provided one does not assume probability distributions in computational models must be identified with beliefs at the psychological level there will be no tension between dai and bdi and that comparison or juxtaposition is clarified by separating mai from dai like has been mentioned anything else before we start to jump into some of the formalisms and keeping all of this in mind


SPEAKER_01:
I guess I had one question on which ontology we're working with when we say there's an isomorphism between the elements of DAI models and those of the BDI model.

because I think there are multiple ways to interpret this.

One thing that I'm wondering about is whether this means that we can basically construct a mathematical formulation of the BDI model that is like a subset of active inference, or maybe there are certain elements of the BDI model that aren't necessarily

encapsulated with enactant that weren't discussed in this paper and what that would mean in terms of formulating this mathematical formulation of the BDI model.


SPEAKER_04:
So I mean what the isomorphism just means is tell me the description at one level and I'll be able to translate it for you very quickly and directly into whatever the description is at the other level.

in both directions.

Right.

I mean, so it just means, you know, tell me, tell me what, you know, tell me what it is that you want.

You know, if I say, do you want ice cream or do you want a pizza?

Right.

Tell me, tell me that you like, if you tell me that you like, you want pizza twice as much as you like ice cream, then it's very easy to just put, you know, a four, you know, in the, you know, in the, in the distribution in, you know, in the preference distribution over the observation of pizza and the two for ice cream.

And then softmax it and log it.

Right.

And then like, you know, there's that's the description, right.

So just in a very direct way, it just encodes relative desires for one thing versus another, you know, tell me what your beliefs are.

Right.

I mean, do you believe that pizza is to the left or to the right?

I can put that in as the different categories of hidden states that you're going for a distribution over.

Right.

So like, it's just, the point is, is that in either direction, right.

Give me the full psychological description.

I can translate it very straightforwardly using the same elements every time as being desires or beliefs, you know, give it to me at the mathematical level.

I can translate that into a description in terms of beliefs and desires, right?

I mean, it's just one to one.

I can't think of an example offhand where there would be any kind of like mismatch or inability for one to account for the other, but

Um, you know, it's kind of hard to prove a negative, right?

So, I mean, maybe you can give me an example, but I can't think of one.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

I was just going to say that I can't really think of an example, uh, right now.

I just found it really interesting with the usage of the word isomorphism, because as you said, it's just a bidirectional and subjective map, so it's basically equivalent, it's just set in a different way.

So I can imagine that, uh, meaning that we can basically, instead of the Wikipedia page for the BDI model, uh, using all of these terms, um, like believe, desire, intention, it could just be a set of active inference equations.

And that's the BDI model because it's an isomorphism.


SPEAKER_04:
Right.

I mean, literally your, your beliefs are just your cues, right?

And you're, uh,

and your desires are just your, uh, you know, P of O's, right.

I mean, and, and, and, uh, you know, the way that we've, uh, you know, we and others have tended to write it now, right.

It's to literally, it's just explicitly to say like that desires are, um, or the preference distribution is P of O given C, right.

Where C is just a matrix that defines your preferences, right.

So, I mean, it's a lot clearer to do that, um, than to just, just leave it just P of O, right.

I think that's part of the confusion is, is, is that, uh,


SPEAKER_00:
not clear where the preferences come from well but they're just it's just because they're conditioned on this other thing c and c can be fixed or learnt but that's the basis of the calculation there um yeah here we get into section four variational and expected free energy considerations and in large script we see the variational free energy equation

Dean, what is the skydiver doing?

And during the one and the two, we'll unpack more about the exact terms and what is coming into and coming out of this equation.

But just as an appetizer here, what's the skydiver doing?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, now that I've got the author here, I just put through that in there because I like the...

I don't think it's a metaphor, but the analogy of, of how, so how do you respond when you jump out of the airplane and you know, your parachute's not going to work?

Do you, uh, do you go ahead first and really attack it or like what now, what are you doing in terms of what your expectations are?

So maybe, maybe that, that, that was a good analogy, Ryan, maybe, but what, like, so where were you, where were you going with that?

Cause yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I mean, I think the point, the point of those sorts of examples are just, uh,

just to, um, sorry to put this to, to show why it's not, um, it's not really correct to think about the, um, like prior, uh, you know, this prior preference distribution, even though it's, you know, it's again, it's cast as a prior belief.

Right.

Um, it's not really appropriate to think about that as a, as a, um, uh, a belief per se.

Right.

I mean,

the, um, or an expectation at any, at a psychological level of description.

Um, so you can, and the way to contrast that, right.

As you can say, look like the person in a model where they don't want, right.

To fall to the ground and die.

Right.

That would be your, that would be your PO though.

Right.

It's your preference not to have the observation of hitting the ground and dying.

Um, but what you act, right.

Is your Q of O given pi, right?

It's what do I expect to observe given that I choose this policy versus that policy, right?

So that's the, you know, the belief-y part, right?

It's what I expect given that I do this or that.

And, you know, how close is that to how much does that diverge from what I want, right?

Which would be your P of O. So it's just a clear example of how your belief-y expectations and your desire-y expectations come apart, right?

And it just doesn't work conceptually to think of one as like the same kind of thing as the other.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I just saw it as if I'm not going to get a soft landing, how big of a crater can I create?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, that then is going to be packed into your preference distribution, right?

You would have some desire to make a big conditional on you're going to die, right?

Like you'd prefer to make a big crater than a small crater.

and that would still just go in your P , right?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Jakob?

I was just wondering, and this might be me thinking too deep, or not too deeply about the equation, rather, but in this formulation where it's a variational free energy for each policy f ,

Does that imply, in the last sentence on this slide, that free energy is a functional of beliefs and a function of observations?

Does that mean that the free energy is essentially a function of three variables?

But in this case, we are only writing it f because it's clear that it's a functional of beliefs and observations.

Um, or should we think of it more as just a function of each policy?


SPEAKER_04:
Um, I mean, the way it's written here, I mean, I think that the most straightforward way to think about it is, I mean, it literally just means that, um, using this equation, you will calculate a different F value for each policy.

Right.

I mean, that's really it.

Like you just, there will be, you're going to be computing.

some some variational for energy value for each policy, and that's going to make up a distribution over policies.

And and I mean, the the tricky thing, I guess, here is, is that, you know, this isn't about this isn't, you know, f of f of pi here isn't about making decisions, right?

This is just about, you know, something like evaluating evidence for, you know, for various policies, because you you can't you calculate f when you already have the observation.

Right.

So you can't really do this perspective decision-making thing with that.

Um, so this is just basically a way of describing how, um, how under each policy, your beliefs will change, um, or wouldn't change right under, you know, when you get conditional on each new observation that you got.

Um, and, um, and so it's not, uh, yeah, so all, all it denotes really is, is just, you know, you have a value of F for each policy and that makes them a distribution.


SPEAKER_00:
And that takes us to G, expected free energy, the letter after F. And as shown here, not sure if there's another reason for why it's G. This is equation 2.6 from the Active Inference textbook, just for reference with some other versions of how G is framed.

G is a prospective value, and they write, decision-making does not only require beliefs about past and present states, it also requires making predictions about future states and future observations.

This requires taking the average, i.e.

expected, free energy, G of pi, given anticipated outcomes under each policy that one might choose.

And there's a lot to say on expected free energy.

What is just one short note that somebody could add?

Or Ryan, why was it placed here?

I'm not sure I understand the question.

Why is expected free energy required?

Why is variational free energy not enough?


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, expected free energy is just what the system is trying to minimize when it's selecting a policy, right?

So I mean,

it's just trying to, I mean, in this, I mean, this decomposition right here is often called like the risk, risk plus ambiguity decomposition, but, um, I guess, uh, I like, I think that, I think that showing the, um, you know, the risk term, the risk term here provides a nice kind of intuition for, um, for again, the separation between beliefs and desires and active inference, because, um, you know, your, your, uh, so the, the,

the term underlined in red there, right?

So the kale divergence between PO given pi and P of O, right?

I mean, that's just saying that, you know, how different are the observations I expect given that I choose a given policy and, you know, how different is that?

How different do I expect that to be from my preferences or my desires, right?

P of O. So the

the closer those are together, right?

The more similar I expect the observations to be under a policy to my preferred observations, the smaller that's going to be.

And so if I'm trying to select the policy that minimizes G, right, then that means I'm going to select the policy that's going to get me as close to my preferred observations as possible, right?

So literally just is that KL divergence literally just is

trying to choose the policy that brings beliefs closest to desires.


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice.

And then what does the blue term mean?


SPEAKER_04:
Um, that's just an entropy term, right?

So, I mean, it's just basically saying that the, it's what drives information seeking or part of what drives information seeking.

It's just, uh, it's just, yeah, basically the agents choose, you know, driven to choose policies that also are going to generate, um,

more precise expected observations that are going to disambiguate states more easily.

Great.


SPEAKER_00:
Here we'll explore it more in the dot one, but there's a description of the posterior probability distribution over policies, p , and an expression involving the softmax symbol with a sigma.

We'll return to that later, but this is just so that we can cover the key experiments and the simulation results today.

This is also one other area of formalism we can explore in the coming discussions about precision and the relationship of beta and gamma and what the convergence towards means.

But we won't go there.

There is precision parameter in this model.

let's go to the dark room problem and many lines of pdf screen and ink has been written on the dark room in the active world since um perhaps friston at all 2012 and also outside of active and um they write in a nutshell the concern is that if agents only act to minimize prediction error

as opposed to acting under the impetus of a cognitive desire-like state, then they ought to simply seek out very stable, predictable environments, such as a dark room, and stay there.

Would anybody like to add anything about this dark room problem, or what is the relationship between doxastic and cognitive ontology and act-inf?


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, are you just asking what those words mean?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, how do you use these words?


SPEAKER_04:
I mean, doxastic is just a term that refers to the leafy, like epistemic sorts of things, right?

So a doxastic ontology would be an ontology that includes the leafy things, right?

Whereas conative just refers to being targeted towards something, right?

Like something about

you know, desires or, you know, something, things you want versus don't want, things you like versus don't like, right?

So it's just, you know, when we say it's apparently purely doxastic ontology, it's just saying it might look as though superficially like the ontology proposed in active inference, like the things that exist in active inference are purely belief-y.


SPEAKER_00:
That's all that means.

Great, and it's applied in the setting of this dark room.

For the following two slides, Dean help us understand what concerns are addressed and what the child on the top right of the slide is doing.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, well, so I'm not going to go through all of the text, but essentially this was my introduction to the darkroom problem because it was kind of the opposite of all my experience, which is that I tend to find people that were curious and were trying to move away from information

leveling off or being static to information gain.

So first of all, I had to learn what the argument was about why people would actually, who are normally social, why they would move away from that social realm and into this sort of dark space under the idea that active inference actually implies that that's what people would do.

And then secondly, it was

I was kind of trying to tie it into the idea of the refrigerator and where it is.

And until you actually, and Danny, you and I talked about this a bit, the pragmatic piece of until you actually open the refrigerator door, which is on the kind of the next slide, you don't really, I mean, you can have a belief that there's something of value in there, but it can turn out that when,

you open the door or Monty raises the curtain, the thing that you were expecting turns out to be a value, but not necessarily of that thing that you were setting yourself up to believe.

And so that young individual spitting the coin out, maybe I guess I was just trying to be a little bit facetious there that it holds value, but it doesn't hold the same kind of tasty value as say having a lick of an ice cream cone, so.

Again, it was trying to move away from the idea that the belief he stopped alone is satisfactory or necessary.

I always get those two mixed up, but I think I was just trying to reinforce the idea that you kind of need to have both so that you can compare and contrast so that you get a sense of what a person or what an agent is doing as they're getting past some of those shrouds or some of those

non-observables into the observable state.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

We'll keep going.

this is unpacking some of the concerns about the apparent pure doxastic belief oriented ontology of actin so ryan described earlier like is it about beliefs colliding and if so if it's purely doxastic then where is this um desire and um is there anything else that anybody wants to add here


SPEAKER_01:
I would maybe comment that I think this also relates to the earlier thing that was discussed, how this confusion might stem from people misinterpreting or misinterpreting

confusing the terms predictive processing and active inference.

And I feel like this addresses it as well, where if it's only beliefs, then there is obviously a concern that once we're in a dark room, we...

Because if we're only in the regime of predictive processing, there is no way for us to move to a different state.

Or there isn't the formalism that describes planning and action.

But as I guess we'll get to in the other slides, when we do include this planning, we suddenly have desire-like terms appearing within.

the mathematical formulation as well.


SPEAKER_04:
Great.

Yeah, and I want to be clear.

It's not like they're thrown in ad hoc, right?

They emerge naturally as like necessary components of any kind of, you know, like using this sort of framework or building it out to involve planning.

So it's not like they emerge naturally and necessarily.

It's not because someone's just kind of tacking them on.


SPEAKER_00:
great um and this is referring to that minimization of g the minimization of g drives the agent to seek out observations that will reduce uncertainty about the best way to subsequently bring about phenotype congruent or preferred outcomes so that's the information seeking

Another way to put this is that under DAI, an agent doesn't simply seek to minimize prediction error with respect to its current sensory input.

It seeks instead to minimize prediction error with respect to its global beliefs about the environment, which entails seeking out observations that are expected to generate prediction errors, such that uncertainty is minimized for the generative model as a whole.

And another aspect of this type of global prediction error minimization process is that it pertains not only to beliefs about states in the present, but also to beliefs about the past and in the future.

And so this is leading to one of the claims, which is that in addition to desires, DAI captures folk

psychological experiences associated with the drive to both know about one's current states and learn what will happen when choosing to move to other states among other parameters in a generative model.

Let's go into this generative model and come to the darkroom simulation itself.

And we'll unpack it more in future times, but the prior over policies E of pi,

they write that um when the agent repeatedly chooses a policy this term increases the probability that the agent will continue to select that policy in the future at the level of the formalism this corresponds to an agent coming to expect that it will choose a policy simply because it has chosen that policy many times in the past

This can be thought of as a type of habitization process, but it doesn't have any direct connection to preferred outcomes because E of pi is not informed by other beliefs in the agent's model.

So here's the partially observable Markov decision process, just one representation of it.

and e is sort of floating there influencing but not being influenced by and we had some interesting discussions which we can return to another time about how we might be able to assess whether somebody is engaging in a behavior because they simply have habitually engaged in that behavior but they understand the actual mapping

of how policies relate to outcomes, or in another case where somebody might be engaging in a behavior, not because of habituation, but rather because they have some sort of deviation from the appropriate mapping between policies and outcomes.

and maybe there's other ways so I thought that was very interesting how even within the same sort of sparse and first principles model similar behavioral outcomes might be observed on like a behavioral manifold and then different kinds of perturbations or evaluations might reduce uncertainty about what is giving rise to those conversion behaviors in in that case

Okay, Dean, with the ice cream truck and the eye.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm going to wait because I think this one and the next one are better to take up in a one-two part because if Ryan can come back, there's some good questions I want to ask him about those two sections because this slide and the next one are kind of anti-dark rooms.

And so I want to kind of pick his brain about how we can sort of convince people that that dark room problem is for such a small subset of the population that majority of the stuff that we're talking about here is done in sort of social settings and social context.

And there's a third party.

sometimes it can observe an observer and what role that plays in trying to figure out what's going on here as we move from the idea of decisioning and so forth.

So I'll wait.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

So here's part one of that.

And here's part two, looking at social learning theory a little bit.

But let's go to the figure and to the simulation.

This is figure one, simulation of an active inference agent deciding whether to eat some ice cream.

And there's various ways to go about describing it.

But one of the key pieces, if anyone can give a remark about what is occurring here, is that there's three cases that are being compared.

There's a no desire case.

a weak desire reflected by this p of o and a strong desire case where the ratio between the two alternatives between um wanting the ice cream and or between the ice cream state and the no ice cream state is a sharper distinction in this second row

So there's a case in which ice cream is in the fridge, but where the kitchen is currently dark, and so the agent doesn't know whether the fridge is to the left or right.

So it's like a tea maze setup with three possible cases.

One where there's no preference for observing ice cream or not, a weak or a strong preference for that.

um and then under these situations we can ask about what happens in terms of the action as well as the um beliefs and valence updates what else would you add about that ryan well i mean i think the point you know the point of this is just to show um well i guess make a couple you know i mean so dean mentioned the


SPEAKER_04:
you know, the issue with the dark room, right?

I mean, as you said, I mean, as you said, I mean, this is essentially just a particular, very similar to, to like a teammates, right?

I mean, just putting a, putting a different sort of semantics on top of it, but the, you know, but the idea is just that it's just set up to show that, you know, even without any kind of desire, right.

Just, just resolving uncertainty the agent will be driven by,

to leave a dark room or do something to get rid of the dark room.

Um, so you don't need a desire, right.

But, but in fact, any realistic agent is also going to have desires.

So, um, so in the case where there are desires, then there's two different reasons why, um, no active inference agent will ever, um, stay in a dark room or be motivated to stay in a dark room.

Like in all cases, it will have a motivation to, to leave.

So, I mean, the,

Point is just to show, right, in some explicit simulations that generically, right, like this kind of darkroom problem, it will just never apply to active inference.

Again, this darkroom thing only applies if you assume the thing is just doing something like predictive coding, but then somehow also assume that it's making decisions.

But that's not active inference.


SPEAKER_03:
because it's not a theory of decision-making.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Here is some description about the strength of the desire.

Could have been shown before the figure, but we wanted to introduce the simulation setting.

And as described, there is a desire

as well as an information seeking and i believe that's the two reasons why the agent will escape the dark room and there's there's other escape hatches depending on how one constructs their model um

potentially like a hierarchical model might have a slightly different explanation for why an agent does or doesn't stay in the room.

But even just within this single level model, there's an information seeking as well as a preference realizing reason.

Any other comments here?

Okay, Dean?

Just a quick thing.

I'll put you in the island.

I'll put you in the island.

Go for it.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

So maybe, Ryan, just a quick, this last couple of sentences, however, preference distributions are set to zero.

Oh, I'm sorry.

I'm not still on the previous slide, Daniel.

Sorry.

Can you go back one?

Yeah, go for it.

Okay, so however, if preference distributions are set to zero, as in our no-desire simulation, such that no outcome is desired over any other net and active inferences

will nonetheless be driven to choose behaviors that will maximize information gain.

Okay, that all makes sense.

That's just the background.

This is the part I was curious about.

While this might reasonably be considered a motivational influence, it is prima facie less plausible that it should be considered cognitive.

and may therefore be better seen as a type of doxastic drive.

Here, the formalism may therefore help us to recover and potentially nuance the folk psychological distinction between desire and curiosity.

These types of drives seem to differ fundamentally.

I agree with you, but I was wondering if you could maybe explain why that...

should be something that we should keep separate the idea of desire and curiosity I know you go into explaining it a little more into the paper but why did you want to point that out to readers well I mean I think there's a couple things I mean I mean one I think that you know these things are both driving you know decisions about what to do right so in some way they motivate they both motivate behavior right but


SPEAKER_04:
but at the same time, um, you know, and, and I think, uh, this is something, you know, that Alex Keeper, um, you know, pointed out when we were writing this as opposed to just, you know, so it's not just me, um, but, you know, pointed out that, um, you know, there is this kind of, um, fairly clear difference, um, between the, um, this, uh, you know, curiosity or epistemically driven, um, sort of behavior, um, from the kind of desire-driven behavior and the, the, the kind of clear differences is that the, um,

this epistemically driven motivation isn't, um, it isn't driven toward anything, right.

It doesn't have a target.

It's not trying to get one thing versus another.

Um, all it's trying to do is just, um, you know, just become clearer about what's out there, um, essentially.

Right.

So, so the fact that it lacks a target, um, is really, I think what makes the, what makes the distinction clear.

Um, but the, I mean, beyond that, I think the motivation was just, uh, was just to show that, um,

you know, like just a, you know, generically, right?

Like the belief, desire, intention principle doesn't really, um, doesn't really say anything about, uh, you know, types of types of desires.

There's nothing really explicitly just in that very, very simple, um, um, way of, way of, um, describing the framework that, that separates out, uh, information seeking from, from reward seeking.

Right.

Um, so, um,

you know, so you could, right, if all you're doing is trying to, you know, compare active inference to, um, to, you know, the BDI model, very simply stated, then, um, then this is able to kind of nuance a little more, right?

Like different, different things that, that, um, might look like, you know, cognitive motivational kinds of things, but, but there are separate, um, um,

on why decisions are made for one thing versus another that are more tied to beliefs in a different way.

That being said, at the same time, I think that folk psychology more broadly, I think very intuitively and naturally does recognize the difference between things like curiosity and things like reward-driven behavior.

Those are concepts that we have just in our natural folk psychology.

Um, you know, so active inference just captures those, right.

I mean, I, um, yeah, I talked about this, um, just as an example of, you know, how, how intuitive I think in like natural, um, this sort of aspect is, um, you know, and I just like, think of like most of the behaviors that say like my little dog does, um, you know, if I look at, if I look at what my dog does 90% of the time, it's way more information seeking than it is reward seeking.

You know, she searches out for some food a couple of times a day.

but I take her in the car, she's pulling left and right to see what's out the window and how that changed all the time.

You know, any little sound perks up looks right.

None of those things are reward driven.

They're all just information seeking.

Um, so I mean, very, very clearly, that's a big part of, um, you know, what drives, um, us and other animals to do.

Um, so, so the point was just to, just to kind of show that active inference captures that in a certain sense, it adds some granularity to, um,

to at least what the BDI model says.

But in that case, the BDI model is kind of too horse-grained.

And I think normal folk psychology doesn't include those things already.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

Also to be returned to, Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, because Brian just basically answered it.

All these two images are basically doing is separating out the sort of goal directed from the curiosity, which is

know the the image on the right is basically a documentary about the franklin expedition where they were going out to the event horizon but they never returned so did they have a goal probably but was that their curiosity being carried out i think we i think we got to be able to make sure that we appreciate both so that's all i wanted about that this makes me think like um


SPEAKER_00:
are you driven to watch the sunset over the horizon or are you driven to find out what's at the end of the rainbow and what's over the horizon and that's the sort of like infinite open-ended curiosity drive beyond the horizon versus the preferred specific state that one can desire in terms of their um observations and reduce the divergence there but cool um

wishful thinking we'll come back to we're just leaving notes so that we can um have more to discuss later because these are all like there's such vital threads um Ryan and Maxwell and Alex because they um touch to our day-to-day experience in a way that

few other frameworks and even papers within Act-Inf do.

So affect and the role of affect and precision, curiosity, these are all just like terms that touch humans.


SPEAKER_04:
One thing that I think is probably worth just touching on, I mean, again, something maybe you guys would want to talk about in the future, maybe when I'm not around in any other sessions, not sure, but

Um, you know, uh, so there is a, a, probably a distinction that's worth keeping in mind between that curiosity per se and, um, and goal-directed information seeking.

Um, I think some of the examples you guys have mentioned have been more kind of along the lines of one versus the other.

I think it might be good to just, just keep that distinction clear that, um, you know, and, and vanilla active inference.

Um, it is really something more just kind of like curiosity.

You're just kind of like independently driven, just kind of, you know, look where you're going to gain the most information.

Whereas the construct of directed exploration and reinforcement learning and what also often something that can emerge, I think, a little more clearly in sophisticated active inference is information seeking specifically or in the service of knowing how to get your goal.

The curiosity version that we're showing here, it has the effect of helping the agent get to what it wants.

But the drive to seek out information isn't actually itself due to the fact that the agent thinks it will help it get its goal.

It's just driven to seek the information independently.

Whereas in other, like in sophisticated inference, the agent is actually doing something more like, I'm going to look over here because I think looking over here is actually going to help me get to what I want better.

So this is kind of strategic information seeking and that's a little different than just like intrinsic curiosity.

So it's just something to keep clear.


SPEAKER_00:
That's quite interesting.

It kind of ties a braid back, but let's explore that later.

Here we have a nice clean representation of the summary of the main argument.

Their proposed solution is somewhat deflationary in the sense that it simply argues that the functional role of desire, not the experience of desire, is straightforwardly present in the DAI formalism.

And then in more detail, they argue that and they provide four points, which it'll be great to go over with the authors.

Based on those considerations, the apparent problem posed by purely doxastic looking constructs is simply not a problem.

There are beliefs and desires in the active inference framework.

Perhaps we could have explored this more with the formalism.

So we'll bring it up to talking more about F.

but won't go into it now.

We'll return to the letters later.

And then the appendix is very informative.

There's a description of all the states and the factors that are used in the simulation.

And in the model stream one, which is by the way, Ryan, it's our, our most popular series was model stream one.

It was, it was, it was a fan favorite, but yeah,

It's some similar concepts and MATLAB scripts.

So the appendix describes how the figure one results were generated.

And maybe we'll see if anybody can run that and execute it.

We can play with a few different things and take some of these qualitative linguistics and even mutate the simulation a little bit, see where that takes us.

We'll close out with our usual closing slide.

So who would like to take the first last word?

Yes, Dean, then Jakob, then Ryan.


SPEAKER_02:
First of all, thanks for shepherding us, these three cats, through this paper, because there's an awful lot of stuff to try to cover in a pretty short period of time.

And it's easy, I think, to sort of go

I don't want to say tangentially, but go deeper into some of the parts of the paper, because for me, it was one of those ones where I would go back and have to reflect on something after I read a section, and then try to fit it into the larger picture that was right.

I think the paper did a very good job of sort of ordering through what you were trying to say in terms of

the reassurance of how the quantitative and the modeling of the psychosocial could be seen as working with each other, as opposed to, oh, this doesn't answer what this other thing questions, but it does cause, this was a paper that for me, I won't speak for the others, but I had to read the section and then try to plug it back into the overall narrative that was being told.

And again, I think part of that is because

the the translation from the stuff that's typically seen as the quantitative part is hard to move into the qualitative part i think that's that's a challenge for anybody that tries to move back and forth between those two things but uh yeah i mean in terms of

in terms of making a case and providing what I think people need to sort of see the two in the same light.

Thank you, appreciate it.


SPEAKER_04:
Sure, I'm happy if it's helpful.


SPEAKER_01:
Rocco?

Yeah, I think, I guess there are two points that I'd like to touch on.

Firstly, I thought it was very helpful to

map these concepts that everyone, even though everyone, I guess that's the nature of psychology, that everyone will have a slightly different probably distribution of what these terms actually mean.

But I think it's in just learning about active inference, it's helpful to link the mathematical formulation

And even just the active inference ontology, which itself can be very cumbersome at times to these very intuitive concepts.

And I think as we're starting to explore modeling within the accident flap as well, I think

it will be really helpful to use this isomorphism between active inference and folk psychology to explain the behavior of agents within these models.

And beyond a darkroom problem, when there is some unexpected behavior of an agent, we can directly look at

okay, how did this tensor change its values and describe it with this folk psychological ontology?

So I think personally, that's the most exciting thing about this paper for me.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I mean, if that's the kind of thing that you're interested in, then, I mean, that's kind of the whole...

it's kind of the whole motivation of, you know, for instance, like computational psychiatry, right.

Which is like the area that I currently work in.

Right.

So you, you take, for instance, clinical populations where people may behave in unexpected or ways or ways that don't necessarily seem like they're all that adaptive.

Right.

Then you can just fit these models to their behavior and you can figure it out.

Okay.

Well, what is making their behavior abnormal?

Right.

Is it, is it something about an overly precise preference distribution or is it something about, um,

you know, uh, the belief that states, uh, states transition to, uh, to, um, into volatile or uncertain way or, you know, things like that.

So, I mean, it is the, yeah, I mean, the kind of, uh, you know, the major point is you can use these models and empirical studies to figure out what the mechanisms are that are leading to healthy and unhealthy behavior.

Um, and, um, you know, that can give you kind of guiding information toward, you know, design better treatments or,

you know, trying to measure these things in a more quantitative way, things like that.

And, and the, you know, and just as I've said, I mean, this is all using, using tasks that, you know, that involve some kind of goal, right?

Like seeking some kind of reward or social approval, or, you know, whatever it is that, you know, humans seek out, you could do that, right?

Unless you have a straightforward way to map the formalism, each element of the formalism to

you know, the reason that we think people behave in the way that they do.

Right.

So, so, so I guess I'm just saying if that's an interest of yours, then I would think that you would, you'd probably be a fan of a lot of the, a lot of the computational psychiatry literature more broadly, both, you know, both the active inference part, which is a lot of what my lab does, but, but also just the broader computational psychiatry community that uses reinforcement learning and direct diffusion models and all the other, you know, all the other classics that are out there.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And it, it opens it up to what organizations want and what do cells want and all these other, um, transpositions.

Well, Ryan really appreciate that last minute, um,

belief or desire combination thereof to join us it certainly helped resolve our uncertainty a lot and it's a great conversation in the coming two weeks we're going to be with hopefully some more authors and more lab participants and just i'm looking forward to taking some notes thank you see you all soon bye

## JPsdk7pVa1I

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome everyone it's june 15th 2022 and we're here in actinflab live stream number 46.1 welcome oh and mute the stream if you have in the background thank you welcome to the active inference lab we are a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at some of the links on the slide

This is a recorded and an archived and transcribed and edited and published live stream.

So please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Head over to ActiveInference.org to learn more about live streams and a lot of the other projects that are happening in the lab.

So we're here in ACT-IMP Stream 46.1, and we're in our second discussion of the paper, Active Inference Models Do Not Contradict Folks' Psychology by Ryan Smith, Maxwell Ramstad, and Alex Kiefer.

and we're going to go i expect in many fun and interesting directions today so thanks everybody who's joined the panel live and also for those who are watching live thanks for adding your comments in the live chat

we'll begin with some introductions and then i believe that will introduce many interesting areas we can continue from there so we can start by just introducing ourselves and then passing it to someone else who has not yet spoken and we'll close with the authors who are here so i'm daniel i'm a researcher in california and

The dot zero was very interesting with Jakob and Dean and Ryan, and it raised many questions that I was excited to discuss today.

Just to provide one would be perhaps the relationship between formalisms of any kinds and natural language and just regular concepts that people have.

How do we draw the connection or evaluate connections that are drawn there?

And I'll pass to Ali.

Questions I'd like to ask if they're not... Sorry, Ali, wait, sorry, just the audio is set up a little bit differently.

So if you could just start, you can just reintroduce, but go for it.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Is it okay now?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Yeah.

I'm an independent researcher from Iraq.

And as I said, I also have a couple of questions I'd like to ask.

They're not addressed during the discussion, especially when we get to section nine of the paper.

And yeah, I'm very glad to be here and that's it from me and I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_04:
Morning.

My name is Dean.

I'm here in Calgary.

I really like this

which I kind of indicated in the last livestream.

My curiosity, because I really don't know, is because of my background in education, when I'm looking at that sort of qualification, quantification piece, and I'm thinking about the desires as something that we can see as 0.1 and 0.9 as a distribution, I often thought of some of my

previous conversations around things like Likert scales.

And so I know this paper doesn't address those things specifically, but the idea of being able to translate into sort of a numeric form has always been interesting to me.

And that's something that maybe today or maybe in the point two, we can think about the implications of that.

And I'll pass it to David.


SPEAKER_03:
Hey, David Kelton here.

Thanks for having me on my first time here on Active Inference.

I go by Duvid as a streamer.

I'm a civil engineer by education and practice by background linguistics and physics and psychology.

I spent many years in yeshiva rabbinic study and have been a practicing Hindu.

I'm more on the mystical side of consciousness, been studying it actively streaming for a few years, but also the mathematical materialistic side.

So this paper was very interesting, especially dealing with the sense perception related to motor control, which my perception of dualism is something that

the material does actually control.

So I like the model, I like the paper.

I was interested in looking at some of the more philosophical and even mystical precursors.

What could actually be explained?

What are the assumptions being made?

And this paper is definitely a good start.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, David, and to Alex.

So feel free to give any introduction and then provide any context on what brought about the paper from your perspective.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thanks.

So I'm Alex Kiefer.

I'm one of the authors on the paper.

I'm affiliated with Monash University and Jakob Hovy's Cognition and Philosophy Lab there, and I currently

Also, my main sort of gig is at Versus Research Labs in LA.

So we've been doing some really interesting research there that plugs into active inference, among other things.

So as far as context for the paper, so this is this issue of how and whether active inference and

and theories in the vicinity, like predictive processing and all that.

How those things map onto folk psychology is something I've been interested in for a long time, before I spoke to Ryan and then Maxwell about this paper.

And I won't try to give Ryan's side of the back story.

But basically, he was, I think, planning on drafting something along these lines independently.

We got in touch.

through Carl Fristen, I think.

And it was pointed out that I was drafting something on the same thing.

And then I ended up just hopping on board to work on certain sections and to sort of help carry through the argument.

So that's a little bit of background.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

What sections we can look at the roadmap?

did you work on or also if you have any thoughts on this overall structure of like what sections did you include and why did you order them in that way?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

I mean, I guess, I mean, really we, we share credit for it, for all of it.

Like it's, there isn't anything, you know, I, I, we, we contributed to the, to the whole paper.

But the, the sections that I was more that I leaned more on maybe, and that I contributed more to were the thing about,

Quantifying the Motivational Force of Desires, Section 7.

And then we also had a bunch of back and forth about the last few sections, Free Energy Principle and Direction of Fit.

So, I mean, Ryan, being the first author, definitely did a lot of the writing.

But those are the sections that I had more to do with directly.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

And then just one more question, Alex, and then we can go back to our open list of topics.

What would you characterize the big question of the paper as?

What do you think would bring somebody to this paper because they were wondering X?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

I mean, so it's pretty, I think it's pretty clear in this case, right?

Fortunately, it's pretty easy.

It's just, the question is whether, uh,

The active inference formalism, particularly a certain strain of that sort of discrete decision model flavor of active inference is consistent with or compatible with folk psychology and the VDI model in particular.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

Okay, and then also, what would you characterize the BDI model as?

And then we'll open up for more questions.

But just to get some of the prerequisites, and you're right that it is great that it is clear.

Many papers have much more esoteric big questions, and this one is very down the middle.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, one thing I liked about working with Ryan is that he sort of wanted to just make the title of the paper a declarative sentence that says,

This is what we're claiming.

And I really like that.

I'm going to try to follow that in some of my work.

But the VDI model, I don't think I have a whole lot to add here either.

It's just the idea fundamentally that beliefs and desires interact to form intentions.

And that's, I guess, maybe also that that's a legitimate way to explain behavior for some class of systems, intelligent systems, people, agents.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, awesome.

So Ali, Dean, or Duvid, if you have any questions you'd like to raise at this time, otherwise we'll go into one of these pieces we've raised.

Yes, Duvid.


SPEAKER_03:
It just, I'd never heard of Hilton or the folk psychology BDM model.

Is that a prominent model you purposely chose or could this be, you know, fill in for basically any non-scientific or introspective or even dualist model for

for consciousness, or is it a bit specific, this Hilton model?

And are you claiming that it fails as a materialistic model?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

So I think part of the reason we referred to the BDI model was to sort of bracket for the purposes of the paper, although I'm happy to discuss it here.

a lot of questions that minorize about folk psychology and what exactly is meant by that.

So if we just say we're talking about the idea that beliefs and desires interact to form intentions, then that's a clear target.

And then, of course, there are many different conceptions of, maybe there are many different folk psychologies and views on

uh in that vicinity but like uh i guess yeah the bdi uh models is sort of maybe supposed to be like a an essence that you can distill from many of those different um perspectives now maybe that's not true we can talk about whether the bdi model is really common to different conceptions of folk psychology uh because i i you know

I have to think about that.

I kind of assume that it is.

I'm curious about the materialism dualism issue.

I don't see, I guess, directly how it plays into things at this level of description, because I guess we're not claiming necessarily that beliefs and desires are material or not at this stage.

But anyway, happy to get into that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, feel free to unpack that, David.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I mean, just classically, obviously people have had minds for as long as human existence.

Maybe if you believe in Julian Jaynes and evolution, that there was an origin to consciousness in the mind at some point.

But historically, most of the Western tradition up till a few hundred years ago believed that these things originated from a non-material source, whether it's soul, however you want to explain it.

uh but uh you know as the controller from the greek model of the soul ethos logos pathos or any model that you know so beliefs and desires that the that would be the controller that would uh be decisive in these uh cognitive functions don't arise from the material so if you have a materialistic model where you're saying that these things do in fact arise from the brain

um you could say that uh you know the ancients were just incorrect either either in ascribing non-material origins to things that have material origins or you could say they were completely incorrect and like in a limited perspective that there is no such thing as belief or desire or there is no such thing as a as like a unified

um, I, so as a way of human Hilton has some sort of material division, even Freud, like even, even going back to Freud just a hundred years ago, uh, the question of the psyche and the subconscious, uh, you know, whether that has material origins or not is unclear.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

Yeah.

So, so I guess, I guess my perspective on this, I'm sort of a methodological materialist about these things.

Like I think that you can,

Insofar as, so in terms of like the scope of this kind of explanation that we discussed in this paper and active inference in general works with, I think anything that you can explain about the causes of intelligent behavior, I think you can probably put a material gloss on that, but I'm not,

Personally, I'm not really committed to the claim that you can explain everything about people in terms of input-output mappings.

But insofar as you can conceive of some function, whether cognition, perception, whatever, as a sort of input-output mapping in space of behavior, then I think you can explain it using these frameworks interpreted as descriptions of brain processes.

So it's interesting that you kind of contrast

Or you suggest that maybe there's an argument for eliminativism.

If you were thinking of mental states as having a root or a source in something non-material, maybe then if you reject that idea, then you'd be prone to eliminativism.

So coming back to the idea, I'm starting from a sort of methodological materialist standpoint, but I'm definitely not an eliminativist.

Actually, the one thing I wanted to get into today is I really don't understand

I don't understand how illuminativism is a tenable position with respect to folk psychology, if you're a materialist, because I think that there's just, well, I'll hold off on getting into that, but I think, I guess I'll just, just one last comment on this.

I think the question of whether beliefs and desires and intentions and other mental states have any non-material aspect and the question of whether they exist and whether they should be eliminated from our ontology are distinct.


SPEAKER_00:
thank you I think this is a fine place we'll have a lot of time to explore other avenues but it would be awesome if you could describe the limitivism and also um there was a quote in your paper where it says if the worry is founded that there's a tension between active inference and folk psychology specifically the BDI model it could be taken either to imply that active inference models are implausible because reasons or

if and to the extent that the models are successful, to imply that desire should be eliminated from scientific theories of psychology.

So what is eliminativism, and how did you interact with that topic?


SPEAKER_02:
Right, so eliminativism is, as we're using it here, and I think this is the mainstream sense, is just a view, well, I guess, okay, the most general version of the view with respect to anything is just that

that thing should be sort of eliminated from serious discourse or serious theory, maybe scientific theory.

And I mean, the idea that the Churchlands have in defending eliminativism about folk psychology is that it's like a failed theory.

So the basic idea is if theories, I suppose, survive on the basis of their predictive and explanatory power and

some other criteria, you know, theoretical virtues, the ability to evolve and explain new anomalies, apparent anomalies that crop up.

So the Churchlands basically think that folk psychology has failed this test.

So the theory of folk psychology has been falsified, and we should just move on.

And that's, I would say, you know, to be sort of a...

precise, that's a version of illimitativism applied to mental states.

But that's the view that we're really talking about here.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Yes, David, please.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I guess there's different schools in illimitativism, but if you want to take that to consciousness studies in totality, or questions of free will, or like I mentioned, the ancient dualistic understanding of

uh consciousness is you could take a limit of some to consciousness in totality that the the man is a mechanistic computer and even uh you know as as a mystic i would argue possibly against the strong interpretation of active inference that's a atheistic eliminavistic model and you might

not you know for philosophical reasons not want to be a limitivists and therefore try to defend it uh but uh then you know what are the mathematics what are your claims actually say uh but yeah i mean the strong levels say that uh there is no uh there is no belief there is no desire there is no

unified I, and we're just an automaton that has some sort of threshold interaction with the environment and whatever perception in our head that, you know, we have voices in our head that might make us think that we're conscious beings, might make us think that we have self-control or, you know, beliefs or even free will are essentially illusions of the mind that have nothing to do with our actions.


SPEAKER_02:
I could just, how do I do follow up?

This is the author's privilege.

Well, great.

Yeah, I would just, it's a good question, how consciousness fits into this picture.

And I'm not sure whether the version of illuminativism that I took myself to be targeting here

includes consciousness or not, it's mostly been a view that's focused on the idea of discrete mental states that play these functional roles, beliefs and desires and so forth.

So, yeah, I definitely think there's further questions about that.

And I can see, yeah, I can see how you might interpret active inference, not just active inference, but almost any mainstream sort of, you know, theory in like neuropsychology and that

vein as as implying a form of illuminate of ISM if you think that these mental states are by definition not material or not entirely material but again I'm happy to get into that further hmm yes the the idea that any kind of modeling by making it specific


SPEAKER_00:
is approaching or on the road or slippery slope or already reached the point of eliminating the need for appeals outside of that description it's also possible to consider that an entire category error and say we're describing brain processes which is i believe what you said earlier and no description of a sunset

is the territory of the sunset math is not the territory as we hear often and so how can one be a limitivist about a process with any kind of description whether it's predictive processing or active inference or any other kind of model um


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I raised my raise my hand here.

I'll just raise my actual hand.

Yeah, I mean, another thing I just don't know what you just said that I should bring up here is that I mean, strictly speaking, I suppose active inference isn't committed to these being directly descriptions of brain processes.

They're right, they're sort of computational models of decision making processes with beliefs and all that.

And of course, if you take the

There's this whole background of the free energy principle and all that that links this to physics and the physical nature of systems.

And I tend to read these models as pretty transparently mapping onto brain processes, but it's not necessarily the case that you need to be committed to that interpretation of these processes as material processes when you use active inference to describe some system at the psychological level.

And there's of course still a lot of question about how the psychological description maps onto the physical description, which I have views about, but it's an open question.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
Uh, Dean and then Ali.


SPEAKER_04:
So in the paper itself on page seven, I think there's a paragraph that kind of refers to all of this that we've been talking about.

I'll just quote at the relationship between conscious and unconscious computation, therefore remains an open question.

That said, some specific DAI models have been used to describe higher-level cognitive processes that can generate conscious beliefs and verbal reports, and then it says who the authors are.

In these cases, the inferential prediction error minimization process can still be seen as subpersonal or unconscious, but the resulting beliefs and decisions themselves are assumed to enter awareness.

As a general rule, however, subpersonal processes in DAI should not be expected to map one-to-one

with consciously accessible or personal level processes.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

So I've copied that up on the slides.

And Dean, what do you think that spoke to or what made you want to share that?


SPEAKER_04:
I think the first author and the other authors were essentially saying, let's make sure that we don't try to conflate things here, that we focus in on what we're trying to do here, which is point to the potential of these formalisms

explaining something if a person can self-report.

If they can't, there's still aspects of this that might apply.

But I think they were just trying to clarify exactly what they were pointing to and not pointing to.


SPEAKER_00:
And Ryan Smith has made clearly a line of research as well as multiple live streams and exhortations on social media about this distinction that one can take a cognitive modeling approach of report behavior.

Did you see that or not?

And that can be very clearly, although subtly, distinguished from the actual awareness of seeing something.

It's not the same thing to have report behavior as it is to have the experiential underpinning

they're potentially adjacent questions or there's a space that they're linked in a meaningful way but it's quite possible to blanket literally one's uncertainty about the question of experience even in a visual or a multimodal way from the question of let's just say we had

the animal or the computer program in the chair and now we're making a cognitive model of its report behavior different question than can the report behavior model be one of the same as what is actually happening because there could be an inter leaving stage where they just choose to lie or other all these other kinds of interesting things happening ali


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and just as a brief side note, I think the term folk psychology here can also be related to the distinction made by Wilfred Sellers between manifest image and the scientific image of human beings.

And the manifest image being our understanding of ourselves as personal and social beings.

And obviously the scientific image speaks for itself.

So I think the term folk psychology can possibly be

uh, equivalent to this manifest image of ourselves.

And, um, yeah, that's just a side note I wanted to share.


SPEAKER_00:
How do you see that Alex?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think, I mean, I, I'd almost agree.

I would just say maybe, I don't, I don't think I would say full psychology is equivalent to the manifest image, but I think it might be a part of it, which is probably nitpicking, but there just might be more to the manifest.


SPEAKER_00:
image of ourselves than just folk psychology but anyway i basically agree um yeah yes the the question dean anything you want to bring here no this reminds me of with

the conversations we've had on linguistics how there's one view on language as a entity like out there body of knowledge and then there's also the person's self-constructed sense of language and they only have a partial subset of the words or they use them in a certain way and there's an analogous distinction where

there's folk psychology the academic field of versus people's inner sense and how do people generate their inner sense of manifest image if if that's appropriate and how can that be connected and mapped to again any descriptive model or disciplinary or transdisciplinary model on alex and then do it


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, so I really should take the opportunity to say that my conception of how folk psychology works is like thoroughly Sellarsian.

It's like, I think he got it exactly right.

So basically, and it's been a long time since I've tried to recite this, but basically just the idea that there's sort of verbal behavior, right, that people enact and engage in that we end up sort of associating with

other things that are going on internally, and that through this sort of process, we end up sort of inadvertently in the course of evolutionary history at some point.

There's this whole Solarsian myth about this stuff, but basically the idea is that folk psychology sort of arises, and introspection and things like that, and I may be putting a bit more into Sellers than he actually says right now.

Again, it's been a while, but basically the idea that introspection and our sense of self-awareness and stuff like that sort of

could have developed out of, first, outward behavior.

And then we sort of become sensitive to correlations among these outward signals, and that develops sort of an inner sense in that way.

But the fundamental idea that's relevant to this discussion, this paper, I think, is that folk psychology is just the name for this sort of thing that naturally developed in the course of human history.

I got to say, of course, there isn't just one folk psychology right there.

For one thing, people speak different languages.

But I do think that the piece of it that I think is, is pretty, pretty safe to say is true, or I think, and that we meant to capture, this was my take on why we were using the BDI model is that, I mean, pretty much anyone, this isn't entirely true, there are different, you know, dialects and things.

But basically,

if you want to understand why somebody did something, you can say, oh, they believed X and they wanted Y, right?

And they intended Z. And that's the level at which I mean to sort of endorse folk psychology is just, I don't see how that sort of psychological, and I got to say, it's not for me, my motivation for sort of wanting to defend folk psychology isn't really anything to do with introspection or consciousness.

It's just

We obviously use these terms to explain behavior, and we do it very successfully.

And so I don't think it could be the case that these terms fail to carry information about the states that people are in.

So this is why I don't quite get the illimited to best argument.

Anyway, that's gone a bit far field from where we started.


SPEAKER_00:
David, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, well, I think, I mean, as a, say, a spiritualist, the limit of this argument is saying that's the natural conclusion of what you're saying and you're drawing from the dualistic tradition when you use these terminologies.

So, you know, say that all of the thousands of years of Western tradition that believed in the soul, and then you want to borrow the terminology.

from a materialistic point of view, it may not be accurate and follow the evidence and think, you know, Jerry Fodor and the modular mind or Benjamin Lieblitz experiments that, you know, what is active inference actually saying?

It's a threshold that is reached

that causes activity in, you know, like leave its famous experiments where the threshold is reached and it could be measured in the brain before the, you'll call the active conscious part of the person recognizes it.

And if it was like a modular mind that you have multiple conflicting parts of the person that could have beliefs and motivation, but what we would call

the you know the module of the mind that creates the narrative for us is only one of those and that's just what active to the person so when i interact with myself or you interact with another person through language you only have access to that one part of the brain that creates a narrative but you know said the liebits experiments uh and you know a few you know more recent experience has demonstrated that that's not likely the part that controls action

And your active inference didn't exist then.

I mean, Bayesian mechanics did, but you're saying it's a threshold and there's all sorts of things that cause a person's threshold to be reached.

And active inference could potentially model that.

And then if even you put in your paper that you could include things like

if you want to call beliefs or desires as higher order rules.

So even at the point, there may not be a mechanistic understanding of what's the origin or how these higher order rules operate, but it would be some sort of free energy principles, some sort of mathematical reduction of a threshold being reached

where the sum totality of conscious and subconscious factors cause the action and even the person ourself through introspection isn't going to have full access to that.


SPEAKER_02:
If I can just respond here.

I think first of all, just to be respectful to my co-authors, I should say, because I might get into my own views here, which they don't necessarily share that that's all.

I should say, I think this paper is really targeted at explaining the connections potentially or clarifying the connections between folk psychology, whatever its implications, right?

Whether folk psychology carries implications of soul type things because of its roots, maybe it does.

But anyway, it's trying to clarify the connections between active inference as just as sort of a formal theory of decision making and folk psychology.

So anyway, it's neutral technically on the issue of whether active inference is true or is an exhaustive or true description of what we are and what we do.

Maybe there's still an issue there.

If you really think that folk psychology, that the terms, the very terms of folk psychology carry dualistic implications, and if you think that active inference

carries materialistic implications, then there's still a problem, I guess.

I guess I don't really know if I agree with either of those, but... Yeah, I mean, I don't... I guess I don't see how the...

I don't see how active inference as such implies anything one way or the other about whether there are non-material origins to behavior.

Let me try this.

I'm just trying to see if I get your argument, David.

We're saying that active inference, or let's say active inference as a framework, says that this is how decisions happen.

You do a search over policies, which are these discrete things, and you figure out the expected free energy, which has to do with comparing sensory data to expected sensory data.

And I guess if you think all of those components are pieces of a material thing, right?

They're all beliefs or desires or something like that, which you take to be.

I mean, actually, I think I can answer this, sorry.

I realize I'm not doing the best job of this right now, but at least I'm getting, this is difficult.

I'm glad you're bringing this stuff up because this is actually, this gets quite challenging.

But I think, so active inference is this theory of, well, DAI is this theory of discrete decision-making that appeals to this, you know, to these,

distributions or things that are like belief distributions, right?

A belief distribution and a desire or a preference distribution.

I don't think it says anything about where the preference distribution comes from.

And in particular, I don't think it says that it doesn't come from the soul or, you know, or some deeper thing.

So that switched from me trying to rationally reconstruct your argument to me trying to

Rebut it.

Sorry about that.

But I'm just trying to make some progress.


SPEAKER_00:
Let me try to walk through some of these steps because I agree it's an important distinction.

So the focus of the paper, the regime of attention of the paper, very clearly written to remain on a line because there's many open threads related to, for example, different cultural folk psychologies, various folk psychology models, various metaphysical claims.

The paper was focused on identifying one possible area of incompatibility, which would be the relationship between the BDI model entities, the nodes in the BDI graph, and assignment of terms for specific parts of the active formalism.

And identifying that we'll come back to.

Now, then...

As has been pointed out today, one could ask if folk psychology carries a dualist implication in the sense of there being material and non-material types of things, whether implicitly or axiomatically or historically, but if folk psychology has a dualist implication,

and active inference carries a purely materialist implication, implicitly or explicitly, then there could be another battlefront of tension, which would not be based around mapping the nodes in the BDI model to the nodes or the formalisms in the active formalism, which is like a theory-theory ontology map question, but this would actually be

a metaphysical incompatibility.

And then Alex, you walk through some steps that said, if active inference is a framework that says, this is going to be a model of how decisions happen.

There's a search over discrete policies.

There's the calculation of variational free energy and or expected free energy.

And then you added as part of a material thing.

then it is going to be incompatible with anything in material.

However, one could also simply say, Act-Inf is a descriptive framework saying, here's how I will model how decisions happen.

As a search over discrete policies and as the calculation of FE,

then there might be one two three four kinds of things in the universe or it could be anything but this is where the materialism enters is actually as a clause in the assumptions of that string rather than materialism arising as a consequence of the neutral descriptive formal basis of the framework what do you think about that alex


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thanks, Daniel, for articulating that so well.

I think that's basically right.

And just as a specific example, even if you go so far as to think that you can map this formalism onto brain states, you don't have to think that brain states get their status as desires or beliefs just from their material constitution, right?

Do you believe that free will arises in microtubules, for example, or something?

I don't know how that works, that theory, by the way.

I don't mean to disparage it either.

I just, I don't know how it works, but I'm using it as an example.

Maybe you think that free will kind of somehow bubbles up through this free will at smaller scales or something, right?

So I just don't think that even if we take this as a description of the brain, that we're committed to anything so heavy as materialism.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Alex.

David?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I appreciate your research.

I'm not here to debate dualism here.

I'm just saying that if we could recognize what are the assumptions or axioms.

So you have questions, and that's why I like your focus on motor control connected to sense perception.

So if there's your perception of a unified I,

And even like Daniel and his research on ants or something like that, that, okay, there's David, Alex, Daniel, all the panelists, Ali and Dean that are talking to each other.

We might refer to ourselves as a name, but is there a unified I?

And so, okay, that's an axiom that is based on a dualistic tradition that may or may not be accurate.

And if you said, well, there's a sum total

of forces that are limited through the free energy principle that we refer to as unified eye that makes decisions but that's more a lexical misnomer and even if you think daniel's uh research and answer something like that that a question like is there a unified ant that avoids death that tries to survive why does the ant have some sort of will to live if i argue that that's also non-materialistic the ants

will to live or that there's a unified force.

So, I mean, you could have a materialistic explanation like higher order rules and just leave it that I believe that these higher order rules stem from genetics or some sort of

uh you know parallel like all ant uh reverse anthropomorphization of machine learning where an ant has some sort of will to survive and therefore you know if you try to step on an ant it's going to move the other direction or something like that but is there actually a unified force in the ant that is uh telling it to survive that causes it to act in a unified way

Or is it just, you know, the free energy principle and a reduction of all of the various sense perceptions?

And, you know, so we are using these axioms from a dualistic perspective, you know, like specifically what we call the unified eye that makes more sense as a non-material force that chooses the eye that's not my body.

chooses to make this action.

And so if active inference is saying, no, it's a sum total of sense perception, some sort of higher order rules that are acquired through a combination of genetics and other machine-like processes that we use the language description as I, but the mathematics is really saying that's not really accurate.


SPEAKER_00:
And Alex, to you, and I'll also just recall way back when, in 2-2-2-2-2-2-2, when we discussed your paper, Psychophysical Identity and Free Energy, which very directly tackles this question of identity, materialism, physicalism, various other processes.

Just want to drop that note and feel free to reply to it.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's great.

Um, yeah, yeah.

The reason I get so excited about this stuff is that I care about it and I definitely don't take like a sort of default materialist position on this stuff.

Um, so I guess, I mean, overall, David, like my, my view here is sort of about the self and, uh, you know, the self and the self with a capital S maybe in some like Buddhist type traditions, I'm, I'm actually a fairly, um,

far on the on the mystical end of the spectrum myself.

And, and for that reason, I don't expect now I'm sorry, this is maybe not addressing what you said in all its nuance.

But basically, the gist of how I see this is, you shouldn't expect that thing, the really special thing that we don't want to eliminate, you shouldn't expect it to show up in our descriptions of things, because you can't describe it anyway, it's transcendent.

So, you know, even if the brain is identical with the mind, insofar as we can describe the mind,

The mind isn't identical with the mind insofar as we can describe the mind, right?

It's the thing.

It's the big self that we can't ever pin down with words.

And actually, out of respect for that thing, I am happy for it not to show up in the descriptions that we give of how this material stuff works or even how anything works, right?

Because insofar as you can reduce it to a description, it's not that thing.


SPEAKER_00:
thanks alex and and to kind of add some thoughts there um the paper clearly delineates two variants or applications of the active inference formalism which is mai motor active inference and dai decision active inference and the the two theories differ in at least two important ways

or these two applications of the frameworks differ in at least two important ways.

The first is the phenomena that they are targeting to describe, whether discrete decision-making and planning behavior or whether motor behavior.

And then there's the question of discrete and continuous modeling.

And so for reasons of biology and historical precedent, the motor models have come from the continuous category

while many of the decision-making models which often map onto things that are legitimately categorical in the world like a team maze or a planning or sentence generation task has a discreteness or categoricalness to its basis and that made me think about linear regression as i really like to think about because

in the history of linear regressions no one said you used a linear regression to model the stimuli intensity and the behavioral response so you think people are a linear regression and this is another mathematical formalism that in some ways although i'm happy to also update my model on this is

able to be interpreted, but not the only interpretation, as having an equal epistemic claim to the territory as a linear model, because they're formalisms.

And the least squares error in a linear regression, that which fits, which is not the only norm one could choose, but whatever function is used as the imperative to fit that linear regression, could be playing an analogous role to like the calculation of variational free energy.

It could be purely understood as a modeling heuristic

that's used to make statistical comparisons within a model.

And then also the linear regression framework can be used to make discrete decisions like breakpoint regression, where you can contrast two different alternative models.

And you can say,

is it more consistent with one regression or is it possible that there's some break point, a two parameter model that we're going to identify?

And so I try to always be thinking like we're on the freeway and here's the action framework and here's the linear regression framework.

And if there's going to be some claim about active inference or free energy principle at all,

about what the formalism means, I always like jumping from car to car and thinking, would people or do they or have they said that about linear regression?

And if they can't, there better be a good reason why they can't.

For example, people who are committed to taking an interpretation of the territory based upon anything of the ACT-INF map, do they think that that is something that's true of all different statistical modeling frameworks and they'd apply that to a linear regression?

or is there something different in the active inference formalisms that legitimize or warrant that kind of a interpretation beyond the linear regression that was the first point and then the second point was about alex very beautifully said with like not expecting the transcendent

and that which cannot be named or however we want to think about that space to appear in the immanent and in the specific realizations, I think it's very important that the axioms are stated in self-contained scientific argumentation and rhetoric.

Although, unstated axioms come in at least two types.

One are the secret axioms that you made and snuck in.

Like, we didn't mention this issue, but we're going to use it as if it was an axiom in our deployment of a broader argument later in Section 9.

Alternatively, an issue might not be addressed because the argument is agnostic or orthogonal or blanketed with respect to that axiom.

Like, you didn't mention what color shirt you're wearing because

not you're going to use it and slip it into the argument later, but rather that the argument being made is uncorrelated or is not related to the shirt color.

So I think that the potentially even aware avoidance of the metaphysical baggage precursor exploration in this paper

is not to say that the issues are unimportant as various other work by all the authors actually speaks to but rather that this can be understood as a specific sequence of thoughts and rhetoric and symbols

that update belief on the relatively narrow, although still quite broad, question of whether the concepts, categories of B, D, and I can map to aspects of the actant framework, just like the linear regression slope could be mapped on to the concept influence of X on Y.

Not that that still wouldn't have some ability to be critiqued in the future or nuanced by future modeling, but you could say the linear regression model is not inconsistent, does not contradict, not that it proves, but it does not contradict folk regressionology.

So active inference models do not contradict folk psychology.

Linear regression models do not contradict or negate folk causal inference.

anything that's going to break beyond that epistemic map is going to need to make a special case beyond people have interpreted this way or somebody who wasn't paying attention might make the mistake of believing X. So sorry for the extended piece there, but I think there's so many important aspects that this paper either guides us on and also takes us to a vista of.

Do you...


SPEAKER_04:
I'm not going to be able to articulate it as clearly as you just did, but here's my thing.

So coming at the paper with my background, my question ended up being, so if we're going to compare something that adds two things up, a belief and a desire, and out pops an intention.

And then last week with Alex on, sorry, Alex, with Brian on here, we started moving to the idea that with expected free energy,

The ability to see the discrete, the difference between the ambiguous and the risk was a difference.

So it's not an adding up to come to some conclusion.

It was an actual knowing that we want to try to move things that are apart closer together.

And so from the standpoint of writing the paper, now the question is, can those things work in concert?

can one approach which says these things add up and then we behave accordingly work at the same time as this other way of quantifying which says there's a variational part that we're trying to minimize and there's an expected part that we're trying to juggle as well.

And so I think when you get closer to the end of the paper and you talk about the world to mind and the mind to world,

That isn't necessarily always additive.

That's still a differential.

But I don't think you, as writers of this paper, disqualified what's going on with the, well, we can add these two things together and this is what pops up.

All I think, and it's said through the paper many times is, under these particular types of sins, the difference seems to also

determine what degree of desire or belief or, I can't say doxacity, might pertain to that expected free energy difference.

So again, that's not as eloquent as Daniel or you can describe it, but from somebody who's way down here and just trying to make sure that in my own head,

That image right there that's up there where suddenly the circumstances have changed and I've gone to a desire that says, well, I can't change gravity.

So I'm going to make the biggest crater I possibly can instead of the outcome, which I'd like, which is to continue to exist.

Maybe my identity now is how big a hole in the earth I can make.

So that's a difference as opposed to an adding up.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Alex.

Feel free to respond, and also we'll look at expected free energy and the simulation.

It'll be great to explore those.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, cool.

Yeah, so I think I got the point about halfway through.

I'm seeing where you're getting at.

It's interesting.

So I think, I mean, my first answer was, well...

Okay, we shouldn't think of belief plus desire equals intention as literally involving a sum.

You know, since I've been doing a lot of writing code lately for work, and I would think of it as like, well, we define the sum operator for belief and desire as just the thing that active inference does, right?

Essentially, right?

Basically, belief plus desire means take the KL divergence.

But a more informative answer is, I mean, if you want to think of it as a mathematical...

type operation, like a sum or a difference, I think you're right, being that it's much more like a difference.

It's much more like intention equals desire minus belief, right?

So it's like you have your model of the world, you see what the difference is between the belief and the, sorry, between your model currently, sorry, you have your model of what you want the world to be like, rather.

see that what the difference is between that and your model of what the world is like and uh and that gives you the expected free energy but um i know you said we get to this in a second daniel but um i think you could pretty much literally see this in the expected free energy um in the kl term there right so yeah so you could expand that so q of the divergence between q and p you can you can write this out in a way that's you know where you're subtracting one

entropy from another, basically.

And so you can see it as literally a difference.

So if you want to map it onto the difference concept, then it's pretty straightforward.


SPEAKER_00:
And that's one feature of the logarithm function as a modeling heuristic, not metaphysical truth, that

division is a division of different terms like the ratio is related to the subtraction of the log of the ratio so there's various reasons why like log likelihoods are used and it's also a core function that's deployed in the KL divergence as well as entropy terms and then just

Yes, duvid, but just to get through the variables here, it's written out in the paper, but a KL divergence is describing a divergence, not a distance, between what are on the two sides of the double line.

And this is the Q variational distribution of observations over a time horizon conditioned upon policy, which serves also a very important function heuristically, especially in the discrete case, and the divergence between that observations conditioned on policy and the posterior distribution on observations through time.

just that's what's in the kl term and we explore this also more in the dot zero and we can return to it as well but just wanted to clarify like and contextualize this to some of our early discussions like this is the y equals mx plus b of this framework and the least squares is like fitting the minimum of something and so again to go beyond the interpretation of linear modeling here not that this is a linear model

requires sometimes describing either the specifics of this model and how it differs, or taking a vaster, potentially extremely untenable position about the naive interpretation of variables in arbitrary equations, which I think is fair to say is an untenable position, which puts the onus of people making metaphysical interpretations or claims about this line into a place where the specifics of this line must be addressed.

Dean and then David.


SPEAKER_04:
Just real quick.

I think for me, it's hard to determine whether or not a relationship or a diversion or the difference is material or not.

And so for me, sometimes that just depends.

Sometimes I can actually

see the edges of the relationship.

And sometimes it's very, very fluid and it's hard to determine whether or not there's something material about that.

And that's actually baked into this formula too.

So I don't know what others think about that, but I mean, there is an aspect of this that is written in, but I don't know if we can actually lock it down and say that that thing, that relationship there is actually material or not.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Dean.

David?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think just looking at it as a statistical model could be used to model any higher order rules with a feedback mechanism, whether the origins of them are material or not.

So we don't have to go into America around talking about what's the origin of these higher order rules.

And I was just thinking the phenomenon of folk psychology applying to humans

and the belief desire intention model if we were looking at a simpler model you know i think like obviously you know daniel studied ants uh but at what level is there uh sense perception and motor control and does that need um

a controller.

It was just a pure feedback mechanism, like action, reaction, and their decision is made based on higher order rules that, you know, I don't know if you'd consider an ant, if you just simplify it, like eat, survive.

And even, you know, if an ant doesn't have reproduce, if even you eliminate like an ant colony where only the queen

reproduces and possibly in humans, you could say the only difference between a human and the ant is you add the reproduce, but you have these higher order rules of basically survive.

And you maybe that's maybe there's only one higher order rule, or maybe you want to give a whole bunch of higher order rules.

And then you define that in your free energy principle, like, okay, so you have the sense perception, and then you have

the movement and so how you define the variables in the feedback mechanism, the active inference mathematical framework could model it no matter how you define it.

And this thing also, I mean, you obviously were focusing on humans, but it might be more simplified to

focus on, you know, the most simplified species, even plants, maybe that they don't have a survive instinct that they, I mean, they have some sort of survive instinct, but like, you know, insect that could try to survive.

If I try to squash an insect, it's going to move in order to try to survive.

And that's a clear example of sense perception.

The insect senses me, you know, trying to kill it, God forbid.

and then moves out of the way of what exactly caused it.

And so you're just going to hypothesize, well, of course it has some sort of survival instinct and the sensory perception feeds in to its motor control movement versus if it's just seeking food or like a Maslow hierarchy of needs.

and uh you know i like the terminology you know anthrop if we're anthropomorphizing you know the ant or are we reverse anthropomorphizing the machine that the fact is in terms of sense perception motor control we understand how the robot computer works much better than the mind and so are the active inference equations really more suited to machine learning robotic automation

And then where you reverse anthropomorphizing that to the human mind.

But certainly the equations are valuable because largely they could be interchanged and defined how you want them to.


SPEAKER_00:
thanks i'll connect some um ant thoughts to the skydiver so dean has returned to this example of the skydiver as being like well if i can't change gravity my policies whether mental attention policies pray or no pray um

you know, do this motor behavior or do this speech behavior, which is a motor behavior as well, conditioned on policy, not going to be able to influence gravity.

And then once updates there prior that also conditioned upon various action policies, they're not going to be able to open a functional parachute, then there's this discrete shift as you've described to like making the biggest crater.

And hearing about the ants, over the years,

it makes me think about folk biology, like the notion that people have in terms of their received understanding that there is like a drive to survive or a drive to reproduce or a drive to do various numbers of things.

It's almost like the BDI of evolutionary biology or of ecology.

And I'm thinking about the case where a nestmate is out foraging for the colony

then they're being like messed with by somebody with like a magnifying glass or being touching them and at first it's like evading now that behavior looks a lot like a solitary insect that might be trying to evade and survive ostensibly to reproduce and increase like its um individual offspring if one is still within the folk biological realm and then it's like there's a switch where the nest mate is actually like no

the evolutionary unit is the colony and so it goes for the biggest crater possible and that's even embodied in the anatomy of some insects for example with a hooked stinger where they can't they're committing six-legged death

to compose a broader high fitness entity at the colony scale and so that's like a behavioral shift from trying to open the individual nestmate parachute to make the biggest crater on the attacker possible for the good of the colony and that no matter how hard you try to map that to the behavior of a solitary insect will be

along a potentially didactic or interesting, but ultimately facetious route because the colony is the evolutionary unit for these obligately used social species.

And so one will be scratching their head at various of the behaviors.

And that's why the value of a descriptive framework is so important because we're able to describe various computational qualities and not be inconsistent or contradicting

folk ant psychology, while also remaining absolutely impartial to questions of what ants think, for example.

And so we can have computational representations of ant decision-making and cognition, perception, cognition, action, impact, and we can link it to natural language descriptions through the active inference ontology, as well as through potentially other ontologies like ant folk psychology,

And we can take that yes and, and other people can add other yes ands if they want, but they're gonna have to take a different tack to uncouple the relationship between these computational quantities and try to interject a wedge and say, no, it does contradict folk psychology.

That's a different argument than that relationship is in violating some other third belief system that I'm bringing to the table.

So hope that addresses some of it.

And thanks, Blue, for your questions in the chat there.

Ali, would you like to raise anything or take us to a question or area that you want to focus on?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, one more thing about this discussion is bringing personal semiotics into table, I think.

Well, active inference actually, I believe, is a kind of,

iconic symbol as opposed to index.

Because you see in personal semiotics for index, we need to necessarily allow some kind of causal relationship between the symbol and the index.

But for icons, we only need to have some isomorphic

isomorphic similarities, not to say similarity because similarity is a very vague term, but some isomorphism between the symbol and the icon.

So ideally, active inference is a kind of, let's say, structure-preserving mapping between the behavior and the model.

So I guess if we could differentiate between icons and indices,

some of these, at least, confusions could potentially be resolved.


SPEAKER_00:
So icons and indices of process semiotics.

Thanks for sharing that, and it connects to some of the discussions we've had on process ontologies as well.

Alex?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, just really quickly, I mean, I gotta say, I don't know that much about process semiotics, but that way of thinking of active inference and of theories in general as like iconic representations is pretty much how I think of theories and how, I mean, then the most recent thing I published with Jakob Hovey, we basically said,

that you can think of scientific theories as relating to the world by a process, not process, a relation of sort of structural similarity, isomorphism being the sort of case.

So I just, I agree with that.

And I think it kind of comes right back to a lot of what we discussed.

As I get older, I start to think that maybe there's something to the essential indexical idea that like I as a special role to play

You know, the letter capital I in English.

But other than that, I think things pretty much function descriptively.

And I think description functions via isomorphism or similarity.

So I totally agree.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

That reminds me of the book Anthem by Rand, where the word I is not included in the linguistics.

And then the end of the book...

not you know spoiler alert um that word i is rediscovered and so it's kind of an allegory that traces some of these questions about the potentially special role of the bodily identity but it's very interesting that these frameworks actually are engaging

or with this augmented perspective for example that ali has raised that these theories can be seen as already having been engaged in

a discourse that people might not expect like predictive processing is what the brain is doing do you agree or deny what's the evidence for predictive processing being active in the brain versus not active in the brain is this neural signal recording that we made more consistent with a predictive or non-predictive model

It takes that meso range of what the system is doing and it partitions it, as we heard also from Ryan previously, into like, well, predictive processing can't be invalidated, nor can linear regression framework, nor can active inference framework.

Any specific model is now engaged in a specific model evidence comparison.

And then one can choose what kind of model comparisons they want to make

knowing that they're not going to be able to exhaustively consider all possible cognitive architectures but also any invalidation or relative model fit or adequacy amongst different models at this specific level are speaking only rhetorically to the truth or the validity or the adequacy of the higher level inviolable framework

There's a lot there to explore, do it.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, maybe we could tie this back to the illimitivism and the anthropomorphism.

So if you ascribe an eye to the computer, you say that's a logical fallacy of anthropomorphism because there is no eye, it's just following code.

Or even to the ant, if mammals may be, but insects communicate, if an ant sends pheromones and you want to anthropomorphize,

An eye to the ant that like the ant is saying, I want to communicate with my fellow ants for a purpose.

And it's like, no, no, that's not that's anthropomorphism, logical fallacy.

The ant is just following genetic code.

And then you say, well, really, for humans also, that we're morphizing the mind and that there is no I related to unified I related to the me.

that even right now that I am communicating with you fine gentlemen, but that's a misnomer in terms that it's just me following my predictive coding and that just for the purpose of language,

I'm referring it to as I talking to you, but that's just like a computer sending code to another computer or an ant sending pheromones or whatever method of communication it uses.

And that's just the language and lexicon that we use.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's...

It's a dialogue that has played out in not only Gödel Escher Bach, but many college dorm rooms, many late night sessions.

One participant or perspective believes that they have, for example, the ability to choose and have agency, and the other disregards that position.

Or one believes that there's something and there's a divergence in their perspective.

I think this is just the heart of the map territory debate in the distributed cognitive setting, as all cognitive systems ultimately are, even what is called individual behavior is just referring to collective behavior at another scale.

For example, one person can say this conversation can be modeled using active inference, or this conversation can be modeled using predictive processing, just like it could be constructed with a linear regression or family of linear regressions.

And somebody else could say this conversation is nothing but linear regressions, nothing but predictive processing, nothing but active inference.

someone might believe that and if they believe that it would be true that that is their perspective i don't know if that would make it true but they would be taking they would be stepping into a territory that the person who remains with both feet in instrumentalism i'm choosing to model it this way or i'm testing a portfolio of different models around how we could model our difference in perspective

Maybe one can say that they have been too timid and they haven't actually engaged in the real question, which is what's really happening, not with how you're modeling it, but that's a whole another debate.

Alex, and then do it.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I just think this might tie into the stuff in section nine that maybe we'll get to.

We don't have to jump to it.

I'm just saying.

basically, I agree, you could raise these questions for any of these systems, people, machines, ants, protons, whatever.

And I think there's an argument to be made that there's not a clear place to draw the line there.

But it could go either way with respect to all of those, right?

I think that, you know, you could be anthropomorphizing in all of those cases, or none of them.

It's not easy to, I don't think it's easy to draw a line somewhere along the sort of

evolutionary continuum or anything like that to say, although there's an argument about temporal depth of generative models that's interesting that touched on a couple of papers here and there.

But, you know, I think the cool thing about active inference and the free energy principle stuff is that it applies across scales.

So I think that to me, that means that you're faced with a similar problem at whatever scale you consider it.

I just got to throw out there, I'm probably going to have to leave around

1230 Eastern.

So I'll say that now so that I can just abruptly close my window.


SPEAKER_00:
So we're in the summary of main argument section nine.

So, Alex, what is the main argument?

And also, in the contexts and audiences that you've presented it in?

How do you feel like it lands?

Or what cognitive updates are you aiming to achieve with this argument as constructed and communicated?

Is this section nine?


SPEAKER_02:
I think I actually may have meant section eight, but I'm sorry.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Section eight, desires and affective states.

Oh, no, no, no.


SPEAKER_02:
Let me see.

I meant 10.

Okay.

I don't want to totally bypass your question.

I just think nine is kind of a summary of the argument thus far.

All right.


SPEAKER_00:
How about 10?

Let's talk about direction of fit.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

So, I mean, so the... Sorry.

Sort of the point here was just that there's a...

certainly is relevant to a lot of what we're discussing there's a straightforward way to generalize this beyond systems that you would necessarily intuitively describe as having beliefs and desires and we can just talk about any system that's described by active inference by this framework or that's describable accurately by this framework

you can talk about the difference between q and p um and this i think also ties into some of the work that maxwell remsted has done on um just the idea that you know uh the generative model is sort of representation uh or it's it's sort of a representation embodied by the system

if it's a representation.

We still disagree about that.

Anyway, the generative model and the approximate recognition model are sort of always there, even if you apply these frameworks to describe very simple systems.

And you can see something desire-like or belief-like in those.

And we just remain very neutral in this paper on the question whether there really are beliefs and desires in these sort of

extended cases, by extended, I mean, not necessarily paradigmatic, right?

So if, if beliefs and desires paradigmatically applied to like people, and then maybe to ants, and I would say definitely dogs, you know, then this, this stuff in Section 10 is, is about what you can say without necessarily committing to beliefs and desires and those in the in the edge cases.

But you can still say that there's at least an ingredient of beliefs and desires, which is a direction of fit.

That sums it up.


SPEAKER_00:
So how could this be used in one case for a human entity in the folk psychological way, and in another case for some entity that people would maybe say that type of folk psychology would be inadmissible for?


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, as far as how it could be used in the case of people that have beliefs and desires or that we think do, I think it's pretty straightforward, right?

It's just saying, well, any kind of full psychological explanation you can give of a person's behavior, it's consistent with the description of that person in terms of active inference.

I guess then the only question is, in the case of a system that might be not clearly

that you wouldn't necessarily think of as having a psychology in the same sense.

What kinds of things would you want to say about it?

I think there's an example that made it into the paper about like a plant reaching towards the light or something, or it's sort of these simpler sort of feedback systems, right?

Where something, there's like a set point and the thing is approaching the set point.

You could still think of the prior distribution as having a,

world-to-mind direction of fit, right?

Because it's the piece of the system that brings it about that things change so that distribution describes reality.

Yeah, so you still have those.

So that's one example.

I don't know, maybe like a bacterium following some kind of nutrient gradient or something.

I don't really know about that stuff, but

That's another example that might... You could describe directions of fit to that creature, and I don't... Okay, my last thought on this.

I don't know why it would be useful to do that necessarily.

I don't know.

There might be reasons in studying these systems that you'd want to.

But if you did want to do it, you could understand it from the framework.


SPEAKER_00:
just some brief thoughts and then ali so first there's a paper of calvo and friston 2017 which is specifically applying predictive processing and active to the vegetative case and i think from the perspective of behavioral analysis there's also precedent in the 1989 paper framework for plant behavior by silvertown and gordon

So suffice to say that plants are included within this cognitivist modeling perspective.

And then it made me think about how the surprise, the self-information is an energy function.

It's what dampens the spring.

And so maybe could you say like the heavier ball with folk?

ball psychology.

The heavier ball wants to drop faster or it wants to make a bigger crater or all these other things.

Again, it doesn't have the agency to want otherwise, given the initial conditions and the rules of physics in that situation, but

it's exactly like a person wanting to make a small hole in the paper or wanting to make a big hole and then realizing that intention would be analogous to an energy functional being reduced by some kind of purely physical system which does again hint towards some of the potentially non-materialist implications legacy that do slip in to different encultured conversations around mind um

Yes, Alex, any last thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_02:
Just real quick, yeah, on the ball example.

I mean, I think there is a sense, of course, in which this framework applies.

But I think, if anything, the ball wouldn't have a desire or the system involving the ball might though, right?

So because the term that would pull the ball towards the ground or whatever wouldn't really be in the makeup of the ball.

And so whether that larger system has a proto-belief or desire, I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
Ali, and again, Alex, feel free to part whenever, but Ali, go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, yeah, I'm not sure if we have enough time to get into this question.

I mean, if not, we can discuss it in the doc too, but I had a question about the aesthetic experience and the pleasure or positive valence we get from engaging with works of art.

In particular, I'm talking about unexpected plot twists in movies or novels or different kinds of intentional ambiguities in some artworks.

For instance, the works of M.C.

Escher and his impossible geometries will immediately come to mind.

And the sense of excitement and joy they tend to induce in the audience.

In fact, playing around with these kinds of defamiliarizations, as literary critics like to call them,

seems to be more of a rule than an exception in any creative endeavor.

On the other hand, outside the safety of the world of arts, we generally don't like to be encountered with too much unexpectedness, as we've seen.

So I wonder whether or how these kinds of aesthetic reactions can be integrated within the formalism of active inference.

Are they special cases of information-seeking drives or

There's a whole other story going on here.


SPEAKER_00:
Alex, go for this, and then thanks again for your time here.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Yeah, I'll check out after this.

Thank you so much.

I love these discussions.

I knew it would be an interesting crowd, interesting topics.

I got to say, I don't know much about what you just asked about, Ali, but I love this topic.

I actually come from a background in aesthetics as well, I should say.

But anyway, I know there's a lot of work on this.

So I know that under the banner of predictive processing, there's a whole lot of work in aesthetics these days on, I think, suggesting something very similar to what you're saying, that there's clearly a relationship here between surprisal and unexpectedness and predictions and the joy that we get out of and other emotions that we get out of artworks.

And I would love to know more about this.

I haven't had time to look into it, but I think Daniel's put a...


SPEAKER_00:
This was also a predictive processing type paper with an incredible title, Move Me, Astonish Me, Delight My Eyes and Brain, and then enter the subtitle.

sequel title um perhaps in the dot two let's sketch this out let's act let's look at the formalisms and let's do some mappings so someone said i believe that mondrian is an amazing painter and i want to go to a space where i do see beautiful art and i want to have this kind of experience or something like that but let's explore that in the dot too with some of the bdis and the aesthetics of encultured experiences

Thank you, Alex.


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

If I could just really quickly, I think that the challenge there is going to be that sometimes prediction error is fine and sometimes it's not.

We need to figure out, right, there's probably some complicated way of saying what the difference is between those cases.

But that's as far as my intuition goes.

Yeah, I'd love to discuss it.

Awesome.

Thanks again.

See you later.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you all.

Bye-bye.

Great.

Dean?

Dean?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I just wanted to kind of jump on that point that Ali was making.

I think that in the, I just want to make sure I've got the right section of the paper here.

Sorry, the free energy principle and the direction of fit, yeah.

Sort of to tag on what Ali and Alex were saying, there's a statement here that says, holding the value of the observation constant in this equation

F decreases as the approximate posterior distribution Q of the state approaches the Q posterior.

The QS term, therefore, is a straightforwardly belief-like mind-to-world direction of fit in that its value changes to accommodate new observations.

I think that the Escher and the Mondrian and every time I go to a sporting event, my openness, my accommodation to

what is perceived as an uncertain outcome is the thing that draws my attention.

And I think Daniel's point of let's map that out.

Let's see how long some people are able to hold that ambiguity space and not necessarily see it as a risk is both immaterial until it materializes and is a process that I think a lot of people want to go through

Because there's something to that that isn't just attention.

It isn't just information seeking, but it may also satiate certain desires.

So I think that is a point to mapping that we should maybe spend a little bit of time on.

Because I don't know that when you open a space up for something to eventually happen, you're...

imposing what the final material form should take, you're simply leaving something open in the hopes that something interesting, i.e.

an Escher painting, might end up being in the next room.

I mean, this is what happens when I go to museums in Spain.

I'm not looking to find the particular Dali.

I'm looking to go into that space and be surprised.


SPEAKER_00:
i wonder how that actually does map out using these formalisms yes it reminds me of when in the dot zero ryan described like the different reasons and the different nuancing the types of information seeking that's very relevant i'm navigating through this museum to reduce my uncertainty about where that one piece that i came to see is

the target driven epistemic foraging from a more general, like, I don't know what is in that other room that is going to influence my probability of moving room to room.

And certainly with the eye circuiting, that is how we maintain a visual field that appears to have roughly equal resolution via our generative model of vision and ocular motor circuiting to regions of maximal information.

distinctly uncoupled from only what regions are most rewarding though people's gaze does tend to linger in certain regions that might be perceived as rewarding that isn't the only imperative and that's why it's so special and relevant

to have a cross system and multi-scale behavioral modeling framework like active inference that helps us understand the pure static field, eyes trying to latch on to anything mode from the gaze on a candle flame during meditation or one region of particular beauty in another visual scene.

Dean?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, just real quick.

And I think that also...

Ali, thank you.

You raised semiotics and I'm a Pierce fan.

So there's a, there's a huge piece of that involved in this as well as to what is the signal that, that very much there's a, there's a slide in here that we didn't get to, but when the ice cream cone is looking off into the distance at that, at that ice cream truck, where, where do we, where do we place that in the foreground or in the background?

And that is a huge, I think that plays a huge part in, in,

the role of the third person now looking at the observer, looking at the observer and getting that sort of recursive aspect involved in this as well.

So again, I don't know how that, we'll borrow Daniel's how to be able to map that as a 9-1 or as a 3-7 and then maybe put it on the Likert scale because I think all of that kind of is a potential way for this

to sort of make a sense.

I wasn't bringing up with Alex the idea that like literally beliefs and desires add up to intentions.

I was sort of saying that tongue in cheek just to be able to show the difference when something is discreet and how we try to bring them together.

And this observer of an observer thing, although it's not, I don't think it's Alex's and the other two authors,

primary goal here, but I do think they lower the bar in terms of bringing some of the more folk aspects of this into the formalism aspects.


SPEAKER_00:
yes and it was a very clever and interesting response which is it depends on what is meant by addition what does it mean for um dean plus ali does that mean they're both going to stand on a scale and we're measuring their mass does it mean that we're going to stack them head to toe and then consider the length does it mean that they're going to interact in a certain context

Doesn't mean we're going to blend them up.

I mean, there isn't an intrinsic definition to what the addition operator or any operator means in a formal system.

And so it opens up the idea that we could have whether specific symbols or just here's how we're using this symbol here.

and use that to refer to relatively potentially complex and multi-step operations or operations that can be phrased in multi-step.

For example, a multiplication on the processor might happen in a different way than somebody is cognitively thinking about it, but that

is, as the title hints, not contradictory.

Not that one validates or encompasses or proves the other, but there's so many things that are not contradictory.

And active inference may be contradictory of certain things.

Let's make a list.

What is active inference contradictory of?

What is folk psychology contradicting of?

And we can make all of that mapping in the right knowledge management system.

And the claim of the article, as I guess Ryan's imperative was, was to make this claim that as they've operationalized both, active inference models do not contradict folk psychology.

And that's quite an interesting claim.

Dean?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, just real quick.

I think Daniel, your point is, I'm rephrasing it from my own view, which is,

you raise a lot of different joint probabilities that by their nature are arbitrary.

And I think that's important to keep in mind.

This leaves open the possibility of looking at things a variety of different ways.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and just to speak to the joint probability density.

So the joint probability density in the Bayesian modeling approach is like where there's a comma.

So instead of A conditioned on B, it's like the joint distribution of A and B.

why a and b why not b and y why not these three and so there's always something like a periphery that the model comes from and we can be blanketed off from it and that actually serves as a scientific and really meta-scientific way

to have rigor and accessibility potentially of the models, to respect when we're in the regime of attention of a model, what kinds of claims can or cannot be supported, what kinds of contradictions are or are not tenable to make, and then also have the yes and with respecting that that joint distribution was not

handed down from on high.

It is not the only possible joint distribution that could have been selected.

And so we can separate off.

How did these real researchers in this real situation come to focus on that phenomena and pick this joint distribution from conditioned on the joint distribution?

What was the actual conversation and consequences and modeling they performed?

David?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, it's all fascinating.

I guess I had two separate points I wanted to express, and they might be more general if this is my first time on this stream than, I mean, it's related to this paper, but specific to active inference in general and the interdisciplinary studies.

um what my streaming partner uh jennifer scharf calls herself church of entropy we've been three years now uh talking about consciousness and i showed her the free energy principle and she immediately said that uh isn't that just the least action principle

And I mean, it's not directly related to this paper, but I could see that in terms of my second point, what I'll call goal directed behavior in general.

And if you want to say that there's only one motivating force in

active inference, and that's the free energy principle, which is basically a restating of the least action principle.

And then at a second point,

I went, you know, last week in Metro Detroit, they had the International Automation Conference, and they had the latest in robotic arms and technology for manufacturer, and they had on display a lot of what we'll call sense perception and motor control, specifically robotic arms that

um don't just repeat the same action or even have like a sensor embedded when but have an embedded sensor of a camera that will recognize the object and then create a set of rules in order to tell the robotic arm the best trajectory in order to pick up the object and then in terms of uh

like old school manufacturer where it would just been taking an object and setting it in one place where it actually has some level of machine learning intelligence, where it could intelligently design where to put the object in terms of like stacking boxes, where it could, you know, the algorithm of the computer could determine what's the best way to stack the objects and then control the robotic arm to do that.

And if it's like, so for humans,

just on the peer level of sense perception has goal directed behavior.

How do I, you know, if we have a hundred million cones and rods in our eye, how do we direct the,

our physical capabilities of sense perception to perceive the environment in this thing that could be modeled by these equations.

And we'll call it the free energy principle, least action principle.

And then the decision making that the goal directed behavior like the automation computer, it has to have a goal code in order to act.

And so it could action, reaction, sense perception,

feedback mechanism in order to action and then the equation are describing goal-directed behavior.

That's why I'm a fan of the active inference model because as a dualist, I mean, as a scientist, let's describe these in purely materialistic things and we don't have to get too much into the theology or what's the origin of these higher order rules, even if you want to assume

that all higher order rules are material in origin.

But I think the equations in general could model it no matter what their origin is.

And it's just a good framework to understand all these theories, the goal directed behavior at all aspects.

And then to put on the last spin on it, like the Maslow's hierarchy of needs,

in uh in like you know what is belief desire and uh you know that i would have introspection or education that would give me um you know morals ethics that okay like my body uh like i put the pithy in the the expression i see the heart desires the mind plots and the limb carry out that uh that uh

I have the capability that my eyes see, my heart desires, but my mind stops me and says, that's wrong.

And even though my sense perception saw it and my desires told me that I should do it, somehow there's this higher order principle of the mind that tells me that's wrong and I'm not going to do it.

And there's that control factor before the limbs carry out.


SPEAKER_00:
thank you i'll just make some short points and then we can just close off with what we're excited to explore in the dot too i really just appreciate what a lot of people shared and i think over these discussions and the years we're finding some clarities around where are different implications and consequences

what is entering into Active Inference as a field and a filter and what is coming out of it, what's happening on the playground.

And so there's just a lot to explore.

Then Livestream 45, just in the last few weeks,

and not to rehearse outside of this paper regime of attention, but the free energy principle, as it's rehearsed in that paper, is establishing the particular partition that's Markov blanketing off the figure from the ground, the thing which is able to undergo repeated measurements in the quantum sense from the thing that is not that thing.

That's the particular partition with the sensory, active,

internal external partition the autonomous states the blanket states from sparse coupling unpacking the implications in terms of Bayesian inference in other words seeing the flow of those states as doing something that is slash can be modeled as Bayesian inference and then finally understanding paths in terms of a principle of least action

which has been starting to be explored from at least the early path formalizations of active inference years ago.

And I think in the last,

two weeks to two years, taking a new view on that through a lot of the work on geometry and analysis by Dalton, Maxwell and other collaborators.

So indeed this path formalization is very relevant and the principle of least action, which isn't the principle of least motion.

It's not the laziest thing.

It's not the one that always works.

It's none of those things, but it's a framework for analyzing behavior.

And with that,

what would people be excited to explore next week or what would be something that they didn't have uncertainty or a motivational drive to explore before today but it has come onto their Horizon through this discussion yes Ali then Dean dude uh well it was uh it was a really fascinating discussion and uh


SPEAKER_01:
I thank you all for bringing such interesting topics onto the table, but I'm very much looking forward to that too.

And I also had a couple of questions.

I'm interested in exploring the phenomenological aspects of folk psychology, especially belief and desire, and also the relation of DAI to

abnormal psychology, which is just briefly touched on in the paper, but not in detail.

And yeah, I hope the next session will be at least as fascinating as this one.

Thank you, Ali.

Dean?


SPEAKER_04:
I already said what I'm hoping we can look at in this point too, but I'll just add this.

I think it's really interesting that the term active inference

And I'll just say in this calendar year alone, we've had a couple of papers that have started typing active inference.

We've had outside the skull or extended active inference.

And now we've got this DAI and MAI.

And I think there's probably going to be more.

And so depending on how many authors are available next week, I might be asking them a little bit about that too.

Like, does that seem like a natural rollout when you have these scale-free ideas that you

need these scale-friendly qualifiers just so that it continues to make sense.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, David, and then I'll make a point on that, Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep, and because this is my first time, so I had a lot of general stuff on active inference in general, and I tried to stick straight to this paper.

I think it'd be interesting to cover more.

I asked the question, has active inference even explained one qualia?

And that there's actually a model here in the equations

Could we describe a single process, a single sense perception to decision making?

And so like the human model to a simpler life form, or even say that is in essence the automation, like the machine learning algorithms for robotic arms, is that in essence using the same active inference

computers i spoke to you know brock online who i guess is an entrepreneur thinking like real estate uh but uh is is it you know what would the application of this be uh to uh you know autonomous cars are more complicated but like something the most simplified version which is probably uh robotic sensors and controlled movement based on machine learning that uh and uh and then

you know said could we try to explain a single qualia in terms of what happens when i sense something and make some sort of movement and then like i was talking what would all of the axioms uh necessary to in terms of the higher order rules or goal-oriented behavior they're not beliefs desires intentions

What are they and how are they modeled into the equation?

What happens when I perceive something and that's translated into action?

What axioms do we have to put into the model to make it work as opposed to or in comparison to the robotic arm that's coded for that does that?


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you to all those returning in first time.

And our second Applied Active Inference Symposium, which is going to be in July 2022, is on robotics.

So we can absolutely address a lot of the applications and also adjacencies.

And the sense that I got maybe just thinking of that robotic case is like a little wind-up toy on a table.

We want to build it.

and this discussion because of how it is constituted and enacted is helping us understand not just all of the implications that go into that wind-up toy but exploring a lot of the consequences of the wind-up toy

And then there's people saying, but wasn't the table constructed?

And wouldn't a different table have resulted in a different wind-up toy behavior?

And who placed it on the table?

And why are tables designed that way?

And isn't table just like a functional consequence of anything being put on it?

And what are we doing here?

How did we decide on that?

How should we decide the next wind-up toy?

And it just takes it in so many amazing places.

So thanks to everybody in the chat and joining live and of course to the authors for the paper.

See you in 46.2.

Thank you, Jens.

Bye.

## 7_YNInrALU8

SPEAKER_00:
hello everyone welcome to active lab live stream number 46.2 it's june 22nd 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on the slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll follow video etiquette for live streams.

Head over to ActiveInference.org to learn about participating in livestreams or in the many other Active Lab projects.

We're here in our third discussion on the paper, Active Inference Models Do Not Contradict Folk Psychology by Smith, Ramstad, and Kiefer.

had a dot zero with ryan joining and jacob and dean where we talked through some of the background of this paper and last week in the dot one we had a great discussion went a lot of ways as dot ones do and opened up some threads to continue discussing in this dot two

I know each of you have some things to bring up.

There's also a few key sections of the paper that we haven't gone into in much detail.

So there'll be a lot to do in the dot-to.

And of course, everybody watching live is also welcome to make comments.

We'll start with just an introduction and warm-up.

we can say hi and add anything else that we're looking forward to talking about or to reducing our uncertainty about through today's discussion or maybe even if it's not too early where we'd like to be heading as we take off on this dot 2 and leave the 46 series how does it

result in us being different thinking differently acting differently in the rest of our post 46 lives so I'm Daniel I'm a researcher in California and

Just a conversation with Dean before we began about some other core concepts other than beliefs, desires, and intentions.

So what other acronym models could we use?

What other kinds of models are consistent or where else can Active Inference be providing us extra information or utility?

And a few other things.

And I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks Daniel.

I'm Dean here in Calgary.

I think what I'm curious about is a couple of things.

As I said, I'm curious about things or behaviors that appear to be targeted versus behaviors that appear to be non-targeted.

And there's some reference to that in this paper.

The other thing, as I said, I'm kind of curious about is this moving to the place of saying that

Active inference has these different types, be it extended or decision making or motor active inference.

what the implications of that are.

The bottom line for me is I think if we can operationalize that word through active inference, it shouldn't be difficult to figure out that that applies to behaviors, that there's operations grounding a lot of behaviors.

So yeah, that's what I'm kind of curious about today.

I'll pass it to David.


SPEAKER_02:
great to be back uh it's my second time on here really uh appreciate this i'm i'm on uh 33 so i've listened through lecture 33 so i'm almost uh caught up to uh the current i look forward to having daniel on my channel friday 4 p.m eastern time um you know there's so much to active inference because it's a useful framework for

countless different fields and specifically related to this I had your definitely thoughts and then how do we look at the mechanics of the equation versus

We call folk psychology, but I would put that generally into what I would call introspection.

I have a background in theology, and I've thought a lot about introspection and trying to match what we see through various methods of introspection and maybe where the science and mathematics is leading us.

And also, I guess, the field of psychometrics that isn't necessarily introspection, but it may or may not match the equations.

And then how do we describe the phenomenon?

You understand them, or maybe they're not descriptible, saying that we describe them with the mathematical equations.

And there's not really any good way to translate that into words that would be understandable to folk, common people in that way.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Ali?


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, I'm Ali.

I'm an independent researcher from Iran.

I'm very glad to be here and I'm looking forward to learn more about this fascinating paper.

Especially, I'm interested in exploring phenomenological aspects of BDI

believe, desire and intention, and also to explore somewhat more deeply the philosophical underpinnings of representation versus simulation aspect of modeling VDI in active inference.

And yeah, that's it for me.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

Let's begin with this more taxonomic question about the types of active inference.

So we can think about different types that we've heard about in this paper and elsewhere, and then

whether or not we have something to contribute about adding a specific type to this list that will continue to grow.

What does it mean or entail that we do have these different types?

So just to review in this paper, 46,

They make a very clear upfront distinction between what they characterize as motor actinth, MAI, and decision actinth.

And there's a few differences between motor and decision.

Who can list one category of difference?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, the motor active inference doesn't typically require that you have to make a decision.

It's more a reaction or a reflective form as compared to the decision active inference, which does, as the papers say, likely map over to the desire question.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

So the motor AI was connected to motor reflex.

Are there decision-making reflex?

Even if that's not a classical usage, like in the reflex arc of the spine or something, moving the hand away from a hot surface, are there cognitive reflexes?


SPEAKER_03:
Not really sure.

I just basically was asking in the context of people who are writing these papers now who are bringing the question down to a motor operational behavior standpoint, how breaking active inference up into different classifications is that in response to a bigger problem, which is the behavior doesn't necessarily

behavior isn't something that's necessarily, we're able to conveniently dissolve down to or concentrate down into motor operations or extensions or any of those other different things that the writers tend to want to focus on now, as opposed to sort of the complexity and the variety and the randomness of behavior as a whole, so.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, great.

So this is from page 81.

Oh, yes, Ali, go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I think the distinction between MAI and DAI is not globally accepted among, well, various researchers.

For instance, if we look at the work of Alan Berthouds,

French neuroscientist, especially his book, I think it was called The Brain's Sense of Movement.

In that book, he actually has a famous quote, namely, perception is simulated action.

And by this, he means that he implies that perception and motion and motion and perception or

thinking for that matter, are irreducibly interconnected.

And so the former defines the latter because of the intrinsic motricity

uh, uh, of the creatures endowed with, uh, nervous systems.

Uh, so I'm not sure if we can, uh, distinguish between MAI and DAI in such a, uh, clear cut manner, uh, because as we know that most motor, uh, most, uh, um, motricity and, uh, motor or actions, uh, are also, uh,

predefined in that perception or many other thought processes.

Thanks.

David?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, I didn't know enough about the BDI model or the, you know, I'm still new to the language, especially of the authors of this paper, to the general philosophy.

But, you know, I was talking a lot about last week about the unified I,

and higher order rules so if you want to look like decision as higher order rules and they would have some sort of power like usually when we think of consciousness in a unified eye that makes decisions and

We talked about eliminativism and the implications of the equations.

Are they eliminativistic or not?

And what direction does the evidence take us?

And so in terms of motor control, like I mentioned, Fodor's modular mind, that it could be that it's a threshold, it's a free energy principle.

And it could just be action, reaction, sense perception, and then a module of our mind sends some perception of however we understand consciousness that makes it appear to us like we made a decision.

I mean, but that may not be accurate that you're the equations might hint that that's not actually what's going on it's simply free energy threshold being reached the threshold could conceivably have.

Nothing or very little to do with the decision making process and it could be post facto like the lead that experiments that the perception, like we made a decision actually comes post facto from the threshold.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Thank you.

Also, I think Adam Safran, who had discussed those Libet experiments, does find a space for agency, if that's not too coarse of a simplification.

But there is some interesting ways to think about what that experiment does or doesn't show.

Maybe we can return to that when we kind of have some figures and details.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
yeah i didn't know what you guys were talking about with this illimitativist thing until i went back to the paper and then i found this and i'll just quote it we also this is from the paper we also motivate a squarely non-illimitivist position with respect to such constructs and suggest that the set of theoretical primitives out of which the active inference models are built is sufficient not only to recover the categories

a folk psychology, but also to potentially nuance them with more fine-grained distinctions.

So I'm not sure exactly, David, what you've been saying either corresponds with that or not, but I'm kind of curious.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, go for it.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, to me, it's a fallacy that, you know, like a best of both worlds fallacy that materialistic research into consciousness make is that in reality, my understanding of the conclusions of what they're saying is that it is a limit of this.

And they'll put a little statement in like it's not a limit of this.

But what is the evidence of their models actually say?

And can they actually program like a unified eye?

And did they eliminate the unified eye?

And it's just a bunch of perceptions and various factors that reach a threshold.

And what does it mean to make a decision?

And that's why I said, do we just throw away thousands of years of dualistic theology?

How people, our whole lexicon of consciousness, psychology comes from a dualistic tradition.

So if they're trying to grandfather in these dualistic concepts, but even the evidence of what they're saying doesn't necessarily seem to warrant it.

And then, you know, do they have the courage?

to be like, no, unfortunately, the evidence points to illimitivism and go with that.

So, I mean, in my impression, they kind of just throw in the statement, but it's unclear how they're, you know, how they're doing it.

Because, you know, I guess, you know, it's going to be unpopular to be an illimitivist.

It's kind of like the free will question that, I mean, illimitivism also relates to free will.

But, you know, to stand up and be like, no, I'm sorry, free will doesn't exist.

That's where the evidence is pointed.

sort of put in there that they're not trying to say that.

But my impression, I think they actually are trying to say that.

Or that's where the evidence of their conclusions are saying, and they just have a human weakness that doesn't want to go so far as to follow the evidence of their research.


SPEAKER_00:
interesting so just to continue on this motor and decision ai so page five mai does not make decisions once a decision has been made about what to do mai uses proprioceptive prediction signals to move the body to carry out the decided action sequence and elsewhere we've talked about that sort of set point and then a transient suppression of precision which allows the body to reach this new spatial position

and also these models have tended to be formulated in continuous time.

Whereas decision AI plugs in very nicely to the motor AI because it is explicitly considering decision making and these higher order rules that

have to do with either if you take a more realist perspective what organisms or cognitive systems are doing or the more instrumental perspective which is just this is how the the process of decision making can be modeled and it's about what which decisions are made about what to do in order to generate some observations and not others and it's that uh

focus on the observations that are generated under different courses of action and their evaluation in terms of expected free energy that also ties it closely to like perceptual control theory.

So that's the distinction they bring up.

And again, whether in the real world, this carves cognitive systems at the joint is one question.

In the world of the theories as constructed, this is a clean separation.

Although as Ali brought up, that doesn't mean that it's widely accepted or even if everybody heard about it that they would necessarily agree with it.

And there may be phenomena that are mixtures.

And that's also why they talk about the hybrid models where it's like decision-making at a higher level and then motor at a lower level.

So that could allow decisions about what section of a face to look at or what section of a page to read.

And then that decision becomes implemented in a continuous motor active inference context through ocular motor action.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I don't think I'm leading with this question about are we moving to a place that says that active inference will have different types because I think that there's math that's used in financial situations, those operations.

There's math that's used in mechanical situations, those operations.

So I think it's a natural byproduct of, so how do you make the math work?

given the circumstance.

I don't think that there's anything about this that's saying active inference doesn't work just because you want to make sure that you're applying the proper formula to the thing that you're trying to describe.

But I do think it's interesting that in order to be able to describe it more precisely, you just can't say active inference.

You have to kind of figure out what the math is for the specific condition that you're trying to analyze.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, definitely makes sense.

Let's now move to this lower part of the page on the different adjectives that we've seen.

So people can probably add or think of more or even imagine.

There's so many adjectives in the textbook called the dictionary.

We've talked about extended active inference, which was addressing extended cognitive features and phenomena, where there could be sort of a offloading, which was when the adaptive active entity is going to utilize something that is more like a notepad, like it's offloading memory onto the notepad, and then the entity is holding on to information about how to seek that information.

Or on both sides of the interface, there could be adaptive act-inf.

And so that was like the sort of true emergent extended cognitive processes.

Deep active inference and citations could be added, didn't get them for all.

was utilized to describe temporal depth in terms of longer and longer time horizons of considerations.

This was really an important development because it moved beyond the sort of one-shot next step model of active and help manage this trade-off between considering time horizons as well as taking action in the time step that the entity is actually in.

sophisticated active inference and various other cousins of it utilized hierarchical modeling which could have temporal depth at one or multiple levels but doesn't need to it does and it could but this is referring to like the thickness or the hierarchical modeling component

uh affective active inference which was used by hesped all to refer to uncertainty parameters and some of the cognitive interpretations of uncertainty parameters as being related to valence um and then there's others like branching time act infants um it comes to what dean said which is just saying like we use active inference

may not reduce uncertainty enough any more than we used a linear model.

whether just talking about it casually or writing the paper, more information has to be provided.

And so this is starting to build the taxonomy and the classifications and the ways of communicating, reducing uncertainty.

Okay, you went to that hemisphere, but was it this continent or that continent?

Was it this coast or was it that coast?

Like zooming in, ultimately resulting in just describing the particulars of the model that was constructed.

Ali?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, adding to what Dean has just said, well, I don't think that these different flavors and versions of active inference that have recently been branched up, they don't necessarily concern themselves with different situations or different niches.

For example, that last one, branching time active inference,

Well, that was a very recent version of active inference, which was, yes, this is the paper they introduced that.

And it's basically a more efficient computational approach to active inference.

And it's just the traditional active inference, but in a more


SPEAKER_00:
efficient with a more efficient algorithm to compute the all the parameters needed yes sometimes it's these adjectives are describing heuristics or implementations or algorithms other times they're describing the model structure other times they're referring to the context that the model is being applied to like an extended cognitive system dean


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's what I was going to ask Ali about.

So if I'm saying something more efficient, what am I saying is more efficient relative to?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, relative to the traditional approach to active inference that has been proposed for the past decade or two, and also relative to the other approaches that are similar to active inferences approach, but not exactly equivalent to it.

For instance, reinforcement learning approaches and so on.


SPEAKER_00:
And one other kind of analogy or mapping there would be like, when a new variant of a neural network architecture is introduced, there's a pomp and circumstance to announce the novelty and the relevance of this for somebody who's in that field.

Similarly, when there's a new variant or a new focus, whether model structure, model target, or something else related to evolutionary biology,

sometimes a new word will come in, but then that new target or model structure, if it becomes used and it's sufficiently close that it's not rejected from the rest of the body of theory, if it's an incoherent usage of the adjective, someone says, well, I made simple active inference and it has this totally different structure.

that might not become incorporated into the network of active inference models.

Whereas if it does become incorporated through its theoretical compatibility or utility in modeling that phenomena, or it's presented in terms of a model architecture that does apply elsewhere, the adjective kind of gets dropped

And then it just goes back to being neural networks, back to being active inference, back to being evolutionary biology.

And then the field moves on.

And so the adjectives are just kind of like another brick in the wall.

Doof it.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I also mentioned last week, I'm not sure if it would go here in this section, is the purpose-driven behavior, action, or even perception related to a unified I and I.

even if it's on the pure level of sense perception is it just that we have uh you know these perceivers and they perceive and then how are the signals read and uh i mean it's easier to describe this in a liministic way whether we're limited or not uh in the for the predictive mind

is the main struggle, so to say, between short-term goals and long-term goals.

And then you have to put in what axioms are we making?

Is there some sort of, for the higher order rules, if we assume that there's some sort of rule that like an organism acts in its own self-interest, in its own, you know, sort of say desire to survive,

or to uh replicate and then you the only struggle would be between short-term and long-term actions like you know God forbid here we have a mosquito pandemic I was gardening and got you know eaten up by mosquitoes and it was just a sense you're replying to the environment like I have an itch should I itch it or should I have some longer term that'll go away quicker if uh if I don't itch it

And is that something that's even in the subconscious where just naturally I would have an itch and I would itch it, but then I would somehow enter a longer term decision-making process that would tell me to act in a different way.

And even in terms for how I'm going to interact with the environment in the future, let alone something that might have a moral or ethical implication.

So if you have a simplified model of just a,

where do we need purpose for sense perception to work and for motor control to work even in terms of reflexes because i think uh you're just even on the motor control let alone the decision making uh you know where does the decision making uh go and what's the purpose behind it and then how is that purpose derived yes so we can go to uh targeted non-targeted


SPEAKER_00:
Another branch point is I think this important question of mapping from real-world phenomena and even direct felt experiences like aesthetic or just more generally phenomenological and anything about a formalism.

And I'm not sure if I've quoted too narrowly,

But they are writing that intentions, so just to review the BDI, the beliefs and the desires come together, and that is what generates the intention.

There's the desire for the ice cream, and there's the belief that there's the ice cream truck, and that is what generates the intentional behavior of pursuing the ice cream truck.

Intentions map straightforwardly to policies with the lowest value for expected free energy, which is calculated across different policies.

Policies are affordances that can be taken over a given time horizon.

So over a time horizon of three, it's the combination of affordances of length three.

Almost all the variables in the DAI model are candidates for traditional psychological beliefs if being used to model the right kinds of high level cognitive processes.

So what are the right kinds?

But then later in footnote five,

This is distinguishing in what they characterize as a different reading of desire.

This reading is not the thing that is desired, but instead about the transient presence of the motivational force to approach the thing we desire.

So it's like, why did you go there?

It was my desire to go there.

What moved you to go there?

Desire.

So it's almost like desire in the specifics, and then also seeing it as a motivating force

But then they note that habit might not have a direction of fit, and it illustrates another reason consistent with our broader argument concerning desires not to assume that probability distributions in the formalism must be mapped onto beliefs at the psychological level.

So they're candidates if we do it right, but it isn't an assumption that they must be mapped onto beliefs.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I wanted to mention the broader sense of the term intentionality, which I think here is referred to because you see, for all the entities defined by markup blankets and defined by the existence of their markup blankets and their ergodic behavior,

Well, we need an entity who can treat an effect as being about its cause.

An entity who can follow the direction from effect to cause.

And we also need an entity who can treat an isomorphic map.

as being about what it maps, or let's say as oriented toward what it maps.

Well, in both of these cases, the directionality or orientation can be referred to as intentionality in its broad sense.


SPEAKER_00:
So just to clarify there, so the second piece you mentioned was the entity needs to be able to treat some sort of isomorphic or structure-preserving mapping as having an aboutness of the target, like the map of the city

translating that into the physical movement.

And then there was a causal inference question.

Entity can trace causes such that they're doing some kind of causal mapping where agency is the belief that one can be the cause of future aspects.

So is this agency or is this causal modeling that could happen in the absence of entity level agency?


SPEAKER_01:
I think it's broader than necessarily being a cognitive agent.

You see, it's any abstract entity that can

that can sketch out these kinds of causal relationships between the signs and their either icons or their indices.

So it's much broader and more abstract than necessarily cognitive agents.


SPEAKER_00:
What kind of entities are you thinking of?

And isn't it manipulation and that kind of logical juxtaposition?


SPEAKER_01:
No, the one obvious example would be neural networks.

neural nets.

We don't necessarily bestow upon neural networks a cognitive agency, right?

But they can well match at least their input patterns onto their output indices.


SPEAKER_00:
and it's um these continuums of agency continuums of cognitive systems it's like easy to forget we're we're talking about a cognitive modeling framework albeit one that has a motor cousin mai and motor motor modeling history because the mai distinction is um

Also historical, like in terms of which models were developed when.

And is this pan-cognitivism?

Are we modeling everything as if it is on the continuum of cognitive entities?

Like, I don't know if it's as controversial to say that a neural network is a cognitive artifact.

it might not be self-perpetuating or embodied or have open-ended agency or all these other features that some cognitive systems have, but what makes it not cognitive, if you meant that?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, probably the cognitive here was not a proper adjective.

Perhaps what I meant was to be, I don't know, a kind of conscious agent or

But again, on the subject of using the adjective cognitive for neural networks, well, there are quite a few opponents to this characterization for neural networks because they believe that neural networks as agents don't necessarily...

decide on their cognitive basis how to map between the inputs and outputs, because that's the difference between representation and simulation if we

well, can differentiate between those two.

So probably, yeah, the more suitable adjective here should be a conscious agent as opposed to cognitive agent.


SPEAKER_00:
Does that not take us extremely far afield out of where we lose touch with empirical measurements, for example, and enter into important

philosophical questions, but ones that take us away from our cognitive leg.

And psychology, perhaps even especially folk psychology, is sitting at the intersection of cognitive systems, philosophical, self-reflexive systems.

So it's almost like a question of this teetering stack of folk psychology.

Which way will it end up falling?

Elimitivism perhaps is saying we'll be able to dispense with classical philosophical debates or some aspects of them by just moving everything that was folk psychological into a mathematical cognitivist framework.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, what I mean here is that, well, the term intentionality here can also be used

in abstract models of active inference and not necessarily well in the cases where we unambiguously deal with conscious entities.

That's what I mean.


SPEAKER_00:
I think one of the takeaways of this paper or one of the implications of this paper would be that if

intentions in folk psychology are beliefs plus desires and beliefs and desires are identifiable quantities in the academic formalism

Then, by constructing entities consistent with the act of formalism, it can be said that they have intentionality, because it could be said that they have beliefs and desires, and so then it would only make sense to call the behaviors arising from beliefs and desires to be intentional.


SPEAKER_01:
So doesn't this conceptualization of intentionality also subsume the more strict or narrow sense of that term?

Because, well, in this sense, if we infer from the use of intentionality here as referring to only conscious agents,

Well, in that case, the whole purpose of simulating active inference agents could potentially, well, raise some questions.

I'm not sure if I could express myself clearly on this matter or not.


SPEAKER_00:
Very interesting.

Dean, and then do it.


SPEAKER_03:
So maybe amongst the three of you, you can help me with this because I don't really keep up with the latest news on neural nets.

But if I were to look at a neural net, I would assume that most of those nets are given some kind of a target.

Even if they go out and forage for it, there is something about that.

But what I've always been curious about is, especially in the context of this paper, is that

If there is a target, that's been sort of linked to desire in this paper.

And if there's a curiosity aspect to the agent or the net, that's been sort of linked to non-targeting.

So if that's one continuum, the orthogonal aspect of that also in the paper is that there's a reward seeking component

say on the left of that, there's an information seeking or an information and ambiguity component to the right of that.

So here's my question.

Unless we say that curiosity actually is a target, which this paper says it's actually a non-target and the operation and the formalism actually points that out, then how do we set something up like a neural net to actually be curious?

Because we can be curious, we can be non-targeting and find reward in that if we go one direction and find information gained in that in another direction.

And they are completely different things.

They're not seen in the formalism as the same thing.

So I'm just curious whether...

Because as I said, I don't know enough about neural nets to know, but aren't neural nets constantly constrained by having a target?


SPEAKER_00:
I think there's many ways to answer that.

I am not sure if it would totally map onto the difference of supervised and unsupervised learning.

like supervised learning being where labels are provided.

These x-rays belong to this patient category.

These ones belong to the alternate category.

I want you to get really good, but don't over-specify, don't over-fit that distinction, supervised learning.

Unsupervised learning is more along the lines of like, here's input.

According to how you're set up,

embody the statistical regularities and the structure of the information that has been input.

And then that representation allows like clustering and subsequent analyses or the addition of labels later, but it isn't predicated in the training phase upon the data or the cases being labels.

Does that?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, but the predication is not curiosity, is it?

That's my point, is that there is no curiosity in what you just described.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

It's like a pipeline that is receiving whatever information is being provided.

And curiosity seems to kind of break out of that.

And it's like, give me more examples.

And then the directed curiosity would be like, I'm looking for more examples of the label A.

The undirected curiosity would be more like, I just would like more examples.


SPEAKER_03:
So to ask Ali maybe, Ali, is it consciousness if it doesn't have curiosity?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I don't think so, because you see, even in...

unsupervised learnings.

We don't necessarily, well, the neural networks don't necessarily extract the essence of their training examples.

What they do is to extract

statistical prototype of their tokens the statistical prototype of their training examples so actually they can't recognize a dog as a dog they just see patterns they just see statistical patterns which they've learned through their training process so they're not uh

they're not necessarily conscious of the object of dog or cat or whatever.

What they try to do is, and in fact, in some cases, well, sometimes we see that they have, in fact, inferred wrong statistical prototypes because of, well, insufficient training examples or

well, not appropriate training examples or so on.

But in any case, I don't think we can...

say that, well, neural networks, because of their ability to recognize these patterns, they necessarily, well, have consciousness because, well, probably in order to achieve consciousness, well, other layers of cognitive and even perceptual mechanisms need to be deployed.

David.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I had some other points, but if you wanted to.

You'll stay in the curiosity topic and it's related to what the point I was going to make about belief and desire.

Clearly defining the words so they're specifically you know you're going to take the BDI model and use words like belief and desire to.

you know, some relatively obscure scientific model versus, you know, like a whole historical review of the etymology and, you know, I mean, and how do we, how are we defining beliefs and desire?

You know, does curiosity have a desire to learn something?

For its own purpose, that means it's not goal-driven.

And then how I would understand belief and desire in terms of, so desires are biological urges, like reproduction or survival, and if the emotions are maybe all derivative.

How you're going to put that out where if you're going to try to source all of them from one pure desire and all the other desires are derivative or if you're going to have multiple desires, and then you'd have to have some sort of waiting function to wait the different desires and then beliefs are self made.

rules that come from our own cognition and that's where decision making comes comes in and even you know i think a rabbinic statement in terms of free will that free will is implying that you have the choice to make the less desirous opinion the the less desires choice like as a chess player if you're thinking like uh uh candidate moves and analysis trees that in reality our candidate moves are just how we control our body

And do we move our arm up or down or the various controls of our physical function?

But what are the candidate moves?

And then how would the analysis tree and

decision making is it you know how would it come that you would make the less desirous uh decision is it purely you know let's say short term uh versus long term and then the organization of uh you know let's take a system like okay i'm a jew i'm a muslim i'm an atheist or i'm a capitalist i'm a communist that we have these self-directed uh

beliefs that control our behavior and if it's learning to do things like i can't steal god forbid i can't rape i can't kill and that like my desire if the body tells me okay i see attractive woman i want to have sexual relations but then i have these beliefs like that there's a system of rules and governance

that is it purely because I can't get away with it that I don't do it?

We don't rape, steal, and kill because we can't get away with it?

Or is there this self-imposed moralistic behavior and that's coming down to what belief means?

And then also, so curiosity, you'd have to clearly define

curiosity if you're talking about neural nets that you know can computer just learn for its own sake uh and even can a human just learn for its own sake that uh you know we're participating in these discussions purely because i enjoy figuring things out even if it has no practical implication to uh you know some primal directive of survival

or reproduction or however you're going to understand these primal directives.

And then the equation be similar to a chess algorithm for a computer where it would appear that you could add in weighting factors, that you could program this into the equations and you have some constants that would be weighting factors.

So if you did have just one primal directive of survival or two primal directives of reproduction and survival, and then you could give those weighting factors, or you could have a feedback mechanism with the environment.

And then, as I said, where do the belief comes in, the self-made rules, and then how are those weighting factors calculated?

in decision-making and what does it mean to make a decision?

Is it possible that we make the least desirous decision?

And if we can't make the less desirous decision, do we not have free will?


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

So Jonathan Schock made a great point, which is that deep neural networks applied to reinforcement learning can include curiosity as an explicit factor.

It guides the agent to states about which it has the most uncertainty.

So it's a term which makes it rewarding to explore currently unexplored states.

And then just to provide a recent example, here's a way in which a neural network architecture was used.

certainly worthy of more exploration and at a first pass or at least just qualitatively one way to think about that and then we'll come to how curiosity was described in the text is in active inference we have a imperative for action selection that includes a pragmatic and an epistemic component

Whereas a pragmatic absolutist perspective like reinforcement learning needs to generate these modules and alternate architectures

such that information seeking, curiosity, can be coerced into a reward framework.

I mean, what is the next question gonna be?

Well, it's rewarding to gain information.

Oh, what kind of information?

How much information?

How are we going to learn the parameters on our curiosity model?

And so on.

And so active inference as a first principles approach for this kind of artificially intelligent system

allows us to include at the base level both an objective achieving and a pure curiosity reducing element.

Dean, and then we'll look at how they talk about curiosity.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Daniel.

So, as has historically been the case for point twos, David just left and I was going to ask him this question.

Okay, I guess he's still here.

So, David, after thought one, and now just what you were just sharing with us here, I wondered, without putting words in one mouth, can I get a clarification?

I think one of the things that you're trying to make clear or

or at least bring into the conversation is that prioritization, which is the sort of the value weighting aspect of how we see the world is not ordering the kind of placing of a formalism down on paper that includes rules like equals and plus and minus in the FEP or the sort of extended and variation of free energy piece.

Is that,

And that oversimplifying what you want us to make clear that that having evaluating is not the same.

That kind of prioritization is not the same as being able to formally set down an order.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I'm a dualist, so like I'm trying to I think I could use these equations for dualistic purposes, and you could just factor in a weighting factor for these higher order rules.

And then, you know, so my system would have some sort of struggle between two separate realms of material and spiritual realm.

So that's personally how I'm I'm looking at it.

But, you know, I could attempt to understand it from just the materialistic realm and how the

equations uh you would apply and then if there's competing factors what's the origin of those competing factors so so if you just put your desires are biological uh animalistic urges and beliefs are self-created uh rules of uh

cognition, and then you want to have a separate function like curiosity, where curiosity maybe benefits the purpose of making beliefs, which would later come to become higher order rules.

Or if you want to have the ability to have behavior that has no purpose, that I just enjoy understanding things, maybe that understanding will help me make better higher order rules.

And then saying, oh, like you're saying for the equation, here we have these equations and it's free energy.

And so the purpose is to minimize the least action principle or limit energy usage.

And so if you're looking like, well, why did I do that?

Well, it's like, dummy, didn't you look at the equation?

It was the free energy principle.

You did it to minimize energy usage.

And so we're just saying that that's the origin of all human behavior from an eliminativistic sense.

And from the folk psychology, that's why I'm taking a dualistic perspective where these higher order rules are coming from a non-material plane.

but I think they could be modeled into the equations.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Also, free energy minimization doesn't entail the actual minimal possible energy usage.

Though some people have made that, accidentally or intentionally, a claim, it isn't what those equations, as they're being used here, necessarily represent, but it could.

There could be a system that thrives optimally based upon reducing energy usage, but also there's situations where free energy minimization and the path of least action are not the lowest energy consumption.


SPEAKER_02:
Was that short term versus long term?

They're saying long term it is, but it's just short term versus long term decision making in the, as opposed to a dualistic, the predictive mind that's saying it's not dualistic, spiritual versus material.

It's a single materialistic in its short term versus long term.


SPEAKER_00:
okay let's think about that in the context of of curiosity um how they're describing so g expected free energy of policies it's like the policies are enumerated and then g is calculated for them reflects the inferred value of each policy based upon beliefs beliefs are p of o sub t

conditioned on pi.

So the distribution of outcomes conditioned upon policies.

If I go left, what do I expect to see?

If I go right, what do I expect to see?

That's a belief.

And the belief distribution about observations conditioned upon hidden states of the world.

If there is food there, then what observations will I expect to see?

And desired outcomes, which is, as we've explored in 37 in user's guide, there's this dual implication of the P of O distribution and active inference as what is expected as well as preferred.

because we reduce our surprise about the expected

slash preferred outcome distribution, and that is how the desired outcomes are realized, not by providing a higher reward or value to increasingly preferred states, but rather treating the preference distribution as expectations, which allows us to use surprisal and surprisal-bounding approaches towards achieving

preferences so how do they talk about desire and curiosity they're suggesting that these drives so this is in earlier we talked about there's the two ways to talk about desire the specific target of desire as a desire like i desire a cube of tungsten or something and then there's the drive that is associated with desire what made the person do it desire in the abstract

um curiosity drives discovery of what is not yet known and thus has no preconceived target however one could also say that it has a semi-formed concept of target because one could be like curious about something and then their curiosity would be satiated by something else something but not something else so in that case there was some of something of a prior on what they were looking for um

The claim that curiosity is not cognitive, so desire-related, might seem suspect on the grounds it could also be characterized as simply the desire to learn, qualitatively, and this in turn could be conceived as the desire that one's beliefs are as precise as possible.

Even though, especially in the short term, learning sometimes feels like it reduces our precision.

However, the mathematics allow us to motivate a genuine distinction here.

Specifically, changing outcomes to minimize the KL divergence in the risk term in EFE is a fundamentally different sort of process from minimizing the ambiguity term.

So the KL divergence is on the left side here.

And the ambiguity term is on the right side here.

Here's equation 2.6 from the textbook.

and it's it's in a different order but just to see here's risk with the kl divergence and then here's expected ambiguity with the h for the entropy calculation um the latter which is the ambiguity term does not care how uncertainty is resolved so long it is resolved there's no preference for becoming more confident in one possible belief over another

Whereas the reduction of uncertainty by reducing the KL divergence is what is bringing us into alignment with our preferences slash expectations.

Hence, that is a much more targeted form of curiosity in that it allows for goal-directed information seeking.

And then they write, Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's perfect.

Because what I wanted to say was that I think that curiosity really points to that risk.

And the reason I say that is because you may find that when the ambiguity is removed, the prize is a happy one or a not so happy one.

And I think that's kind of important here to see sort of the... It's hard to say, as it says here,

However, the claim that curiosity is non-cognitive might seem suspect on the grounds it could also be characterized as simply the desire to learn.

Before the learning, you're sort of in an ambiguous state.

Will it be a happy surprise or will it be an unhappy surprise?

And so I think this kind of pulls that out.

The ambiguity applies a certain amount of risk, but then you have to act in the active inference aspect of it to determine whether or not the surprise all at the other side of it is actually good or not so good.

So I think that's where the curiosity arm of this comes to the fore.

It is non-targeted until it actually has been realized or somehow materialized.

Whereas the targeted stuff, the desire stuff, can be part of your plan.

I'm not sure whether the curiosity fits as conveniently as the desire does.


SPEAKER_00:
And just one short note on that is we see a conditioning on policy.


SPEAKER_03:
Right.


SPEAKER_00:
in a few different places.

So it'd be interesting to think about where does planning to learn come into play?

And in what ways is planning to learn directed?

Or what if you plan to have undirected learning?

Or all these other combinations.

Doovit?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I'm not sure if it would exactly fit in with the equation, but I'm thinking here like Maslow's hierarchy of needs defined in terms of the free energy principle where, so to say, curiosity requires excess energy.

So if you're on the first rung of the hierarchy,

that you have limited energy to apply towards curiosity.

And if you do have energy to apply towards curiosity, you're going to be best off to be curious about things that will directly apply to your security,

your food or the primal directives as opposed to if you move up the hierarchy, at least put this into Maslow's hierarchy, where there's less risk associated with curiosity that maybe you've achieved more leisure activity and therefore have more energy to expand towards curiosity that you could reach the highest levels of Maslow's hierarchy and focus on

you know ideals and uh what is the meaning of truth or understanding uh science uh but it would still be uh you however you're defining the free energy principle that you have some sort of uh uh conservation of energy and curiosity is an expansion

of energy that is limited, but more resources could be allocated, so to say, energy resources to curiosity if it makes the whole unified person more efficient and they become more secure, more safe, more social, accepted, so on and so on.

And therefore, they have more energy to expand towards curiosity.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Ali.


SPEAKER_01:
I also think it might be helpful to mention the neural basis for these surprise appraisals, because you see, as we know, we have two systems of thinking, system one and system two famously sketched out by Kahneman and Tversky, or fast track and slow track reacting to stimuli.

So in the fast track,

Well, the stimuli bypass the sensory cortex and go directly from thalamus to amygdala.

So our first reaction, our immediate reaction to every surprise would be something quite similar to fear.

But then after appraising that stimulus, after going through the sensory cortex and then amygdala and then hippocampus, then we can appraise, we can evaluate that surprise as being positive or negative.

And as a result of that, we get a positive or negative valence effect.

So in summary, well, every surprise, I mean, either positive or negative, it could be at first, at the very first moment, can induce a negative valence emotion in us.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, I brought in some of the quotes from this paper, Habitual and Reflective Control in Hierarchical Predictive Coding.

It's from 2021 and it's by Kinghorn, Milledge and Buckley.

So they directly connect hierarchical predictive coding architectures, which when they consider action have a lot to do with active inference.

in terms of thinking fast and slow, like you had just brought up.

So they wrote, on this view, fast actions may be triggered using only the lower levels of the hierarchical predictive coding schema, whereas more deliberative actions need higher layers.

We demonstrate that HPC can distribute learning throughout its hierarchy with higher layers called into use only as required.

So that is very interesting when we think about

going back to the MAI-DAI distinction from this paper, it's a hybrid model, albeit one where the motor spatial control is continuous or modeled as continuous, and then there's a more discrete, more mental or cognitive model that's like thinking slow.

So it's almost like there's thinking fast and slow even within the mind, and then there's thinking with the body.

that's like even a lower level i don't think even by thinking fast they weren't talking about the reflex arc but there can be hierarchical modeling even there um so it uh what are these nested models that are slower

How do those develop?

Are they related to the physical architecture of our onboard machinery?

To what extent do they involve so many of our off-sourced or extended cognitive phenomena, like our colleagues, like our social networks, our books and learnings, the social structures that scaffold our beliefs and so on?

There's a lot of interesting pieces there.

What would be a good direction to go in this second half of the dot, too?

We had targeted, non-targeted.

Is there anything there that's not covered by the curiosity discussion?

Is there... Oh, unmute, Dina, then yes, go for it.


SPEAKER_03:
Sorry about that.

Yeah, I think we pretty much wrestled that one to the ground.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, David?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, my conception for targeted, I'm calling the unified I in terms of...

maybe like the ant colony where you could look at it like the ants are all functioning personally with their own directive behavior and it just works out that they're directed or as a unit.

But even in like a human, whether there's a unified of the human cells, like even sense perception that it's easier to look at it like our...

Like I mentioned, we have almost 100 million cones and rods in our eyes that are receiving photons at every given instant.

And we just look at it like they're acting in a unified manner.

But even that requires some sort of targeted behavior for even direct motor control that our cells in our given body are acting in a unified manner.

And could you take the free energy principle to a cellular level and say, well, cells will act in a unified way if it's in accordance with the free energy principle.

But if it wasn't in accordance with the free energy principle, then cells don't act in a unified targeted way.

and act according to their own levels.

I'm not sure if you could take that to the cellular level for even things like sense perception, motor control, like one arm wants to go this way and one arm wants to go that way.

And how do we have this unified control?


SPEAKER_00:
It's an interesting thing about what would make something concord or not with FEP because it's a description framework.

here is where in from livestream 25 with uh professor levin here's even in the ant colony example where different subsystems and and cancer and and um like other situations like biofilms were modeled this way that there can be coherence within each cone so to speak uh

I don't know if this moves us closer to understanding the experience of the eye or whether there is in fundament a unified eye, but the cells in the nestmate's body can be understood as undergoing coherent behavior.

The nestmates can, the colony can.

And then different people have taken different perspectives on what makes one level of analysis more relevant than others.

Like an evolutionary perspective is that the unit of selection is granted some special power.

A information processing perspective or integrated information theory might highlight what happens informationally within and across levels.

Let's look at their dark room experiment.

We kind of came to it a little bit last time, but what did anyone think their figure and simulation spoke to?

How was it adding details or information that weren't present in the

more formalism and qualitative driven other sections of the paper?


SPEAKER_03:
I have a question.

I don't know if I have an interpretation of it.

When others looked at this as it's now graphed out, did they see ambiguity removal or did they see an entropy question being resolved?

Because what I saw was the latter.

I kind of saw that something...

something appeared with more information gain or something disappeared if there was no sense that the change of an ambiguity state was going to make any difference.

So I'm kind of curious how others interpreted the actual data as it laid out post hoc, because this is all post hoc.

This is just comparing .7.3 to .99.01.

In terms of the desire strength, and I think they use the term urgency in the paper, going up, right?

Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Well, on the left side, okay, so time is moving from left to right.

There's an entity that doesn't desire, they don't have a preference for achieving ice cream.

And in this simulation run, they observed that they were in a dark room and they picked the decision to flip a switch.

They then went to the right

and they ended up not finding that they got ice cream the weak desire agent first flips a switch and then with higher confidence goes to the left and they end up realizing ice cream in this case of the strong desire agent

even though they have uncertainty about going left or right initially they're in a hurry or it's urgent and they go left immediately and that turns out that it does achieve getting the ice cream one note is like

these are only showing one run of each of those simulations so it's like does the no desire entity always go to the right or is that a 50 50. how have people used the bdi to do quantitative modeling of behavior

Are they moving their verbal and formal arguments from above in the paper into a form factor that will be more amenable or palatable to people who are already using these models to do behavioral analysis?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think the BDI, I mean, strictly from the standpoint of here's what we watched this agent do.

It kind of had a 50-50 choice.

It was playing more in the geometry space.

How this is represented is more sort of the Bayesian distribution piece, right?

So you've got a

percentage of an area as you're moving from left to right that's either darkened or remains agnostic.

It doesn't sort of change what the outcome or what the matching of an outcome and the expected free energy are.

So I think that it just brings more information to the

to the observation of what's actually going on when the lights either do go on or don't go on.

Because that first one, the lights don't go on, I think, and the agent either stumbles to the right place or doesn't, but they don't care.

But I do think that what happens is you can have geometry only, or you can have geometry and

a proportion or a distribution, and I think that's what this is kind of laying out for us, that now you've got more information.

And with more information, hopefully you've got less invariance.

You've got more variance being described here than you would if you left it at the geometric level alone.

Does that make sense?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, and they follow up after the figure that this magnitude mapping, it's giving not just some theoretical detail to this mapping, and they provide several citations, many recently with Smith and others,

where it's used in many different contexts.

And then I kind of found it also interesting in the following sentences after the paragraph that I had just quoted there.

This motivating force could be corresponding to the magnitude of the KL divergence.

KL divergence between the Q variational distribution of observations conditioned upon policy divergence with the preference distribution P of up within the expected free energy so that's one of the terms that we've looked at in the G of Pi i.e the risk term not the ambiguity term with entropy

This is because stronger preference values over rewarding outcomes in P of O of T increase the KL divergence and lead the agent to seek reward over information gain.

So there's still a knob, maybe multiple that are slightly interacting.

There's a knob by which more

Pure curiosity.

That would be just the ambiguity resolving, but undirected.

Mixtures of pure curiosity and directed curiosity.

Weak preferences with a lot of openness.

And increasingly sharp preference distributions induce increasingly urgent pragmatic value-seeking outcomes.

And...

There's a lot of funny things that come to mind, like a question for one person might be a survival question, for another it might be a research question, for another it might be like a pure curiosity.

Where's the oxygen in this room?

Is that a survival question?

Is that just, you know, again, are you researching oxygen distributions in rooms?

So you have a target to understand that?

Or are you just curious about that thought?

Dean, then David.


SPEAKER_03:
I think, Daniel, that clearly speaks to what David and Allie were both mentioning in terms of, so what's your timeframe here, right?

So you take off and you have a bird strike and now you don't have enough time to land anywhere other than on the river.

Is that curiosity?

Is that desire?

What is that in terms of how much time do you have now to manage the risk aspect of this situation that you now find yourself under?

Certainly survival.

But yeah, what percentages or what proportions of each one of these different parts of the equation are being calculated at any given moment relative to the overall time frame that you're now constrained under?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, do it.


SPEAKER_02:
let me just look at the refrigerator you know example that well okay had i been curious you know earlier during the day about the layout of the room i might have remembered how to get to the refrigerator but i i didn't expend that mental energy so here i am hungry

And I don't know my surroundings.

And so you have the level of curiosity could have provided benefit.

But now at this point, you know, you have the risk factor.

Will I injure myself or eat?

And I was thinking, you know, like chess or something like, OK, like the AlphaZero is programmed with the most powerful computers for hours and hours.

to just understand the game.

And then later, it's able to take that and win.

So as a person, it's like, OK, I really just like thinking about chess and understanding the patterns.

But then, OK, well, I have to reproduce.

I have to see to the success of my children and the offspring.

I have to make money and survive.

and so you know maybe i could become a professional chess player or something like that but then you would come and come in and well um if my goal is to uh you know reproduce and see the success of my offspring and you know make money and survive there's better methods to do that than becoming a professional chess player even like active inference

that, okay, I'm curious about how this stuff works, but it's probably not going to help me reproduce or make a living.

And if I tried to take my curiosity about consciousness and use that to benefit the reproduction or making a living, it's unlikely to see that much fruition.

But at the same time, the power of curiosity is you don't know how it's going to benefit you.

So the ice cream example, if we had a meeting in the kitchen during the day and then we all go back to our rooms to go to sleep and then we're hungry at night, the person who was just curious about how the room was laid out is going to be able to likely retrieve the ice cream without any injury as where the person who didn't

expand the energy to be curious about the layout of the room may not achieve the ice cream.

And that's why in my own head, it may not be directly applicable to this paper, but it could be in folk psychology.

It would be to map this to something like Maslow's hierarchy of rules, which would be in line with neural nets, that there would be some sort of higher order rules.

and some sort of ability to uh put the expansion of more energy like okay like i thought about chess and now i'm winning and i've achieved a little bit of social standing or you know won a little prize money or you know even school i was curious about consciousness now i got a bachelor's degree and i have enough proficiency to you know get a job and support a family


SPEAKER_00:
and now i could exhort even more energy to it but at the time of the pure curiosity you don't know how it may you actually benefit you in terms of reward great points that it's almost like jumping through different hoops what it might be best accomplished through pure curiosity at a future time point

So in, again, that survival, research, and pure curiosity trilemma, there's times where being driven by one or the other helps us move through complex real-world situations.

If we knew the whole story from the beginning, then we could just follow along.

But in a highly partial information world, where we don't want our priors to...

lead to ruin basically then pure curiosity and research help bring things within our survivable limit into information gathering spaces that we wouldn't necessarily have traveled to limited resources i don't know if they could program that also into the computer also like the limit of resources and if that if you interpret free energy principle in general to you'll be a definition of limited energy resources

Ali?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, adding to my own previous comments about the subject of consciousness and curiosity, I personally believe that the nature of consciousness is ultimately computational.

So it's amenable to modeling and simulation.

But we're just not there yet.

But well,

One possible approach to achieve such model could be potentially the active inference approach or other related approaches.

But you see, curiosity is just one aspect of consciousness.

I think it could probably be helpful to distinguish between the artificial curiosity and the experience of curiosity or the phenomenology of the curiosity because what we see here is the agent that simulates the artificial curiosity and it's not exactly

isomorphic with the experience we get from our derived to our information seeking drives.

And in fact, in this paper, I think it was in page 28.

Yes.

It's in page 28 that they state that we have not addressed questions about the structure a generative model would need in order to account for experiences of beliefs and desires.

Well, at least in this paper, we're not dealing with the actual experience of curiosity.

We're just trying to somehow model and simulate the artificial curiosity.

In fact, this term artificial curiosity is one favored by Carl Friston himself in his various other lectures.


SPEAKER_00:
yes very good point and it relates to kind of the experienced view from the inside versus the behavioral modeling view from the outside a curious particle or a curious forager might be engaging in some kind of behavior but that isn't the same thing as experience of

but they do provide references to other work, like including work that has been discussed previously on live streams with Christopher White and Ryan Smith on report paradigms of consciousness.

As we kind of head towards the end here, I thought this was very interesting in the section before the conclusion 11, free energy principle and direction of fit.

And this is kind of a good,

section to carry out and bring forward into our other discussions on Act-Inf.

For any organism described by the FEP, the description will contain an implicitly normative state element about the states the organism should be in and can be described as having cognitive desire-like direction of fit.

So there's a preference distribution.

And as this paper is building up, it can have an interpretation as desire, being a targeted desire.

Even beyond the case of forward-looking decision-making agents,

Not all Bayesian beliefs in the FEP formalism are best characterized as doxastic, being about belief, doxology.

This perspective may expand upon current discussion in the FEP literature, where it is fairly prominent to discuss as-if beliefs in simple systems, whether a mere active entity like a pendulum or adaptive active entities, and just say, well, I'm not saying that it really believes that.

It's acting as if it believes that.

that conform to the FEP.

Here, our point is they can also equally be described as having as-if desires.

Belief entered the active lexicon slash ontology

Perhaps because belief is used also in Bayesian statistics, where distributions more generally are called beliefs.

Also disjoint from the phenomenology of experiencing a belief, but rather that's just called belief updating, is like a process in Bayesian statistics.

This paper...

kind of closes the loop with belief, not towards phenomenology, but stapling together some of the Bayesian distributional usage of the term belief with the doxastic being about belief.

The aboutness of those Bayesian beliefs is the folk psychological concept of belief.

By making that mapping and connecting the formalism as a whole, or at least in the core equations like the F and the G, to the BDI model, it also allows them to identify which Bayesian belief distributions map to belief in the BDI, and which Bayesian belief distributions map to D, to the desires in the BDI.

and so to the extent that somebody can say a system has an as if belief implicitly in a folk psychological way we can also talk about as if desires and that helps um partition

but not disregard the discussion around what different systems experience, the classic, you know, what is it like to be X?

But it, at least according to this argument and perspective, authorizes usage of intentions and desires, intentions arising from basically the combination of the beliefs and the desires in the BDI, right?

and talking about active systems as if they have desires.

What is that simulation desirous of?

And then using its beliefs and desires to explain its intentional behavior, not the experience of intentionality, experience of belief, experience of desire, but using them in this view from the outside, more deflationary perspective.

So that's quite interesting.

And I think something that

We'll see how it catches on.

Are there other sections that people want to talk about?

Or what will they carry forward into their post-46 life?


SPEAKER_03:
think daniel a couple of things i think the desire to think part that you're just talking about there i'm not sure that it's specific in nature i think it's more generalizable and sort of that scale free um to there's some of the stuff that david brought up um i think that when you when you um

you start getting getting to know active infants a little bit more and i'll speak from personal experience with a focus on a little bit of sort of personal grooming you become one heck of an attractive state and so i think you might not make money off of that but at this point but i think as you get more comfortable with the kind of being able to take the information and uh use it across a variety of different situations it's um

It actually is quite helpful.

I don't think I'll ever get rich off of it at this point, but it is kind of interesting how it's, I think it is growing in terms of the amount of attention that it's getting.

So that's kind of my two takes on this so far.


SPEAKER_00:
So you're saying it might influence fitness?


SPEAKER_03:
I think it might down the road, as long as we have enough timescale.


UNKNOWN:
Do the talk.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

And I've been coaching chess for a while and mostly to youth and I'm used to explaining, uh,

somewhat you know these concepts like you know i i want you to say that uh people who are just curious about chess and how the patterns work and how the pieces work often improve much faster than people who desire to win and that a lot of times people will reach a certain strength and then their curiosity diminishes and it's just their desire to win which isn't enough that you know it's just like i want to spend my night thinking about these uh patterns

versus like I really want to win and have some sort of practical benefit from my efforts.

So I have my own personal goals that brought me to active inference because I was looking for my own tools to advance my own research.

and came on to active inference as a method or tool that even though it appears that the majority of people are using it for a different purpose, that I would be able to rework it for my own purpose.

But because it's an interdisciplinary study and I'm an engineer and engineering usually works that way, where someone has professional certification, they sign off,

and you could expect that they did their part right and it's going to work and you could you know attach that module to your module and both modules are going to do what they said they're going to do and then you know the curiosity will do i really want to understand how your module works

you know, do I really care about Dean and Ali's research or, you know, do I just, you know, want to trust that their module works and I'm going to be able to attach that to my module to, you know, make something more powerful.

And both are probably true to, you know, to your limited energy, limited resources that, you know, that I would like to understand Dean and Ali's module to the best of my

ability but energy time allocation resources are limited but then you know certainly if you had a module that would help my module and we could plug them in together and you create a more powerful interface so that I'm bullish about active inference and as a framework that will benefit you know the more and more people who get involved and I'm seeing my own direction into my own research how

I think this will be useful and I even think I got Jennifer, I think, joined the Discord and I mentioned to a few other people that might be able to advance their research and then try to understand the current existing modules that are out there within the active inference.

As I mentioned, the importance of interdisciplinary studies for big issues.

None of us are going to figure this out.

It's going to take interdisciplinary studies, and none of us are going to be able to understand all the disciplines necessary to piece together the bigger puzzle.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Thank you.

Yes.

Interesting point about the curiosity-driven learning.

and how that can be like a not even paradoxically more successful approach or mentality to set off on a learning journey with.

I just think about somebody trying to learn organic chemistry, which I tutored for many years, and people who set themselves up for the pragmatic value and said, I want this outcome.

Sometimes they achieve the outcome, other times they didn't, but it set up a lot of psychology around not achieving the outcome when it didn't happen on the expected timeline and a lot of like secondary cascading failures.

However, there's also the clear counterpoint, which is, but if we don't want the higher grade, then like if we're just going to be curious about learning organic chemistry, like

my finals in six weeks.

So how are we going to balance the timelines and the curiosity?

And I think maybe even this paper helped us look at one way, which is keep the preference direction, but understand how the urgency of your preference

influences the way that you take action.

And just think about what if your final was tomorrow?

How would you go about it?

Okay, now what if the final was in 100 years?

How would you go about it?

Where are we in that continuum?

Do we have time for curiosity and for openness?

Or is this an actual emergency situation?

and then we can triage where there is an emergency organic chemistry situation but also hold space for curiosity and openness and even in the emergency there has to be information seeking it's just more directed information seeking okay we're going to work through the practice tests and that's what we're going to have time for there still is going to be information seeking but not of the same kind if we had more time to kind of space out

even though in an alternate slash preferable world, perhaps that's the better way to learn or the more fun way to learn or so on.

Any other thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, one of the things I really like about active inference research is

the willingness of the researchers in this area to seriously address the criticisms instead of just dodging them and their willingness to constantly improve and update the theory in order to fill the gaps and also address the

well, the weakness or any weakness or loophole in the theory.

And that's very, you see, liberating to see such active area of research going forward in a very determined and also very open-minded way.

And well, that's one of the things I think sets it apart from

some other research areas today.


SPEAKER_00:
It's what we prefer.

It's what we expect.

We're curious about it.

Okay, Dean, Ali, Duvid, thanks a lot for this fun discussion, and Ryan, Maxwell, and Alex for this paper.

It really capped off a long run of livestreams.

We've had quite a nice sequence going back to the beginning of this year, getting through many, many discussions.

Next week, we're going to have the second quarterly round table meeting, and then we'll have July off of paper discussions.

And we'll be coming back in August with paper discussions.

We don't know exactly what they're going to be, but we know some of them and we have a few guest streams and other streams coming up, but, um,

Yeah, it's been a nice run.

The lab meeting next week will be a great cap to this season slash semester.

And then we'll come back for the end of 2022 with some new changes that I think people will be really excited about.

So thanks, everybody.

And see you later.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Daniel.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, everyone.

Okay, thanks a lot.