## qw0SkhnHWWI

SPEAKER_03:
three two one hello and welcome to active inference lab live stream number 27.0 it's august 23rd 2021 and we're going to be discussing the paper active inference applicability to different types of social organization explained through reference to industrial engineering and quality management

So welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams.

At the short link, you can find the roadmap of the upcoming discussions that we're going to be having.

And these are going to be group discussions on August 24th, tomorrow, and then August 31st for number 27.1 and 2.

And hopefully the author will be joining us for both discussions.

And we have some openings in the coming weeks if you want to join for a session or if you want to recommend somebody who should join.

Today in ActiveStream 27.0, we're gonna be learning and discussing about this paper with the aforementioned long title by Stephen Fox, and the link is here.

And just like a lot of the other .Zero videos, all of them, this video is just an introduction for some of the ideas.

It's not a review or a final word.

It's kind of always this assemblage of all of the participants here just modifying the slides and going down a few avenues that we thought were interesting.

setting up some questions to discuss in the dot one and dot two.

So we'll go over the aims and the claims of the paper and the abstract and roadmap and then talk about keywords, then go through the figures and tables.

So if you want to participate in these group discussions tomorrow or the following week, then just let us know or save and submit your questions and get in touch with us if you want to participate.

So we can just start with hello, and then it will be cool to hear from both of you what drew you to the paper or what made you interested in talking about it.

I'm Daniel and I'm in California.

So whoever wants to go first.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm Blue and I'm an independent research consultant in New Mexico.

And I liked this paper.

It was a really like refreshing, kind of interesting and very readable perspective compared to a lot of the other papers.

And it made some links with industrial engineering, which I thought was interesting and kind of like a new take on active inference and FEP.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm Dean.

I'm up here in Calgary.

And what I found interesting about the paper is just looking at it through the lens of engineering's priors, I guess, in terms of what they would hold up as active inference just because of what they do every single day.

And again,

That kind of juxtaposed with the social piece was really interesting to me because not to overgeneralize, but when you're focusing on how to break something down, you don't tend to look at the whole.

So I thought that was really interesting to try to pull those two things together and make them coherent.


SPEAKER_03:
I agree.

There's that discussion of the interfaces between the engineered system and the actual way it's used in the niche, which I think we're going to return to when we're talking about like a bookshelf.

So the paper is the title of the link are shown here.

And I guess maybe do either of you want to just read the first two aims and claims?

Sure.


SPEAKER_00:
So the principal contribution of this paper is to relate active inference theory to everyday practice in social organization.

Active inference is a corollary of the free energy principle

which formalizes cognition in the auto poetic organization of living systems that resist the second law of thermodynamics by occupying a limited repertoire of states, thus persisting as bounded self-organizing systems over time.


SPEAKER_03:
okay and then i'll read the last two then anyone can give a thought it is explained throughout the paper how industrial engineering and quality management better enable social organization to occupy a limited number of states in order to persist as a bounded self-organizing systems over time rather than dissipating into their surrounding environment

Although previous papers by others have encompassed active inference up to the levels of socio-cultural cognition, this is the first paper to address active inference in everyday organizational practice, including industrial engineering and quality management.

So the paper is setting up to be just like one more plank towards applying active inference, bridging some of the practices that are already in use in the fields that we're going to be exploring, like the quality management and industrial engineering, and then sort of the adjacent possible for what kinds of systems could exist in those domains.

Sometimes we have a more mathematical paper or more philosophical paper.

This one's going to use a lot more of the jargon.

And like Dean said, the priors of engineering.

So that's why it's kind of cool to hear about it.


SPEAKER_01:
Daniel, can I add something to that?


SPEAKER_03:
Yep.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I just think it's interesting that I think we...

to use a bridging metaphor is seems just to be a really easy thing to do.

And then I think what the paper in terms of the aims and the claims does is tries to point out where that

that connection might exist.

And we can always argue whether or not it exists in all situations at all times.

But I do think that there are some times, again, when we can hold a static connection between an idea at one scale and an idea at another scale.

And so not all scales allow for that or have those affordances, but sometimes they do.

So I mean, that part of it,

Maybe what we need to do is separate the times when the metaphor works and when it doesn't.


SPEAKER_03:
Agreed.

Being utilitarian implies some sort of utility metric.

Having a preference for reward or for preferred states implies those being defined, maybe.

And also, I think this will come up in this paper because it's all about which are the useful metrics to check up on useful policies to pursue.

Okay, so does anyone want to read abstract one?


SPEAKER_01:
I'll read it.

Active inference is a physics of life process theory of perception, action, and learning that's applicable to natural and artificial agents.

In the paper, active inference theory is related to different types of practice.

In social organization, here the term social organization is used to clarify that this paper does not encompass organization in biological systems.

Rather, the paper addresses active inference in social organization that utilizes industrial engineering, quality management, and artificial intelligence alongside human intelligence.

Social organization referred to in this paper can be in private companies, public institutions, other for-profit or not-for-profit organizations, and any combination of them.

The relevance of active inference theory is explained in terms of variation of free energy, prediction errors, generative models, and Markov blankings.


SPEAKER_03:
Pretty interesting.

I think usually when we talk about these multi-scale perspectives on institutions, cities, societies, it's always like the entire edifice, all of the niche and everything that's moving in it is part of this one biological organism.

Right.

or at least biological co-regulating system.

And here it's very explicit that it's trimming the biological component from the engineered component.

It's kind of like the car and then the passenger.

So then instead of just saying, well, the car and the passenger are part of the same extended cognitive niche, because that's one way to look at that situation.

Like it's an extended affordance that the driver has.

Another way to think of it is by making a very clean partitioning, recognizing that there's still this emergent function, like cars don't drive themselves, but you can still parse out the individual who's using the car from the design process of making the car.


SPEAKER_01:
And one thing to add to that, if you haven't read Lucy, and I'll always kill her last name, Lucy Sukman, S-U-C-H-M-A-N.

She's got a book out many years ago that I think has still got some incredible shelf life.

It's called...

It's reconfiguring the human machine interface.

And if you haven't read it, it's a fantastic book in terms of looking at how her case study is how people walk up to a photocopy machine for the first time where the engineers are trying to make it intuitive and how the human interface with that isn't always necessarily something that you can engineer for.

So something to consider if you're looking at this idea.


SPEAKER_00:
If I could just give another thought, I think that the uncoupling of social organization from biological organization is kind of a really unique and fresh perspective.

compared to some of the other papers that we've looked at.

Especially considering that it is biological organization because it's happening in biological creatures, but it's an interesting partition that the author creates to make it known that it's not talking about hierarchical organization in structures or societies.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so we don't need to worry about what's inside of the tissues and go into the biological organization.

Okay, I'll read the second abstract and then anyone can give a thought.

Active inference theory is most relevant to the social organization of work that is highly repetitive.

By contrast, there are more challenges involved in applying active inference theory for social organization of less repetitive endeavors such as one of a kind projects.

These challenges need to be addressed in order for active inference to provide a unifying framework for different types of social organization employing human and artificial intelligence.


SPEAKER_00:
So I have a thought on that.

It might be somewhat controversial, but, um, you know, so I think that, um, the highly repetitive, so, I mean, I think about active inference in terms of exploration and exploitation, and I think like, it really depends on, on where your generative model rests, right?

So like, as the generative model, like the model of the organization, or is it the model of the individual?

Because I think that, um, doing a highly repetitive project that reminds me of exploitation.

where a one-off project can be exploration.

So you can still update your model depending on exploring some new avenue by this little side project, but you come back to updating your model, the model of your business, yourself, the way that you work, your organization, with knowledge about how to do processes in a one-off kind of process.


SPEAKER_03:
I agree.

especially because we talk about it a lot in the context of generating strategic novelties, perhaps, and those are seemingly less repetitive, but...

there's going to be some further clarification on that and also this points to this uh yeah exciting areas like one shot learning or like true structural novelty and active inference models that's something that we've talked about in other areas like how do you know when to be tweaking the knobs of the parameters as you currently have them set up versus expand a hidden state into two types of hidden state or something like that again thinking about what the system is realistically or from this instrumentalist way

okay the roadmap is written out here and it's a we're going to go through it in rough order it introduces in each of these sections one of the kind of key ideas or principles the variational free energy prediction errors generative models markov blankets and survival

And then in section seven, active inference is proposed as a unifying framework.

So this is kind of one of those classic paper layouts with some disciplinary sections, one through N disciplinary sections.

And then the next section is active inference as a unifying framework.

And then the next section is like challenges or current research directions.

And then a concluding section, maybe with a more call to action or more philosophical liftoff.

There were a bunch of keywords and I think we're going to get to all of them.

So two columns of keywords.

Let me shrink the video.


UNKNOWN:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Two columns of keyword.

Okay.

So first active inference.

It's in the title of the paper and here's how it's written in the paper.

Who wants to read the large text here?


SPEAKER_00:
I got it.

Active inference is the physics of life process theory of perception, action, and learning.

Active inference generates predictions.

Active inference predictions are based on knowledge learned from past situations and perceptions of present situations.

Active inference minimizes errors between actions that are planned through the inference of predictions and what happens when the planned actions are taken.


SPEAKER_03:
So this is the first lines of the paper, right?

In the introduction, that's how it begins with, you know, active inference is the first word.

So that's sort of the opening shot and it's just a cool framing to bring it out as a physics of life process theory

yet this isn't about biological organization so it's almost like recognizing the origins and some of the motivations for the kind of modeling that active inference provides yet making another later decision to partition the system of interest a certain way so cool framing and then the uh next lines so kind of shrinking that definition of active inference um

This is because prediction errors cause unwanted surprises, which individually or accumulatively can threaten survival by going beyond the limited number of states in which survival is possible.

By contrast, minimizing prediction errors facilitates survival through least action.

So this is also linking up several of those key terms that are going to be section headers later, but it's just this idea that

predictions about the external world, especially if they incorporate preferences that are optimistic, help reduce the complexity of deciding which actions to take.

And then the way that that gets operationalized is with the process theory of prediction error minimization, which is a real-time estimate of how good the generative model is performing.

And then just add anything or...

say more here but it's just an interesting topic how it's described as the principle of survival through least action so what is this principle of least action and how do we reconcile active biological agents as being in one way participating under this survival through least action even if it's just a misnomer what does that really mean

And then how does survival through least action contrast or overlap with more familiar phrasing, probably survival of the fittest?

Like, is the survival of the fittest the survival of the least active?

Or how should we read this relationship between maybe Darwinian conceptions of fitness and which individuals survive versus this physics-based framing of survival through least action under the principles of least action?

Stationary action principle.


SPEAKER_01:
Can I add something, Daniel?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I think it's interesting that you, depending on how you define each of these terms, that you can sort of transfer or oscillate across frame, what a frame is, which to me is identifying a focal point, maybe a margin or a limit, and what a fit is, what goes inside the other, like glove and hand or hand and glove.

And I think sometimes we talk about a niche fit,

But that's different than what the frame of the niche is.

So the fact that we're sort of ping-ponging back and forth between the two, I just wonder whether or not we're looking at the same thing or if we realize we're looking at two things at once.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Continuing on with the introduction.

It's written, active inference is a corollary of the free energy principle, FEP, which formalizes cognition of the autopoietic organization of living systems.

Within FEP, active systems must occupy a limited repertoire of states.

This requires minimizing the long-term average of surprise associated with sensory exchanges with the world.

Minimizing surprise enables them to resist a natural tendency to disorder.

So this just kind of relates to some questions like how do framings for this sort of active intelligent behavior what other framings exist and how do we think about broad concepts like reward preference and curiosity and surprise in active inference.

And then the last paragraph then, any thoughts or not?

Surprise rests on predictions about sensations, which depend on an internal generative model of the world.

In particular, although surprise cannot be measured directly, a free energy bound on surprise can be, suggesting that agents minimize free energy by changing their predictions about what sensory inputs will come from actions, or by changing the predicted sensory inputs through changing action.

This just reminds me of the kind of fundamental pairing in Active Inference where the ways that you can go down that free energy gradient are either by updating parameters of your internal model, learning, development, or by updating action states, which is through action.

Because you can't control external states directly, and you can't control the incoming sensory data directly.

then all you can do is control those two states that are under your control, the internal states and the action states.

All right, another term was the Markov blanket.

So anyone want to just like give what's the Markov 101 or what's a way in which Markov blankets came into play in this paper or in another context?


SPEAKER_00:
So Markov blankets are essentially the boundary or how a system creates a boundary and how you can define essentially like a non-equilibrium steady state system with a Markov blanket.

I thought it was an interesting play in this paper and I think maybe we'll unpack it here later on in the intro video.


SPEAKER_03:
We just, in number 26, talked a bunch about Markov blankets.

So, suffice to say that it's still open exactly which cases, which sense of the Markov blanket is meant on this continuum from analytical and mathematical with Markov, the OG blanket.

the Bayesian statistical generalization by Pearl and others, and then this partitioning into incoming sensory and outgoing active states of the blanket by Friston and others, and then how that exactly relates to all these other topics that we're discussing.

Okay, I'll play the video at 46 seconds.

Blue, what was exciting to you about this?


SPEAKER_00:
So this is the video from the Tesla AI day that just happened last week.

And this is, it's a humanoid robot that Tesla is going to attempt to design.

And so I just put this definition of artificial intelligence from, like, Google, and it said, the theory and development of computer systems able to perform tasks that normally require human intelligence, such as visual perception, speech recognition, decision-making, and translation between languages.

And so, spoiler alert, this is actually not a robot.

This is actually, like, a person, but he made it, you know, look like a robot that was getting up and then, like, bam, I'm going to dance.

But I think, like, that kind of...

movement and perception about space, that kind of spatial awareness is something that's still very much a challenge for AI.

So that's why I threw this video in there.


SPEAKER_03:
Agreed.

Will be interesting to see how they do processing and what kinds of algorithms and hardware and software end up being used for real time robotics systems.

Any comments on artificial intelligence or anything, Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Again, I don't spend a whole lot of time on this, because to me, artificial intelligence is always a post hoc domain.

Even this example, can we create a copy of this?

I mean, it's already been done by something, and now we're trying to re-engineer it or redevelop it, as opposed to what active inference is, which is the inclusion of ad hoc.

the what if.

So, I mean, if they can get artificial intelligence to a place that it's including what if, in the truest sense of all possibilities, then I'd probably be quite excited or scared.

I'm not sure which.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

So some other keywords were social and organization.

And one of the goal statements of the paper was, this paper is intended to contribute to bridging the gap between theoretical papers in active inference theory, which have been reported to be too opaque to be understood widely, and potential application opportunities in the multi-intelligence social organization,

that being social organization that employs human intelligence and different types of artificial intelligence.

So, and whoever put this image, what did it mean or represent in the context of the paper?


SPEAKER_00:
So I just looked, so I didn't, I don't know that it's necessarily really in the context of the paper, but I started to look into like, how are societies organized, right?

And so this is like, I just was doing some Googling and I thought that this was an interesting paper and the title and the author there in the small print, if you're able to read them, but this is like a state organization, right?

And it describes the fascist media model as focusing on community and culture.

And it describes the communist media model as focusing on state bureaucracy and the liberal media model as focusing on market exchange, which I just thought was interesting and just kind of an interesting way to, I don't know, reflect on societal organization and what is the central theme there.


SPEAKER_03:
And it's kind of in line with that partitioning of the kind of the car from the user, because not included here are like the human users.

This is kind of everything but the eyes on the TV.

This is just partitioning the structure of the organization as an engineered object.

So that's a cool similarity.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So we just had a guest stream and Pranev and Raphael, even they were debating, can we say that something that's an emergent property in an individual, which is then something that we can test as an emergent property within a dyad, can also become an emergent property within these high variability states?

And even they couldn't agree completely.

that there's some sort of a parallel.

I think we know that on these high variability states like a social organization, afterwards, again, we can take an account of what it became, but it's really hard to know where it's going, even if you break it down into a,

communist or a fascist direction.

It's telling us, like you say, what direction down the highway the car is going.

But beyond that, it's still a lot of guessing.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep.

So I guess that's where industrial engineering comes into play for that designing for that car on the highway.

Industrial engineering involves applying methods such as task analysis and job design in order to predict results, evaluate results and improve results from processes during their development.

The application of industrial engineering has been progressing around the world since the 1900s.

So.

wasn't an area I was too familiar with.

I saw a lot of mention of the 99 out of 100 and the three standard deviations and then halt the process.

So that kind of just was an interesting thing to hear about.

Any thoughts or we can continue on?

Okay, I guess a related field of industrial engineering is quality management.

And so this is a type of system that involves, I guess, hardware and software and behavioral protocols.

Quality management systems, QMS, involve documenting processes which have been developed through industrial engineering as process specifications, work procedures, et cetera, monitoring processes for conformance to specifications, et cetera, and using observations of non-conformances to inform the further development of processes.

Both industrial engineering and QMS are focused on the continuous improvement of processes.

The application of industrial engineering has been progressing around the world since the 1900s and quality management since the 1950s.

Any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_00:
Just having been a business owner, it's a process.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep, definitely makes me think about precision of measurement changing and then...

what can be measured and then what can be measured gets entrapped and then what can be regulated becomes gamed and all these sort of complex ways that assessment of performance fits one into local versus global optima.


SPEAKER_01:
You can also see how instructionalism got systematized.


SPEAKER_03:
yep, if there's a way to do it and this is the way that's approved, even if the later becomes like an improvement in the protocol or some sort of change in the context, maybe it can't be utilized because it's not part of the approved version.

And so there's no simple answer there because you can't just say, well, okay, accept all changes.

And then if you just say, okay, we'll have a small bar for making edits.

It's like, there's no perfect trade-off point with the false positives and the false negatives.

especially for situations that truly are ambiguous, which is why we fall back to these approaches that put us at the kind of functional inflection point of the pragmatic and epistemic outcomes, which is like active inference, rather than just pursuing reward over short term or over some other timeframe.

But common to all these different frameworks for control theory is basically statistical process control.

So maybe whoever made this slide, was it?

Yep, Blue, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
So statistical process control is a collection of tools and techniques used to measure and analyze process data in order to characterize the behavior of our processes and achieve process control.

And so in the paper, I don't know how much we'll get into it here, but the paper really describes statistical process control and gives a figure similar to this.

So you have normal process variation, which they described as six sigma deviation from whatever is optimal.

So there's the optimal, which is like the green line, and then three sigmas to the up and three sigmas to the down as to like an over or under estimate of your target.

And then any time that you have a process that deviates from the Six Sigma range, you have the special cause variation.

And so in the business schema that I'm familiar with, at least, which is minimal, but some,

You do this root cause analysis.

Why is there this special cause variation?

What happened in that one circumstance?

We have to go and analyze that instance to find out why it was outside of the sigma deviation because that's an unacceptable data point at that point.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Good explanation.


SPEAKER_00:
How about thermodynamic entropy?

also um this was also me but um it's a quantity representing the unavailability of a system's thermal energy for conversion into mechanical work often interpreted as the degree of disorder or randomness in the system uh and so you know there's the the law of thermodynamics that says that entropy in the universe is always increasing so um becoming going from

more ordered to less ordered or so from highly ordered to more disordered which this kind of shows in this example uh things spreading apart and like it's like you would if you left town for two years and you came back and found that your house was a mess that wouldn't really be surprising like even if you left it clean even if you know i mean just things deteriorate and fall apart and dust goes in and whatever rodents creep around and stuff like that and it's that apparent


SPEAKER_03:
and empirical local organization of matter like into bones and flesh and life and whatnot and also the always and only co-occurrence of that kind of local organization of energy with cybernetic or anticipatory behavior

That's what motivates a kind of framework that is going to, on one hand, work for particles, but also work for active particles and all of the continuum between.

So that's why there's all these different cognitive structures as well as physical structures that are being linked together through basically physics.

And by hooking to free energy principle and variational methods and all these other areas of math and physics, then it puts active inference just like one step closer towards embodiment on some of those different pathways.

Okay.

Information, theoretic entropy.


SPEAKER_00:
So this is the Shannon entropy as it's often referred to because it was, I think, first described by Claude Shannon.

But I always put Maxwell's demon here when I'm thinking about relating thermodynamic energy and informational entropy.

And I think, was it Alex Kiefer wrote a paper that really we did in one of the live streams that really kind of outlined how these are connected with the Helmholtz distribution.

And so if you really want to dig deeper into these relationships.

That's a good way to do it.

But I always think about, you know, so Maxwell's Demon is the idea that, you know, if you have molecules like shown on the left here in this box and you have two sides of the box and there's a partition in the center and like, you know, they're cold and hot molecules.

So if you knew which molecule was hot and which molecule was cold, so if a demon is sitting there who can see is the molecule hot or cold and only lets the hot ones go through to the right and only lets the cold ones go through to the left, and every time he opens the partition, effectively that is work.

And so just kind of conceptually...

That shows that the relationship between information and work, the more information you have, the less work you have to do, maybe.

So that's kind of the relationship that I think about in my mind.

And then there's a formal definition of Shannon entropy down below.

But it's usually given in informational context as a measure of surprise, as we've talked about on the live stream many times.

and they relate information as negative entropy.

So it's the reverse, surprise is the reverse of surprise, or sorry, information is the reverse of surprise.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool, thanks for the explanation.

Dean, any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, one of the things I... I mean, I love this.

Thanks, Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you for that explanation.


SPEAKER_01:
It's really good.

So one of the people I'm reading right now is a guy by the name of Dan Siegel and his book about the mind.

And what he talks about is...

When people are at dis-ease, so not an easy state, but when they're struggling with something, he talks about the fact that there's one of two ends of a continuum, be it blue and red, in this example.

One end is chaos and the other is rigidity.

And so from an information theoretic entropy state, are we stuck?

Are we bored?

Are we feeling trapped?

Or are we being overwhelmed or underwhelmed?

meaning we're not in that in-between state.

And so I think there's a lot that can be done if we get a basic understanding of Maxwell's demon without sort of getting stared off by it.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

It's almost like, yeah, what would these particles and their temperature represent if they were, I don't know, ideas or something more related to inference rather than just particles, because we're always looking at that intersection between the physical systems and the informational systems.


UNKNOWN:
All right.


SPEAKER_03:
variational free energy.

So this keyword was defined in the paper as the difference between predicted sensory inputs and actual sensory inputs when monitoring processes.

VFE increases as the difference increases between what is predicted to happen if actions are taken and what does happen when those actions are taken.

The more prediction errors there are, the more thermodynamic energy will be consumed amidst the thermodynamic entropy of remedial actions, corrective actions, restorative actions, and firefighting.

This will leave less thermodynamic energy available for doing productive work comprising productive actions.

Thus, if the variational free energy is high, then thermodynamic entropy, e.g.

energy not available for doing productive work, will be high, and the thermodynamic free energy, e.g.

energy available for doing productive work, will be low.

Hence, variational free energy can have an inverse relationship to thermodynamic free energy.

This is because the bigger a prediction error, which can be considered in terms of bigger VFE, the smaller can be the thermodynamic free energy available to do productive work.

So this is a pretty interesting passage.

Did either of you have a thought on it?

it's exploring this thermo-info nexus in a little bit of a different way.

And on one hand, it's kind of confusing that the variational free energy is going to be the opposite of the thermodynamic free energy.

But it's almost like, what is happening here?

And it just...

to see that they have a negative relationship.

It's like if the engine were perfectly anticipatory and super efficient, it would be carrying out a ton of work.

If it's moving in a super spurious heat producing way,

then the product, lot of variational free energy, a lot of surprising observations relative to functional operation of the motor, then your capacity to perform work to capture those very noisy vibrations is low.

And so a lot of the underlying

potential becomes dissipated rather than used to perform kind of useful inference, useful action.

So not sure if that's a correct mapping, but I think it'll be cool to talk to the author because this is a very fascinating idea about how different formalizations of free energy actually relate to modeling processes.

Yeah, Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
So it's like, I really thought this is kind of what made me think of Maxwell's demon, right?

So it was interesting because, you know, the variational free energy, when we talk about minimizing free energy, we always think about like as minimizing surprise, right?

So if we minimize surprise, then we don't have to do all this thermodynamic energy, like the firefighting that they talked about.

And I think that the paper, when we get into the five whys and that figure, I think we'll

elaborate a little bit more on that but um the it's just interesting because we don't have to output as much work and that's kind of what made me think about about maxwell's demon and kind of why i snuck that in there um but yeah you're right i don't know like you know i think that the relationship between um infodynamics and thermodynamics is still very much being defined there's a lot of very recent research um that's looking closely at how those two uh relate to one another nice do you


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I just, I immediately said to myself, I really want my autonomic nervous system to work, and I don't want to have to think about it, because a lot of the mechanical things are dependent on that.

So I'm not sort of pulling apart what the claim is here, but I think...

If you read that, you're kind of saying, okay, a lot of the surprise you're not even aware of because your autonomic nervous system is functioning correctly.


SPEAKER_03:
Great.

point there it's almost like a surprise variational surprise does not equate to attention or even especially the conscious awareness of attention in a human psychological situation so it's totally possible that like the difference in pressure sensing depending on your body's posture that's completely normalized out that's recalibrated for the expectations of body position

without coming to our attention, unless we bring it to our attention.

So that and many other similar examples.


SPEAKER_00:
So Dean, I love how you're like not able to stay outside of the biological partition.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I just, I'm not, again, I'm not, I want to be able to create with this stuff.

I mentioned that.

And so to me, it's,

To willfully ignore that is hard for me to do.

I'm not saying it's not possible.

I'm not saying it's the right thing to do here.

I'm just struggling to let go of it.

I want to let go of it, but I'm having a hard time with it.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, and I think for all of us, you know, the urge to apply to every system is very strong.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.


SPEAKER_03:
Here's table one.

So here's the mapping of a bunch of different sets of terms from active inference constructs, and then thinking about how they're applied in industrial engineering and quality management practice.

So variational free energy, which we just were talking about, is the difference between the predicted sensory inputs and actual sensory inputs.

the variational free energy upper bound as well as its lower bound is basically the range in which that system is working well.

It's like the loaves of bread are within the calibration range and we can just keep on pumping them out.

Precision weighting has to do with which aspects of the process are monitored with which level of precision.

For example, which width of a part has to be machined in fractions of a millimeter versus other tolerances.

And then the expected free energy is the expected energy between the preferred sensory inputs from process operation and the actual sensory inputs.

So the variational free energy is the difference between the prediction and the actual.

So you have some generative model of your data center, and then you have the generative model of the temperature through time, and then the comparison with the actual.

But here it's about the preferred

versus the actual.

So that's like we recognize that it is warmer than we would like it to be, which is why we're conditioning our policy in the long range towards getting back to that zone.

But for now, we need to also have an accurate sensor measurement.

So that's also a nice juxtaposition that's not always finessed in other papers.

The next, in all these keywords, the first set were about free energy and precision and how these terms are calculated relative to one another.

The second set of terms in table one is some of the key terms of Bayesian statistics.

So just to read only the constructs, and these are also really helpful because we're as a lab thinking about what are the core terms of active inference?

What are the definitions that are general enough to be really,

educational but also not too limiting or prioritize one sense over another for example so the bayesian terms that would be found in any other course or textbook on bayesian statistics prior expected posterior actual posterior preferred posterior and prediction error so that kind of puts the predictive processing as a uh under the umbrella of bayesian statistics okay

The next set of terms in the table was related to this dichotomy of two different types of inference.

So epistemic inference was defined as updating the definitions of process during process improvement based upon analysis of nonconformance reports, whereas instrumental inference is updating which actions will be included in the process during process improvement.

So this is sort of like epistemic knowledge based.

This is about updating the knowledge based upon especially the times where things don't go right.

And then this is like policy inference, action planning as inference, because it's like instrumentally is actually like about what the instrument is gonna do.

So, and then the last, oh, okay.

Any thoughts on these terms?

Okay, then the next set of terms in table one was Markov blanket, internal state and external state.

So definitely check out number 14, number 26, a few of the other live streams to learn more about the Markov blanket.

And this is a figure from DaCosta et al, 2021.

The blanket is here the boundary state between the internal state of the social organization

So those are the ones and the external state of the environment when operating processes are defined in the quality management system.

then what are those internal states?

Those are the social or organizational processes developed during industrial engineering for minimum risk in the process environment.

And then the external state is the environment.

So that's kind of mapping the Markov blanket, kind of the car, the interfaces and outside the car, or maybe that's not the perfect mapping, but I think that's kind of what is being suggested.

And then the last,

few terms of table one are four of just the general constructs, general principles that are also section headers and important topics, risk, ambiguity, principle of least action, and principle of survival.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I think all of this ties into a way of looking at the world through rows and columns, which is fine.

I mean, it's a good place to try to look at things and analyze them, but

Not everybody creates off of that because not everybody is necessarily looking for a precision forward view.

Sometimes you're experimenting and you're making all kinds of mistakes and learning from that as well.

And so, again, you just want to see this for what it is.

It's nothing wrong with it, but it's not the only way.

That's all.


SPEAKER_03:
Blue, anything?

Okay, so then there's the figures.

And these will recall some of the key terms we talked about earlier.

uh the text says as shown in figure one spc charts these statistical process control charts have upper and lower control limits and processes need to remain within these limits processes that go outside the limits do not meet specifications that define intended states so left side good top of the drake meme right side bad bottom of the drake meme not working

okay figure two is this five wise so it's written out here more textually if you want to pause it and look at it and here it's more graphical so do either of you want to give a thought on the five wise or okay well the scenario that's laid out is uh

kind of working backwards from why there was a not reliable organization.

And the five whys, it's actually not related to Aristotle's four whys.

But that would have been a nice opportunity.

Maybe there's a four by five matrix.

But these five whys are referring to needing to go back kind of five layers, or like five

derivatives up the chain, asking what led to a high reliability organization being unreliable.

So the general case of this sort of cascading failure in terms of variational free energy.

So the general phrasing is that there's high,

uncertainty, high entropy in work instructions.

So the IKEA instructions are not accessible enough to many people or the radio is really blurry so people can't hear what letters are being said.

And then that makes the variational free energy high because of prediction errors, which then leads to unproductive actions.

So then you're scanning on the radio because you can't quite lock on.

And then that's consuming energy.

And then that ends up reducing your battery so that you can't do what you actually need to do.

And then the case in this truck driver incident is that the truck driver is getting ambiguous signals.

logistical data.

So this itself is a policy communication from like, you know, some cloud mapping service or the company that's contracting the trucker.

And then this leads to the driver having increased spatial uncertainty getting lost, which leads them to drive around unproductively.

So they don't have enough fuel to efficiently complete the deliveries that are important.

And so here's the graphical layout of the five whys showing with that example, how on the bottom is the truck drivers getting the bad info.

And then that surfaces after sort of several repercussions in terms of the structure of multi-level decision-making and active inference, how we can...

use this framework which maybe is used in industry and map it onto the states of decision making from active inference perspective but notice that there's no reward here it's not well drivers uh minimize their reward about this or you know risk on this or maximize their reward on this so it just shows how this sort of um framework

has a different framing than people might expect if the only machine learning model they were aware of was machine learning and specifically reward reinforcement learning.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and it isn't just industrial.

You can be like me and jump in the car with two of my friends who are both emergency doctors and you're heading off to the ski hill and at some point the conversation comes around to there are no accidents in the world.

And, of course, being emergency doctors, they see the outcomes of accidents

events happening to people and so their perspective is there's always a way of being able to go back and see all the parts of the decision branch and how it arrived in front of them and them having to sort of put the pieces back together again but again i don't i don't know that necessarily that that means that randomness doesn't come into play and there isn't a

certain part of this where the variation simply can't be um calculated in but i still go skiing with them i don't i don't just just dislike them or defriend them so anyway yeah


SPEAKER_03:
it just reminds me of like when I dropped a hard drive and then I thought, well, I guess this is the one in a hundred hard drives that fails every year.

Yes, but it was also the one time that I dropped it.

So there's always this sort of like N equals one way to uncouple

cause and effect or potentially actionable consequence to the not reliability of your organization.

But then also there's this designing for the statistics when they decide to make a recall or not based upon, you know, the relative amount of failure versus the relative amount of, you know, legal changes needed, something like that.


SPEAKER_01:
So that's where you talked earlier about including co-occurrence instead of just only giving time over to the sequential aspect of this.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep.

So figure three frames the quality management systems, the QMS, the quality manual as a generative model comprising beliefs about processes.

So it's interesting because it could be seen as just a cookbook, recipe book, instruction book, but it's being at least deployed in a generative capacity

And instead of just like saying, you know, whip the eggs for five minutes and then until they're frothy or, you know, until they are this, make peaks.

It's like, we expect it to make peaks.

Whip it until your expectation is achieved.

It's a different way to get to that same outcome.

Now, which one's gonna be more resilient?

If it says five minutes and there's no peaks, then what do you do?

Do you add something?

Do you keep on going?

Whereas if you have a precision seeking process, maybe you can be resilient to it if it only takes two minutes and you don't overdo it.

And the example of something being correct, like 99 out of 100 times is just used, I think, just repeatedly in the paper.

Just it could be calibrated differently.

And I'm sure it's situational.

It's just sort of like shorthanded 99 out of 100.

But yeah, it is defining these QMS in terms of the active states.

So what should be done?

You know, pipette 50 microliters of fluid into the little tube, and then you monitor something about the process.

And then that leads to this feedback cycle between the quality management review, and then that being in kind of co-evolution with the industrial engineering itself.

And then that leads to the update of the process in the quality manual in step four, so that then there's kind of like, okay, if it's too low after your first pipette, then do a little bit more pipetting.

And then they keep on protecting that 99% functional outcome at each of those nodes that are bifurcating out.

Okay, any thoughts?

I'm not going to read this whole thing, but the top part talks about this design for assembly.

And one of the principles is to make parts either symmetrical or clearly asymmetrical.

So nothing in the uncanny valley.

This is done so that it is immediately and unequivocally apparent how a part is to be put into sub-assembly.

And this is the famous IKEA catalog aesthetic.

and how that made furniture building like fun and accessible for some people, I guess.

And then in this second quote, it is kind of thinking about that IKEA paradigm.

Although furniture companies may not be considering their industrial engineering in terms of minimizing variational free energy, it is apparent that its aim is to minimize errors between what it intends to people to see when looking at its furniture kits and what people do see when looking at its furniture kits.

So it's sort of like the goal should be to make it look like it looks on the sale room floor or like it looks like in your imagination after you see the advertising.

And then if you can see those flat pieces of wood and you can see that instruction booklet and you can see the policy, then you're going to be not surprised.

You're going to be satisfied because your preference was to have like the couch there.

So just kind of a cool example that highlights how

Our preferences aren't just over temperature.

We often talk about those kinds of examples, but we can also have preferences for having affordances or niche modifications.

Like we can have a preference to have a handle on something.

And then that kind of relates us to this like behavioral economics under active inference.

Like what makes somebody expect there to be a new couch in their living room?

And then what makes them drive out and pick it up on the weekend and everything?

And then...

It's this kind of idea that the supply chain is this extended uncertainty reducer and it's like bringing stuff to you.

And then there's this notion in this computational industrial case and in the at home case where the assembly information that's provided is a policy decision from the people who are making the product.

And then that really relates to like participation in making that product.

If it's all pre-compiled, then there's no affordance for participation versus having like a culture of people working through it for many different ways.

And then this was just the funny example of the interface, which said, although there may be little risk in furniture assembly, this can be followed by much ambiguity in furniture installation.

So in other words, it's not just about what's on this brochure.

Because predetermining all the possible prediction errors in fixing the assembled furniture to walls in millions of different buildings around the world is very challenging.

And so there's this difference between the assembly information, like how do you just assemble the system of interest, which is just the internal and blanket states of the new shelf,

What's the difference between that information, how to build the bookshelf, and then the operations?

Like, oh, well you didn't tell me that I couldn't kick it from the side.

It's like, you just told me how to build it.

You didn't say that I couldn't use it this way.

And then, so how do you design for internal coherence versus designing for interoperability with sort of unknown unknowns and all these different types of entities that the system's gonna interact with on the blanket, on the interface?

So it's not just the Ikea booklet, but I thought that was kind of an interesting notion that even just building it wasn't really the end of the story because then people take their perfectly built bookshelf and then just like staple it to the wall the wrong way and like ruins both.

So Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and then, I don't know if you can see this, but then how do you account for this?

How do you account for somebody who took a piece of olive wood, any random piece of olive wood and turned it into something

like this right so it's not there's no there's no billy there's no way of deconstructing this you just have to pick up you have to pick up something that is a mark off blanket it's it's as it's pre-carved and then you have to be able to pull out what you think is in that and how do you how do you engineer that

Well, it's a completely different process.

So I think as people, we're capable of doing both.

And I'd love to talk to the author about how you do this kind of work when there's certain results that are...

are available and are part of the active inference model.

So it'll be a nice contrast tomorrow.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep.

Nice.

Good point.

Like where's artisanship and craft in this phrasing?

So here's an example using that case of the bookshelf or the cupboard being bolted to a wall.

And this also gets at that partition between the part of the system that you can design and then the part of the system that is not being considered.

So here, the internal states, and this is kind of interesting.

It'll be cool to see who is there alive to talk about this sort of embodiment aspect.

The internal state is the person's embodied prior knowledge of fixing assembled cupboards to walls.

And depending on what they know about carpentry, if they're just totally watching the YouTube video and then letting it rip versus if they're experienced, with different materials, they're gonna take actions and that's gonna modify the niche, which is the external state, the room to which the cupboard will be fixed.

And that's going to be reflected in what the person perceives.

then it's just cool like the here maybe there's multiple ways to interpret the center it's like there's the wall blocking like external blocking state then there's like the affordance block where the tools are inadequate like you know you need the the hex wrench of size seven and you only have the size four so you just can't do it even if you know how to do it and there's times where even if you have the right tool it's like it's too rusty to do it

so there's like it's just a cool example and shows a little bit of that that horseshoe theory again between philosophy and engineering where they're both radically focused on embodiment and pragmatics okay

Then the next section after four is seven, active inference as a unifying framework.

And so basically they write, an important application of active inference theory can be as a unifying framework for a social organization framework summarized in figure five, which we'll look at in a second, operated through quality management systems, QMS, via interoperability protocols at an upper level of multi-tier enterprise architecture.

So before we look at figure five,

It's just like, how does active inference serve as a unifying framework in some of these areas that we've been talking about for the last months?

Like we've heard people use this integrating word to talk about active in action and perception, engineering, biology, communication, cyber physical systems, remote teams, et cetera.

So just it's being used a little bit in a different way here.

So let's see figure five and then you can give any thoughts on it.

Here, organizational active inference is again being mapped onto this sense, internal, action, external loop, this kind of a circular loop.

The internal states are the organization's belief.

Just like in figure four, it was the person's embodied beliefs, here it's the organization's embodied beliefs embodied in the QMS, which is again being framed as beliefs over processes and states.

That results in human and artificial intelligence employed to fulfill specifications, procedures, etc.

So these can be actions that are taken by APIs or bots or by people.

This acts upon the external states, which lead to perceptions of sensory states, which could be the temperature in the room,

It could be the pH of the wine.

It could be the number of sales on the course.

So then they do industrial engineering on this loop as an organization in relationship to integrating perception and action through internal state updating, pretty much just like we've been talking about for all these other active inference systems.

Any thoughts?

Okay.

Table 2 writes, there can be many reasons why pragmatics subsumes semantics and leads to prediction errors.

For example, inept priors and inept preferred posteriors can come from lock-ins, path dependencies, and success traps, which place emphasis on past experiences over new information.

Individuals may seek to survive by learning from filtered information that supports the preconception of groups, which they believe can support their individual survival, rather than seek information that supports the efficient reduction of prediction errors in external states.

So it's almost like you can't prefer what you prefer so much.

Otherwise, you're going to, I don't know, maybe follow that local band all the way to a local end instead of sometimes coming out of that local organizer, local local attractor.

And any want to go for this blue?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

It just, it seemed like just confirmation bias, right?

You seek to survive by learning the information that supports the preconceptions of groups.

Right.

So that's like, you know, I believe this, my, my, can, can my group believe this?

Like, I don't know.

That's that.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

This is a cool table.

It's like, okay.

So in the perception phase of active inference,

You can have a top-down error based upon inept priors, so you can believe the wrong thing about what you should expect to see, or you can have the sensor be influenced, interesting about e.g.

emotion, but that's, I guess, being phrased as a bottom-up way that perception can be modified.

And then in the intermediary, intermediate, it's bounded rationality.

So that's kind of like a compromise between what you think is possible and magical realism.

Then the action phase also can be run aground by inept, focusing on basically poor outcomes.

Like if you're aiming for five degrees off of shooting a free throw, then you're going to miss the free throws, right?

And then that also your attention could be affected by poor signal to noise ratio, like if you couldn't see where the hoop was.

And just interesting how like it's being really methodically broken down the sources of where the error can come from.

And then also in table three, there's a nice distinction

And it relates to that notion that active inference would be potentially very effective for repetitive processes, but potentially not as effective for one-of-a-kind processes.

And so the repetitive processes are like mass production, and then the one-of-a-kind processes are like the project production.

So right off the bat, it's kind of like, well, how individual does a project need to be before it's not best modeled by active inference?

And then it just talks about how Markov blankets, generative models, prediction error, and variational free energy play out in both of these two areas.

So that would definitely be something for people to like read through the table and then mention it and give a specific example or question to the author because this is like super informative and a cool combinatoric way to look at how ideas are related.

So yeah, Dean and then Blip.


SPEAKER_01:
So when I'm looking at this, and I don't know if this is helpful or if this just makes it even more turbid, but if one hand of this is the ability to frame something so that we know what's in, what we're looking at versus what we're not looking at, and if the other hand is how we match, essentially if you go back to table two and this, table three and the figure, the matching is what's superordinate and what's subordinate, what's inside of what,


SPEAKER_00:
Those are the two hands.


SPEAKER_01:
That still doesn't tell us what is going on in between, which I think is the fit piece.

which from a thinking standpoint is, am I fitting now hand in glove, meaning is my glove size large or is it glove in hand?

Does the glove I need serve the purpose because I'm skiing or because I'm foraging or I'm water skiing, right?

So between framing and matching,

is this fit question.

All three of them are different things.

The fit is in between these other two things.

And even if we make a great table, even if we make sure that we got the right headings and right definitions underneath, it still doesn't talk about, is it glove in hand or hand in glove?

And I think for people who want to actually use active inference,

They want to be able to not get stuck conflating fit with frame or conflating fit with match.

They want to put those two parameters, the frame and the match on the outside, and then see what happens in the middle based on what those parameters are.

I think that's the struggle for most people

trying to gain entree into, well, how does this active inference thing actually work?

It works different all the time.

That's the point of the Markov blanket.

It's the potential to be able to invert at will that I think laying it out this way helps.

It gets you like 90% of the way there, but it doesn't really tell you what you could do with it as opposed to what just happened.


SPEAKER_03:
Very interesting.

Dean?

Lou?


SPEAKER_00:
So, like, just kind of this piggybacks right off of what Dean was saying, like the Markov blanket, and even here in the first line of this table,

you know, the Markov blankets are hard when they're shifting, right?

And this is something that we've talked about in other live streams in other contexts, like shifting, overlapping, my Markov blanket, interacting with your Markov blanket.

I think that, you know, the underlying mathematics to support those kinds of arguments are kind of missing still, or not missing, but still being worked out is probably more correct than

But, but I do think that Markov blankets do change.

I mean, even if I just think about like my brain as, you know, Markov blanket, like cells die, cells are born.

And I know that that's very controversial in the neuroscience field, but, but cells are actually born.

So, so, I mean, there's, there's constantly this, this turnover of,

who belongs inside the Markov blanket and any kind of, you know, organizational structure has that shift.

It's not like the boundary of the Markov blanket has to be, has to retain some kind of flexibility.

And, and so that, you know, is, is seen here in this, in this

first line.

And also, whose generative model is it?

So this is kind of another something that I was like, hmm.

So the quality management solution, or the QMS, right?

I maybe got the abbreviation wrong.

But that is the generative model.

But who does it belong to?

Does it belong to the process?

Does it belong to, and this is maybe my deficiency in my understanding of

industrial engineering, because I'm just not familiar with the jargon.

But like, is it the process that gets the quality management solution?

Or is it the organization that has the quality management?

Or is it like some kind of subunit?

Is it a team?

So I'm just kind of unsure about they talk about this is the generative model, but like, whose model is it?

And like, so depending on on how that's answered, and we'll have the author on so we can ask them, but depending on how that's answered,

you know, these one-of-a-kind processes, as I said earlier, can maybe be used to update the generative model in a very explorative kind of way.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

So here's just for a few implications and bigger questions.

So here's just a quote.

Markov blankets are not features of real-world systems.

Rather, they are an intuitive post hoc ascriptions

Rather, they are intuitive post-hoc descriptions made in order to model real-world systems.

Hence, any description of a Markov blanket is subjective and can be changed over time as the modeler's focus changes and or as real-world systems change in the opinion of the modeler.

Thus, as summarized by phrases such as the map is not the territory, Markov blankets, da-da-da-da-da-da-da.

And then also, this is a funny line.

It has been argued in relation to Markov blankets and other important constructs in active inference theory that the math is not the territory.

wherever you heard that one before.

But this is like kind of the ultimate instrumental take.

It's making a clean distinction between map and territory, between the utility-driven use of active inference and claims about what the system really is.

And then this, just the last line, but it's an interesting quote, but I'll just read the last line is, move to the slides.

Hence, the ascription of Markov blankets could be a recurring challenge throughout project production, which may only be resolved by reference to decisions made in courts of law long after the project is completed.

Just maybe think about, I don't know, maybe like the Bay Bridge being built in the Bay Area in California and like, you know, it was years later and it happened differently and I'm sure some companies were bought and sold and all the morphing of the organization and the physical modification of the project and the personnel changing over

all of that which is sort of this on one hand it's an n equals one unique enacted situation but then on the other hand there's principles for engineering it well and uh

Sometimes the process is itself wondering about how it's organized, and then sometimes you can't even know until it's after it's done.

So that's just kind of cool and funny.

Another quote, this is sort of taking a take on philosophy from the engineering perspective.

Exactly how beliefs are updated in embodied cognition is a topic of ongoing research, which involves specialist mathematics to describe relationships between prior probabilities and posterior probabilities.

By contrast, updating beliefs through active inference in industrial engineering and quality management involves applying well-established practical methods.

In particular, planning what should happen by active inference involves developing processes through applying industrial engineering techniques.

So it's sort of like we know what our policy affordances and mechanism of updating our affordances are.

That's our discipline.

And so more broader question is what are the implications for generalized frameworks like embodied cognition or active inference

What are the implications when they interface with disciplinary or project-specific one-time work?

And then how does active inference get simplified in the context of industrial engineering?

And how does work in the disciplines become linked in a bidirectional conversation to the broader body of knowledge?

Just general questions.

Any thoughts?

Okay, Dean, yeah, go for it.

Dean, you're muted.

Yeah, I can't hear you, Dean.

Oh, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Sorry.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, continue.


SPEAKER_01:
No, my bad.

Whether we're talking about the Bay Bridge as do we have the proper glove in hand?

or whether we're talking about instrumentalism, do I actually have a precise fit of glove for my hand?

I think what we have to be aware of is that both of those questions come up post hoc.

I tried on the glove and it worked, or maybe the design of the Bay Bridge should have been different given the contextual circumstances.

All I'm curious about is, so before the Bay Bridge is built, before I fit one of two questions into that glove-hand relationship, am I aware of how that can be seen post hoc or ad hoc?

conscious of the fact of where I'm taking this active inference model.

And as Lou pointed out earlier, whose is it?

And now just as importantly, when is it?

When is that question being asked in the context of what the product is?

Because if we're gonna talk about social organizations as the product,

Active inference allows us to look on both sides of that.

So as long as we're including the when in terms of discovering fit, I think we're actually using active inference in terms of what its potential is.

That's all.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice comment.


SPEAKER_01:
Little philosophy.

Not like we need that, but I'm just throwing it in there.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, that's cool.

So then here's another quote.

In terms of the explore-exploit dynamic, project production involves much more exploration than exploitation.

Hence, more wayfinding than navigation is involved.

In particular, wayfinding involves the ability to create novel routes which are based...

on understanding a wider frame of reference than navigating along a preset route.

Wayfinding involves creating novel routes through changing situations by making non-conscious reference to subjective prior knowledge and conscious subjective reference to current situations and semantic information.

That's pretty dense, but pretty fascinating because it does point at this kind of like repetitive.

Then you can just write out the directions and follow them in a little bit more of a rule following way.

And then the extreme case being like a train, like the Cal train just went from San Francisco to San Jose, just went.

And it was like, it had, you know, the affordance to speed up or slow down.

But then when there's the bushwhacking or the wayfinding here,

then there's almost like novelty of path.

And then there's higher novelties like introducing a new tool or climbing to the top of a tree to see further.

But there's just this path finding novelty that is really important for all kinds of these applications.

So just...

raises the question that'll be cool to discuss about like how does active inference uh juxtapose or interface with sense making and wayfinding um explore exploit the pragmatic epistemic distinction and then the way that the models are fit with accuracy minus complexity just how does that come together in active any thoughts or good yep dean


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, because wayfinding is my niche.

I was just so happy that he pulled these two references.

If you haven't read work of 95 and 96 here, I strongly recommend it because he's pulled out two fantastic references in terms of...

things you could look at in terms of what that exploration piece actually is.

They're both fantastic, especially the 95.

I've read both of them and they're both excellent examples within the context of what he's trying to talk about in terms of implications.

So I just wanted to do a clap for that one because I thought, glad he brought the wayfinding piece into this.


SPEAKER_03:
cool yeah the 95 is finding the way a critical discussion of anthropological theories of human spatial orientation with reference to reindeer herders of north eastern europe and western siberia 2009 and then the second article is humans use predictive gaze strategies to target waypoints for steering 2019. so it's kind of interesting because um

And especially having adapted a visual foraging model to a Stigma G pheromone deposition model in the active inference paper, it has drawn out this contrast between two extremes of foraging, both which can have a pragmatic and an epistemic component.

There's like skin in the game, ant body on the ground where you're physically moving.

you're hurting and you have to go somewhere to find out how it is there versus visual foraging or visual scanning is sort of like you have the cost of movement, of course, but it's not like where your eye is, is directly paying a cost in most cases.

So it's kind of cool to see that the way finding and the sense making comes into play on these two extremes with a niche modifying body on the ground, as well as with a scanning approach.

Okay, another quote, won't read the whole thing, but basically we can imagine after hearing all of this that the prediction error is something that you want to minimize for effective business operation.

So a large prediction error could lead to the company dissipating, for example, through its internal resources being scattered into an external state by being taken into the possession of its unpaid suppliers.

So that's a Markov blanket dissolution via court-mediated bankruptcy proceeding.

um alternatively the company could be acquired and merged into one of its large unpaid suppliers that seeks to move up the value chain from tier 1 to oem manufacturer in the case of acquisition and merger the description of markov blankets would need to be changed in legal documents

So that just totally set off my Scott David alarm and made me think about the ways that the Markov blankets can be designed, the managing synthetic externalities, seeing law as a niche modification and as a technology in and of itself, but also one that can

facilitate other technologies coming into existence or being hindered as we see all the time.

And then he uses the acronym BOLTS, business, operational, legal, technical, social.

And then the bigger question is like, how can we see active inference serve in a de-risking or recovery capacity?

then how can we reframe existing or emerging practices for resilience in terms of active inference so this is like a 1980 style merger and acquisition framed in the markov blanket framework but what does the d5 active inference model look like what does the smart contract active inference model look like these will be like really interesting questions and how they're going to intersect with formal laws as well as the codas law

Any comments?

Okay.

And then I think the last point was just

In the further directions of the paper, further refinement of active inference constructs is needed to enable wide application to social organization employing human and artificial intelligence.

Apropos, the practical examples in the paper can provide starting points for research into the challenges of ascribing Markov blankets, defining generative models, handling pragmatics, and modeling variational free energy in real-world social organization.

And that's an idea that we touched on in our 2020 paper, Active Inference and Behavior Engineering for Teams, which is that in the case of remote teams, then

the entire structure can be observed through the sensory data that's sent to a user and then the actions that are received, for example, on either side of an interface or either side of a blockchain wallet.

So for remote teams, because they're defined digitally, we have access to the entire state space, so to speak, of sensory and active states.

Whereas for trying to do the active inference model of people in a physical boardroom, that's always gonna be complicated, even if you have a really effective way to get body position out of the cameras in the room, for example.

So just kind of cool to think about industrial design or engineering, all these different ideas we talked about in terms of online, as well as physical engineering.

So not just like cars and stuff.

Those are hardware and software as well.

So we kind of just close by saying, what?

People can give their last thoughts, Blue and Dean, just what would a good understanding enable?

What are some good unique predictions or implications or areas that this line of research might be addressing?

What are the next steps for this kind of research?

The goals of the research, and then also just what you're curious about asking the author tomorrow and in the following week.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think I've laid out some questions today that I hope I don't forget for tomorrow.

But I definitely think that active inference in systems, in organizations and social structures is definitely important.

along with the validation of your model through other models, like through the models of other people and through this confirmation bias, like, oh, my model must be good because you have a model that's like my model.

So I think that this existence can help to really set boundaries and definitions

on how we really form social structures, not just businesses.

And I mean, in businesses, there's kind of a hierarchical component.

But I mean, also like society as a whole, we form these social structures

structures and how does the social morphogenesis really take place?

So I think really the author puts out a good, you know, way of kind of delving into social morphogenesis, even through like quality management and industrial engineering, but it's definitely first steps.


SPEAKER_03:
Dean, any final comments?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm really looking forward to talking to the author because

I think at the end of the day, rather than

What's the word here?

Rather than exploring why these mappings have been put together in this paper, I'm kind of curious now about trying to figure out, so when did these parallels sort of form in his mind and get to a place where he could take a lot of this background information?

Because he's really cleverly and thoroughly sourced here.

When did he sort of put these two things together as a reflection of one another?

And where does he see that going forward?


SPEAKER_03:
Totally agreed.

It's a single author paper that reflects a really deep understanding and probably a lot of experience presenting and thinking about this and maybe even applying it.

So those are all super interesting areas to find out about.

All right.

Well, Blue, Dean, thanks.

That was epic.

Thanks for all the help on the slides and on the stream.

So that was great.

We'll talk to everybody in the .1 and .2 or later.

So bye.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Dan.

## Oq2oM55OKzE

SPEAKER_03:
all right welcome everybody to the active inference lab today it's actinflab live stream number 27.1 on august 24th 2021 welcome to the active inference lab we are a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at the links here on this slide this is recorded in an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll follow good video etiquette for live streams so people can just raise their hand in Jitsi if they want to speak at any time or write a question in the live chat.

This short link has a calendar of upcoming live streams.

And today we're here in 27.1 on the 24th.

And in August 31st, we'll follow up with another discussion on this same paper.

And then we haven't yet decided what to read in the upcoming weeks.

So if you want to come on and discuss, that would be cool.

Today in Actim Stream 27.1, our goal is to learn and discuss this very cool paper, Active Inference, Applicability to Different Types of Social Organization Explained Through Reference to Industrial Engineering and Quality Management by Stephen Fox.

And we're gonna go anywhere we want with a paper or questions, and we're really appreciative to have Stephen here, so that will be a cool discussion.

Let's start with just introductions.

The non-authors can say what was interesting to them or what kind of brought them to this discussion.

And then it will be awesome to hear some context on the paper that we can take the discussion anywhere.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a postdoc in California and I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, good morning.

My name is Dean.

I'm in Calgary.

And the thing I found really interesting is that this was the fastest turnaround time between the point zero, which is a bit of a deconstruction, and now this point one, which is now going to be sort of put back together or reconstructed today.

And I just like the idea that the sort of the feedback loop is really tight.

So I'm really kind of

Both curious and happy that the feedback is such a quick turnaround.

And I'll pass it over to Steven Sillit.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, thank you, Dean.

Yeah.

Yeah, I'm just really intrigued.

I'm very excited to hear more questions about how active inference fits in at the larger social and applied scales.

And I know a lot of us here, it's kind of a bit of our thing is how does this get applied in different contexts?

So yeah, thanks.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome agreed about the whiplash dot zero so Stephen welcome, please introduce yourself and then maybe give us some context.


SPEAKER_05:
Hello everybody, my name is Stephen fox i'm a principal scientist at the technical research Center of Finland.

and my background is i left school when i was 16 i was an apprentice and did that my craftsman master craftsman manual work for 10 years and then when i was working full-time in industry i got a phd in engineering design and subsequently i've got a doctor of science degree in production engineering

and i came across um active inference and i thought it looked pretty straightforward and useful but then i started reading some scientific papers about it and it became more and more difficult to understand at least for me

So I thought the only way to resolve this was if I wrote a paper about it and sent it off to peer review.

So three iterations and 5,000 words of critique later, it was published in the paper that you've read.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, awesome.

I have a few thoughts on that, and then anyone can raise their hand.

So one piece was that getting more difficult to understand active inference as you went along.

What dimension was that?

What made you feel that way?

And is that different than other areas that you learned about?


SPEAKER_05:
Well, the scientific papers about...

on the topic, they are addressing particular audiences, aren't they?

So for example, some papers are

addressing computer scientists who were using established machine learning paradigms.

So the paper is directed to them.

And I guess the papers are sort of responses to criticisms that come from that audience.

So if a reader is not a member of that audience, it's not clear what it's about.

So I think the core idea is straightforward enough.

But so it's sort of like the relationship between thermodynamic entropy and information entropy.

So this is beyond the active inference literature.

The basic idea is simple enough.

But of course, if you read a scientific paper about it, the scientific paper about it is about some particular

issue there when it's applied in a very particular

for a very particular purpose.

So I think I understand the relationship between thermodynamic entropy and information entropy.

But if I read any scientific paper about it, I at least can become baffled because it's a very focused issue.

And of course, in scientific literature, you need to go beyond the state of the art.

So I think that's the thing.

I asked a colleague of mine to look into the literature as well, and he was baffled enough to decline my invitation, complete with a funding possibility, to carry on looking into it.


SPEAKER_03:
Dean, thanks for sharing that, Stephen.

So Dean, go for it.

And then anyone else with a question?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, Stephen, I was just curious.

So you're kind of alluding to who's in the room, that, you know, who is the audience thing?

And I'm curious because you sort of understand yourself as being a bit of a craftsman and a bit of an artisan.

So do you think the paper has...

a ready audience, or do you think your paper can act as an attractor state?

Because we're talking about active inference.


SPEAKER_05:
My own paper that you've been reading?

Yeah.

Well, I think, well, the first thing is,

Now it's clear to me.

And also it turned out, I didn't know until it was published, that the academic editors, Professor Friston,

So at least it's clear to me what it is in what I'm doing.

And so I can apply it.

So for example, I've put it into a proposal that's currently under review and hopefully get some funding.

And then if it's of use to others, then that's good.

That would be, and I've had one person who's read it very thoroughly and said it was, he said it was a great help to him and he wished this paper had existed forever.

three years ago, because it would have saved him so much trouble of going on the treasure hunt through the literature.

So that gentleman is in the world of business.

So he also had been on this treasure hunt through the literature, finding a sentence here and a sentence there that he could sort of put together and think, well, do I understand this?

Don't I understand it?

So, yeah, hopefully it's of help to others.

But it's not.

I mean, I don't think there's a big, there's not a big audience for this, I don't think.

It's a niche.


SPEAKER_03:
it'll always be a niche.

And it makes me think about how the development of this niche and the community dynamics within it have been different than maybe other fields.

Like what you said again about getting more difficult or perceiving the implications or the difficulty to be higher than when you initially jumped in.

First off is a meta learning characteristic.

You're updating your uncertainty or your scope or the policies that you're gonna have to take as you explore the space.

And then there's something about this field that impels a lot of people to...

learn theory and to explore applications.

Whereas, I don't know, other related fields, sometimes, like you said, they're either framed as a technical debate, like people have shown this relationship under this condition, here we show up for this other condition.

And then that's a bit too abstracted away from meaning for many people, or it's just in some corner of the literature, or just sort of, it remains at a qualitative level.

sort of okay cool cybernetics like goal orientation and then it can veer off and maybe get disconnected from some of the formalisms and so you mentioned the core of active inference or that now you have a clearer sense of it so what did you initially or what is your more refined sense of what that is now um so


SPEAKER_05:
well illumination came to me when i read a paper i think it's an uncertainty and stress and it says um a professor friston's one of the the authors uh and it says that free energy something like this that free energy is the information that somebody is lacking

uh to to make their internal model match reality and of course we know then we could be discussing forever and a day about what reality is but i thought that was a so on the treasure hunt that's a sparkling jewel of information because i thought okay so ah so it's an information gap

What we're talking about is the information gap between the internal generative model and the external state.

what the uh and there's variational free energy because of course our internal state keeps changing and the external state of the world keeps changing whether we want it to or not so

as we try to uh and as actions haven't the actions we're going to take we haven't taken them yet so we seek to reduce expected free energy over a series of actions

And so to me, what does that mean?

It means we seek to reduce the information gap between our internal generative model of the world and the world which we are in, that we're in.

um so and then active influence as well how do we do that we can the actions we can take we can either we can change what we pay attention to that's an action or we can take action in the world

to change uh the sensory inputs so that's it so and if um so if uh now this reducing the information gap i'm as you'll have noticed in the paper i'm using this term unwanted surprise so surprisal is the difference between

what we are predicting and then the sensory input and the world itself so these things can be for example in consumer culture survival may mean selecting the right

garb and accessories so one can survive in a social group and prosper in there maintain one's social capital so if we're in the if we're in the rich world survival can be at that level but if we're in the uh other parts of the world survival can be

the difference between literally between energy output and energy input over the course of a week and you literally might not survive if you don't get that right so does that make sense


SPEAKER_03:
very interesting description just to kind of trace out the order that you brought up a few variants of free energy.

And so you framed it as being free energy as the information gap between the internal generative model and then the external states dynamics.

So that makes me think about like trading.

Like if you knew

what the shape of the stock or the crypto was gonna look like, you could trade perfectly.

And then for other situations, it's also like, if you knew perfectly what was gonna happen, you could act perfectly, you could steer your ship so that given the exact wind distribution, you were always like navigating at the fastest possible rate.

But that is kind of an intractable calculation to make due to, for other reasons, the internal and external states changing.

and that's leading us to the variational free energy.

And then that is a statistical calculation conditioned on action, which leads us to the expected free energy, which is seeking to minimize free energy indirectly through expected free energy directly.

And then you point out that there was this capacity to change attention and to change sensory states through action.

So I think that was very succinct, uh,


SPEAKER_05:
run through of a lot of the active inference things dean or steven what did that make you think about well when i oh yeah could i just could i just read could i just read exactly what it says in the paper uncertainty interest it says free energy can be regarded as the information a person is lacking

and which he stroke she could use to make his her internal model as close as to reality and the authors of this paper are then these are so there's professor friston but the other authors are been doing research and threat

So there's Bruce McEwan and Carl Friston.

It's called Stress and... Stress and Uncertainty.

Okay.

Why it causes diseases and how it is mastered by the brain.

And it's published in Progress in Neurobiology.


SPEAKER_03:
Got it.

Thank you.

cool so that was the paper that kind of gave you the insight into the of free energy yes where where's the chat here i can send you the link in the chat um it's on the bottom left or you can email it afterwards and we'll add it to the youtube uh description so cool uh

Dean, what were you going to say on that?


SPEAKER_02:
No, I was just going to ask Stephen,

So when I was going through the paper, until I got, I don't know, probably 80% in and started seeing the references that you made to the wayfinding aspect in the exploration piece.

Prior to that, there was a lot of attention given over to the precision piece around the free energy principle.

And one of the things that I commented in the 270 was,

If we're talking about active inference, we're basically talking about two things at once.

We're talking about precision and we're also talking

about provisioning.

And I think my simple metaphor is, are we talking about a hand that fits into a glove or are we talking about the provisioning piece, which is how many different gloves have we provisioned in terms of the context that the hand might find itself in?

Cold weather, water, forging a piece of hot iron or whatever.

And so what I was curious about was in terms of the

social organization and the industrial engineering piece, how the provisioning and the precision coincide with one another in terms of what you are thinking now post-hoc writing this paper.


SPEAKER_05:
Can I share my screen somehow?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

Let me unshare these slides.

So on the bottom left, the middle button, share your screen.

And then I'll make it like full screen.

So you can make it look however you want on your side.

Okay.


SPEAKER_06:
All right.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, can you see?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, hit hide on Jitsi, where it says hide sharing your screen.

And then yeah, I can make that full screen.

So thanks.


SPEAKER_05:
So you see a diagram?


SPEAKER_03:
Yep, figure one.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, so why there's so much emphasis

on what's going on down here in make to stock and assemble to order is because what I was trying to do was get an anchoring

And so, okay, in here, in where there's mass production and mass customization, where there's a great deal of refinement of what is offered through many rapid iterations, that then there's something

That's fixed that Okay, there are there are a lot of activities like this in the world and the diagram about the quality assurance process So this is in in a way this is as if we think about it of the evolution but the Toyota Corolla is a highly evolved species and

compared to um if we make uh if we make a vehicle ourselves from scrap so i don't know it's been in the news there but teenage teenager in india has made a tuk-tuk out of scrap solar powered as well so then that's a it's not highly evolved it's the first

prototype working prototype and then these things up here this uh the top engineer to order the initial situated entropy is much higher and the barriers to information gain are much higher so as the diagram you're looking at just changed

Yeah, OK.

So this is from another.

So that diagram I just showed a minute ago, that's from another one of my papers in Entropy.

And this is from another one.

So what's going on is that if... So with...

DIY, do it with others, prosumption, mass imagineering.

It begins with just an idea in our minds.

And we may begin at the level of, I think in the video, Dean, you show a carved piece.

So it might be you've got a tree stump in your back garden, or you might have a tree.

And start down there, raw materials.

And you might...

shape it and then there can be this phenomena that well there's a dialoguing between the human doing the shaping and the piece of wood itself because the piece of wood has got its own properties and you're not going to get a

and aesthetically pleasing carving if you chisel against the grain right so so the grain that has been shaped through perhaps hundreds of years some of the trees there in california um so there's a dialoguing between the the human doing the shaping and the the piece of wood itself shaping what the human does but then more

From an industrial point of view, if anything that is bespoke, so the term bespoke is more appropriate in apparel than engineer to order.

So bespoke is short for bespoken for, and it meant bespoken for by an individual.

So the materials that were to be used were bespoken for by an individual.

and in today what happens with bespoke is that there'd be cloth so that's a formed material parts buttons

And then suppose it's show business or suppose Elton John in his most flamboyant days had an idea in his mind for a new costume.

It would be a preliminary idea.

There'd be iterations of sketching.

and uh doing some mock-ups maybe and looking at the fabrics and they do it and then maybe we get to quite an advanced stage of the fitting and he'd decide that he'd look at it and think i don't like this actually and completely change his mind and they do something else and then with engineer to order

That could be, for example, the late Steve Jobs' yacht.

So you might have an idea in his mind about what it might be, what it might look like.

And then the shipbuilders, they're going to try and get as far up the bill of materials as they can.

So they're going to try to use the cabin modules that they've used on other ships, or at the very least, to use the 3D digital models that they've got.

So what's in the paper, it's really around this picture.

It's down here because then that's the... So to start with something that's quite concrete and highly transferable before then, as I do later in the manuscript, in the paper, getting into the project processes and the wayfinding and so on.

Does that answer the question?


SPEAKER_02:
Can I just do a quick follow-up, just so it's clear in my mind?

So what I'm seeing here, what you put up on the screen is, and I want to be corrected if I haven't got this right, is I see ways of laying out a fabrication series.

And I guess what I was wondering is more on a philosophical level, as you're transferring from idea to fabrication,

How do we use active inference there?

How do we turn the idea and translate it into this fabrication exercise?

Is it a planning effort?

Is it getting our ideas, plural, provisioned?

Is it about propositioning the garment maker before they go on to do the construction?

Is it

You know, what I'm trying to do is get in my head clear what your focus was on, because I can tell now already 40 minutes into our conversation today that there was much more you could have written about, but I'm sure basically what you wanted to do was

was get one thing clear in terms of this paper, but that, for people like me, that opens up a whole Pandora's box.

So I just wanna be, in my mind, certain that the focus here is about the fabrication piece and not the stuff that comes before the fabrication piece.

Am I leaning in the right direction?


SPEAKER_03:
Seems like he silently left, actually.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, no, sorry.


SPEAKER_03:
I was on mute.

Oh, continue then.

I was on mute.


SPEAKER_05:
Powerful answer.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.


SPEAKER_05:
yeah so in the in the paper itself um i think i'm using the term it's mass production and project production is it yeah so in so yeah so the the focus on the paper of the paper is on this mass production so just to try to

What's the word I'm looking for?

I can't think of anything better.

But just to sort that out.

Just say, okay, so that's what happens in mass production.

And here are these diagrams and these explanations here.

And there's the statistical process control charts and things like that.

That's what goes on there.

That's settled.

Okay.

Now we move on to the project production.

And why I'm focusing on physical production is because then it's tied into action.

There's a clear link between action and energy.

And, of course, energy is a finite supply of it.

uh for individuals and organizations so the mass production stuff is to provide the the platform to go into more challenging areas am i answering your question dean tangential rambling am i no no no like


SPEAKER_02:
I guess it depends on how much you decide to zoom out.

And so I just want to be clear in my head what the focus is on, because there is absolutely active inference in fabrication and manufacturing.

I have no quarrel with that whatsoever.

I just want to be able to make sure that I don't overextend what I think is the active inference potential

Because as I said, when I was reading the paper, where it got exciting for me was that whole exploration beyond the precision and onto the provisioning or provisionings part.

So thank you.

Yes, you cleared that up for me.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

How about Stephen with the raised hand and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thank you.

I'm looking at this here, and I see some interesting ways that you're engaging free energy in relation to active inference.

Because often we might see mathematical models and then philosophical arguments.

And I sense that this mid-ground, which may be where a lot of the applied work happens at scale, is heuristic-based or principles-based to get a sense of how to navigate

um and may not be directly modelable because there's so many dimensions so that's kind of interesting so i wonder you know where where people are talking there about situated entropy or the the the um it's it's a potential um so i'm wondering how you how you think about the heuristic and how you think about um

how much someone could model this type of thing or how much it's about modeling.

And if so, what type of modeling might be useful in organizational industry context?


SPEAKER_05:
Um, well, I think at the end of the paper, I, I raised this question, I think about, um, well, there's, uh,

There's maths, and then there's modeling, and then there's simple rules.

And so in engineering design, and not just engineering design, simple rules can be extremely powerful.

So design for manufacture and assembly

the application of that has led to 90% reductions in the assembly times of many products.

So you could have just kept modeling the former process as people did for many years with ever more sophisticated mathematical models and simulation tools, but it still wasn't very good.

Or you could just apply some simple rules, reduce assembly time by 90%, and then, well, then it's a lot better, isn't it?

So I sat in one of the meetings that...

Professor Friston and Maxwell Ramstead, I think, were going through Professor Friston's book, The Monograph, the name of which escapes me now.


SPEAKER_03:
A Free Energy Principle for a Particular Physics.


SPEAKER_05:
yes so professor friston and thomas parr were in discussion with is it michael bale who's uh he works for a japanese ai firm uh martin biel yes money bill yeah and um

at least one colleague of Martin's and they were discussing amongst themselves.

And I don't think as far as I could tell, they weren't able to get an intersubjective understanding between themselves even.

And Martin's published a paper in entropy where he's contesting some of the maths and, uh,

So my view is that, of course, things develop and they have to start somewhere, and no doubt that will lead to good things.

But the more people that can understand something, the more likely it is that...

opportunities for its development and flaws in its current um framing can be identified and progressed so i'm and i've sent in my email this morning this quote from einstein didn't i from from geometry and experience that uh what do you have it there now um

That quote from Einstein was in my email.


SPEAKER_03:
I can look it up in just one second.

But right now, just on the screen, was the guest stream with Martin.

And so totally agreed.

Really fascinating there.

OK.


SPEAKER_05:
So in answer to the question, I say, of course, there's a place for maths.

There's a place for computer simulation.

But if so, if we go for so it may be that some are engaged in positivistic research and they're seeking to establish a correspondence truth.

And others, you know, anti-positivists, interpretives, they are engaged in looking for constructivist truth.

And what I'm doing is, I suppose, it's critical, realist, pragmatic truth.

So if it works, it's true.

So what I'm doing is, well, it's probably a bit rough, but maybe it's good enough to get something done.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep, very interesting.

One question I had was, you talked about that kind of co-evolution with the iterations, whether it's the craftsperson working with a raw material with its imperfections or its characteristics,

And then all the way up to this more social form, which is like Elton John and the costume designers in that feedback.

So whether it's just hands on object like drawing or whether it's more extended to include all these other aspects.

how do we hold space for that versioning and uh co-evolving process and for the material to allow it to reveal its characteristics while also having effective supply chains you know that can make cpus and that deliver high precision materials because it just sounded like you had experience on on both sides with the industrial engineering as well as the craft and artisan side


SPEAKER_05:
Yes.

So, well, with automated engineering tools, as I'm sure you know, there are these communities of makers and where people are sharing.

Is Instructable still going?

That online community of giving instructions for projects and things.

So,

so one one big uh challenge is that it's skill so manual skill so if if work like carving it depends upon our um

quite a lot of manual skill to get a reasonable looking carving that somebody might be happy with.

But if you're gonna make something, if you're gonna 3D print something, then the manual skill required isn't so high and that can be communicated

so some of the uh work that i've been doing is in this a virtual social physical convergence but through virtual technology you can share socially skill knowledge in doing physical work and

If also, do you know the open ecology movement, where there are engineering designs freely available on the internet?

So through virtual, social, physical convergence, there's great potential to enabling more people to produce what they consume to become prosumers.

And as Gandhi, I paraphrase Gandhi now, he said, prosperity can't come from mass production.

It can only come from production by the masses.


SPEAKER_03:
Very interesting answer.

Reminds me a lot of Bucky Fuller trying to pivot the supply chain from weaponry to livingry, mass producing the aluminum sheets for housing.

But that was kind of only potentially a transient step in this supply chain and production and then eventually knowledge reimagining.

Will we all have a silicon foundry in our house?

Probably not.

Could we all have a compost bin or could we all have a sewing kit?

That's something that's a totally different type of artifact, so it can be mapped differently.

Dean, and then anyone else or any questions in live chat?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I don't want to go off into the woods here, but I was curious, Stephen, if you've ever read any of this stuff from Matthew Crawford, in particular his shop craft title, and then the other one is The World Beyond Your Head.

And the reason why I'm asking is because in that book,

In that second book, which is one of my favorites, he talks about all of the distractions in the world that caused us to not be able to be focused and precise and do the crafting, never mind being able to do the production at an industrial scale.

And so I was just curious if maybe there was...

maybe that author was maybe whispering in your ear when you were putting this together because if you whether you're whether you're carving something out of a piece of wood and having a dialogue with it which I completely agree with or you're just making sure that there's no bugs in the in the command software for the for the making of the copies it's still an ability to

be able to use things like active.

He wrote the Beyond Your Head book in 2014, so I don't think he was looking at active inference.

But I think that how that is employed can sometimes be perceived as just the right amount of being able to give attention over to something and still remain open to possibility.

So I was just wondering if that was something that may have been adding some color to what you were doing here.


SPEAKER_05:
No, I have not heard of that before, but I shall look into it with interest.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it's fantastic stuff.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, thanks for the comment, Dean.

Steven, Silet?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this... I hope this game doesn't go in the weeds either, but I think this is... Like you say, this touches on so many things.

When you talk about the generative model...

um and you've got embodied cognition sort of fitting into that um generative models we've often been thinking that it's an action orientated model so it's an act it's a model of how to act okay um and i'm curious how far for instance if you do welding you mentioned welding and stuff like that so

With this skilled performance idea, that can be the generative model of how to weld.

But at what point, or this sort of maybe ties into something I've been exploring, at what point do you think that the instructions to weld are in the niche?

and being used by someone's generative model, of which they only have a certain sequence available, you know, now welding, it may be that someone just they get a skillful practice and go the whole way, you know, so it's all in there.

But I'm just wondering, once you get to sort of this management level, what point it's a niche artifact as much as it is a generative model internally?


SPEAKER_05:
Well, I think with craft skills, it's being able to do it.

It's just at some point or another after I was an apprentice, I think most people who are apprentices have had this feeling that you're struggling and then you wake up one morning and then suddenly you've got a feel for it.

You can do it.

and um exactly how that is i don't think anybody really knows because somehow it's going into the the fascia system that's the thing the feel for it is embodied in the fascia system and most um

To my reading as a craftsperson, most literature about embodied cognition is just paying lip service to it being about embodied cognition.

And it's not really addressing the nature of embodied cognition about how much that depends upon the fascia system and body memory.

and uh in this 4e model uh about extended cognition you know put put your memories in your mobile phone type of thing but there's no way that you can put your your manual skill uh embodied cognition muscle memory in a mobile phone you can have many videos of

people doing manual work from all kinds of different angles.

So that can be informative.

But it's not, as you can have many videos of people riding bicycles, that's not the same as having your body memory of how to get on a bike and not fall off while you're pedaling it.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, Stephen, go for it, and then I have a thought.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think this is a good... I agree.

I mean, so there's some transition that happens when it goes from presumably some instructional process which has been decoded in a kind of a...

cognitive way to something more embodied like you're saying it becomes a practice but then there's also i suppose and i don't know but when you start coordinating for instance you've got a whole group of welders working on the side of a oil tanker um so there's there's kind of then it might start to move again there's there's a scale beyond the individual welder you know and at what point does it then

get beyond what I've been thinking of as an experiential, ecosystemic kind of knowing to something which has to be coordinated through some artifact, like a plan or something.


UNKNOWN:
Cool.


SPEAKER_03:
Let's just go to Blue first.


SPEAKER_00:
Daniel, go ahead, because your thought is probably my thought.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, no, you should go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
So I have a question that was kind of related to Steven's question in terms of the niche modification, not as it relates to craftsmanship per se, but to industrial engineering.

And in this paper that was the topic of our discussion, you said that, you know, that

The processes need to be carried out right the first time in like 99% of the cases.

So I remember this.

And to what extent is that first time right?

I mean, I just remember as a business owner, there's a lot of SOP development process.

So you develop SOPs and KPIs so that everybody knows exactly what their job is, exactly what they're supposed to do, and exactly the procedure for executing the job so that theoretically anyone can come in and be subsumed under the Markov blanket

for the business and the niche has been modified maybe in such a way to make that happen correctly 99% of the time in the first time.

So do you think that that process development in the industrial engineering application is niche modification or perhaps something else?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so this, the 99 times out of 100, so that's Six Sigma.

which is under the umbrella of total quality management.

And that is where... So if you've made... So this is all... By the way, are you still seeing my screen?


SPEAKER_03:
No.

Maybe could you reshare it?


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, yeah.

Hang on.

So let me just... If I go back to...

so if i go yep back to that point i was making about some embodied cognition so yep looks good this this can you see that segment of predictive processing yep okay so what i'm doing in this paper is i'm uh

refer i'm making reference to the fascia system and body memory um and relating it to this you know well predictive global neural workspace um so that's um as far as i've got with that now this 99

Now, can you see the treadmill?

Yep.

Okay, there it is.

This 99.9% at the time, right this time, this has come with the treadmill of production and consumption.

So if an organization invests a billion dollars in building a factory and in the tooling, then

It's got to mass produce and it's got to get people to buy what it's selling.

And there can't be disgruntled customers because now there's global competition.

And that 99%, it can be measured to microns with car body panels and things like that.

But if you're in the leather cluster in Italy, and you're making leather bags, as has been going on for hundreds of years, then the precision is not so desirable.

It's good if every one of the leather bags that is made

is a little bit different to each other because that signals that it's handmade.

So the 99% that write first time

is all wrapped up in this um treadmill of production and consumption with varying levels of precision depending on what the niche is so if the niche is you're a global car maker

Well, the door better close with the obligatory clunk, and it better be a watertight, airtight fit when you're driving at maximum speed.

Otherwise, customers will be lost.

So in different niches, the level of vision that's required depends upon what customers are expecting.

and what the competition will tolerate.

Does that answer the question at all?


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks for the interesting answer.

I'll give a thought and then we'll go to Scott.

So first, it's almost like, what about a semantic precision?

Like a writer who is outputting precision in terms of at multiple levels, like a typographical precision and also like they don't just want to release their hand hitting the keyboard.

That's not what their writing product is.

So it's not just the mechanical precision that we can talk about.

And then that idea of waking up to skill and the way you connected it to embodiment is really interesting.

Maybe people wouldn't expect that from an industrial designer, but then when we think about craft and the continuum, it makes more sense.

And then also that waking up aspect of it, it's like during sleep when we're simplifying and pruning neural connections.

the more neural applications of free energy principle and active inference could help us see that as like a process of model simplification and unlearning the details.

And that is sort of where skill and mastery comes in.

And that could be cognitive unlearnings and bodily updatings in terms of the morphogenesis of the tendons or the sensory receptors or

all kinds of other changes and so it's just cool that we can like really telescope in on just wanting to apply it to as you did in the paper really partitioning out the biological systems

partitioning out the flesh and bone, but we know we can go there, but there's so much that you can say about just the engineering side that it was just like, it makes it very interpretable, yet also clearly comprehensive, which is what you pointed out was kind of lacking in the literature when you were learning.

So Scott, go for the question.

I don't know if you watched the .zero, but we...

We had a Scott David alert with the Markov blankets of contracts and law.

But yeah, anyways, go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, thank you.

Sorry I was delayed.

I was on another call.

A couple of things that... Thank you.

A couple of interesting comments that sparked some questions I had.

So talking about the fascia and your statement about the mobile phone can't record the fascia, and obviously that's true, but it sparked three things in me I wanted to get your thoughts on.

One is...

what in the notion of the fascia and the embodiment is it possible to use active inference framings or is it fruitful in the opposition of various fascia elements so when you're learning diving or frisbee playing one muscle's pushing against a bone or whatever and so the fascia has multiple components as well

And so are there learnings that happen among fascia elements themselves because they're building actin, myosin, you know, bulk or whatever?

I guess those are the proteins, but in any event, they're building bulk.

That's one is the opposition among fascia elements.

The other one is it reminded me a little bit on the mobile phone thing.

Sandy Pentland at MIT talks about

I think he did some work on predicting if people are going to get Alzheimer's by they have their mobile phone in their pocket and they start walking around their apartment differently and the mobile phone is able to track that there's a difference, an anomaly.

And so I thought that was kind of interesting that although the mobile phone can't track your craft, but it can note anomalies based on picking up fascia histories.

And then the third thing, it made me think a little bit about robotic prosthesis and haptic sensors.

And so there, again, you have this feedback mechanisms that are bounded.

Obviously, again, they're not storing craft, but it seems like, I just wondered if any of those sparked any thoughts that relative that question of the, I guess, not just the mobile phone, but that sensory apparatus and the information networks being responsive with elements of fascia in different direct and indirect ways, and maybe an active inference framing, a hybrid between the technology embodying a certain

expectation, let's say, and the fascia embodying a certain expectation, and that kind of harmonic coupling, if that had any thoughts on that.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_05:
I think one thing that I'd consider in all these things is what's the...

going to mention the r word now reward uh what's the uh what would be the effort to reward ratio of doing that so if if um like you said about learning to dive so i'd say that maybe there'd be some uh

rules um sort of like design rules for learning to dive that maybe could be formulated that might be useful for people to learning to dive but then going into

very sophisticated modeling when individuals are so different that might require a huge amount of effort and the reward may be less so I don't think you're alone when I was saying before Scott that that in industrial engineering so up until 1980 people use the mathematical models and the simulation tools available to

to model industrial processes but then design for manufacturing assembly was introduced and assembly times in many products was reduced by 90 with simple rules and so all the amount of there's there's a place for modeling but um what i'm more interested in for is focusing on um

Are there simple rules, are there simple methodologies, tables and diagrams that can provide insights as designed for manufacturing assembly that can lead to very substantial improvements?

So that's what I think.

But then like this gate tracking you were talking about, about people, are they getting out?

One thing that I think is very attractive about active inference is it can provide a starting point.

where humans and artificial intelligence can be starting from the same place.

That, okay, what's going on here is we're trying to reduce this information gap

between the internal generative model of the human being and the external state of the world that they're moving around in and both the human being trying to do that under and the artificial intelligence is trying to do that and how is that done it's done through active inference

where we learn from either changing what we pay attention to and or changing the action we take.

So then there can be a common starting point and maybe this can make the human being feel much more comfortable around the artificial intelligence.

So I'm working on a project at the moment that's this third wave of AI where there's some top-down rules and bottom-up sensory inputs combining.

And I see active inference as being well worth exploring as a starting point for human-AI interaction.

where both the human and the AI have got this generative model.

That's the human.

It's understandable to the human.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome points about

where active inference could come into play.

And also almost from a designer's perspective, if they have a systems diagram or a digital twin of some type that includes active inference agents interacting, first, because they're all of a similar type of model, there'll be increased interoperability and ease of computing these kinds of systems.

And then

the system designer or perturber can simulating with counterfactuals or with any other technique can uh formalize what affordances they do and don't have so it's like if someone says the only way i'm going to get this marketing um you know to succeed is if i update their generative model so that they think that you know this isn't a ponzi scheme it's like if that can be formalized then we could have benevolent

Shapings of the niche and kinds of interjections like we're gonna inject this much money with this much of an equation Because we're doing KL optimal control on this parameter Conditioned on these other parameters, you know, how do people feel about that?

versus We're gonna do an ad hoc strategy based upon conversations that you weren't part of so and then that just while you were saying about the generalized principles

Again, really interesting because there was a lot of detail in the paper and a lot of really insightful comments, but it wasn't the same formalism-driven approach that we've seen in some other works directly.

Of course, cited a lot of the primary literature there.

So just cool how you pulled back to the level of the generalized principles.

and then we can dip down into more special mathematical framings but this last part of table one which were also all sections of the paper were like essential kind of principles that at least you and the reviewers agreed were important enough to define clearly


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I found that quote now.

So this is from Albert Einstein, Geometry and Experience, addressed to the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin, 27th of January, 1921.

As far as the law of mathematics refer to reality, they are not certain.

And as far as they are certain, they do not refer to reality.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

That reminds me also the way that you, again, describe free energy as that information gap.

It's almost like we can have a description or an estimation of a gap, a negative space.

And so it's like, well, what's in the gap?

It's like, well, if I knew or if we had any more precision, then we'd tell you.

But all we know is how large the deviation is.

So it's sort of like a way of...

One way around it is using a positive definition of something that's lacking, and then that's closely related to this idea of tractable minimization that is better suited to be calculated than an intractable maximization.

Like maximization of reward or expected utility, which is a totally different set of constraints and outcomes than a variational free energy gradient descent.

So Scott, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_04:
I wanted to, that got me thinking of the, just the, uh, I guess the, um, library of opportunities for a system, or I'm not sure how to characterize it.

But, um, one of the things I've been fussing with is the Chris Christopher Alexander, um, for folks who haven't, um, been in that space with, I just learned that a few months ago about him, but

He's an architect who collected the idea that he had had was the collect up in architecture and is collecting up different practices in architecture and different patterns.

And he came up with a pattern language.

The idea was if you want to create a portico and a place to negotiate private and public space, for instance, he had certain patterns that happened in different kinds of architecture.

And so if you wanted to do architecture, you could look at a bunch of patterns and stare at them for a while and see which one looked best.

And it's interesting with these questions of filling gaps, the easiest place to look is what other similarly situated parties have done in similar situations.

So if you have that crosstalk, the peer-to-peer conversation,

than you can discover without having to go through all the pain and the cost of discovering yourself.

And that's the notion of guilds, right?

I heard reference earlier to apprenticeship.

Learned by the masters, not just reinventing the wheel kind of idea.

And it's interesting when we talk about gap filling, because in more static systems, culturally static systems, let's say, historically quiescent periods, then you can learn a lot from the guilds.

But in periods of high dynamic change, environmental change,

the guilds are going to maybe underserve you because there may be so much change that the old practices just don't hold up.

The externalities are such that they swamp things.

And so I wonder in that gap, if there's an element of discovery, both of the available, what are the ways to discover what's available and,

And then discover the things that are not available, A, because they're in a different silo, so they haven't been available.

But maybe because they haven't yet been tried in any silo, right?

So they're just not emerging type of notions.

Maybe that's a bad question.

I don't know.

It just, it felt like that gap.

There's easy, low-hanging fruit of practices.

Chris Alexander kind of stuff is relatively low-hanging.

And then it seems like there's other mechanisms here of discovery, and maybe that's randomness, and maybe that has to do with evolution.

But anyway, if that's commentable, I'd like some comments on that.

Yeah, awesome question, Scott.


SPEAKER_05:
Are you still seeing my screen?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, I'll make it big.


SPEAKER_05:
All right.

Okay, so now...

leapfrog skills leapfrog skills yes there it is so um the thing is about manual skills as scott was just saying the guilds and everything so in the work that i do development projects that point out that industrial thinking is 300 years old it came from the english midlands 300 years ago and uh

And taking that as the basis of doing development work may not be a good idea because it's 300 years old and the world's changed.

And so it is with skills that...

It's good to be able to carve wooden pieces.

It can be very rewarding.

And maybe it can bring a few people some economic benefits.

But that can't address the poverty of billions of people.

And craft guilds, as I say to people, well, when they say ministers, when they say, well, we need to build training centers and give people apprenticeships.

And I point out, well, that's medieval thinking.

So that isn't good.

That's not very good.

So here there's explanation of leapfrog skills.

I take you down to some diagrams here.

Whoops.

Just a simple example.

Bear with me.

This is taking longer than I thought it would.


SPEAKER_03:
What was your active inference stage or awareness at this time in 2016 or when you were writing it leading up to here?


SPEAKER_05:
zero well no but the thing is it looks it depends how you look at it doesn't it because i so if you're doing manual work then you're doing active inference because

What are we doing?

So information gap.

How am I going to do this?

Because I need to do this.

Because if I don't do this, I'm not going to get paid.

If I don't get paid, I can't buy food.

I can't pay the rent.

So how am I going to do that?

That's the information gap.

And then, so I'm going to pay attention to my priors.

What have I done before?

I'm going to pay attention to the sensory inputs from the external state and notice that, oh, not all the materials I need are here.

So I need to improvise.

adaptive expertise i need to not apply what i've done before where it's not going to help and i'm going to have to think of a bit of something to do it and uh so in my opinion active inference is certainly what's going on in manual work and then you you give it a try it doesn't uh

all right it works to some extent or not another extent so then look back in the generative model hang on what I don't like done something like this before look around oh look I see in the distance there's some bit of kit I can use over there I'll use that and so on but to go back to this craft

thing but can you see that figure five that yep the kind of stuff you put around the door so doing these joints that difficult to form and to fix and very often if you stare at such joints closely you you'll see they'll have been filled up with glue and dust or a bit of uh more paint being stuck in there

But then if you do this instead, it actually looks better and it doesn't, no need for the craft guild.

It's just a kit.

It's just these molds.

It's just a kit.

So you've got the, and these blocks here in the corner, it makes it look more fancy and you can just assemble it.

So I go back to this one.

OK, so.

Do you see now a diagram that says movable factories?


SPEAKER_03:
Yep.


SPEAKER_05:
OK, so movable factories on the job training product kits in the middle.

Engineering design of capable processes for mistake proof production.

So this is, as we know, Ikea spread around the world, much more successful than any furniture company.

It's competitors because they do engineering design of capable processes for mistake-proof production.

And this can be applied to many things, water towers, solar arrays.

anything really so this in uh what's going on about the craft guilds that yes craft guilds although i'm a master craftsman myself it's medieval thinking and it's um it's just not scalable and it's very very wasteful hugely wasteful

And really, craft skills are good for coping with chaos.

But chaos is hugely wasteful, awash with entropy that can't be resolved.

So when I'm doing development projects, this is what I'm advocating, what's in that diagram.


SPEAKER_03:
Dean, with a raised hand, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm just throwing down a couple of things here.

So this kind of fits in.

This is a nice fit into the glove of what Scott was asking and then what I saw in terms of the title of that paper.

So my question is this.

If we, using the same kind of triangular shape as the five whys, if we start at the top with learning and that learning then breaking down into one aspect of which is updating,

And then that breaking down into one act of which is gap respecting that then breaking down into assessing what the step function is.

And then that breaking down finally into some sort of action taken, which is the filling to follow or the gap closing.

Is that medieval thinking or is that an invention gradient descent?

I know that's a lot of stuff, but if you want to take the best of what happened 300 years ago and not get locked into starting with I'm going to close a gap because I perceive a gap present, is there a way that we can take the best of the past, meld it with the current, and come up with an inventive gradient descent which doesn't sort of hold us to either the craft or the mass production?


SPEAKER_05:
I believe we can.


SPEAKER_02:
Good.

We'll be good friends.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes.

And in in that paper, let's see if we can get to this.


SPEAKER_03:
There's yet uncertainty and stress.

Nice questions.

what you said about the scalability of the mentorship and the guild model versus alternative models was really interesting because there's the sort of academia versus non-academia divide.

So with that sort of student through PhD and that traditional mentorship system and how that's evolving, then there's the traditional craft

um trajectory the apprentice and the master and the way that that is also changing and the way that academia and research are reconnecting so there's just so many cool threads about how everybody will find guidance yeah so are you are you seeing my screen yep mass imagineering mass customization mass production yep


SPEAKER_05:
So I'm looking at, in this one, I'm looking at it from the point of view of consumer culture and saying how these complement each other.

So it's in there, Dean, about how these can all be complementing each other.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm definitely going to have a read of that.


SPEAKER_05:
Remember to maintain firm downward pressure on the soles of your feet while you do.


SPEAKER_03:
And pump to the tempo of staying alive.


SPEAKER_05:
You've got to keep your feet on the ground, otherwise it'll blow your socks off.


SPEAKER_03:
Scott?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I want to get back to, that was, you struck me with that statement before, the craft skills are very wasteful, and they're useful with chaotic situations, but chaos is really wasteful.

That's really, that struck me, and I wanted to ask you, I thought, well, that's interesting, because inefficiency is resilient, and the distributed, make me think about distributed agriculture, distributed manufacturing, a lot of the resiliency

discussions that are going on now.

I work with a group called All Fed that's trying to figure out how to feed everyone in the world and things like that.

And then also the notions of monoculture and the production of cheap industrial calories, but then there's no variety.

And again, getting back to this, the notion in active inference, I keep coming back to Carnot's characterization in the second law of thermodynamics that you need hot and cold differentials to perform work with a heat engine.

And I feel like you need the differentials and information to have active inference Bayesian occurrence.

So that inefficiency feels like it's laden with value because of the differentials that are in there, the chaos and the, it feels like there's lots of value to be derived from chaos and inefficiency.

And maybe that's part of what was, well, I guess it was being done in the industrial revolution notions is you took craft skills and reduce the inefficiencies and drive value.

And it feels like as we have more chaos in the information sphere,

are we, how might we release those, that value, but still recognizing that maybe it's a, there's a font of inefficiency that keeps coming at us because interaction volumes are going up.

So we don't have to worry about an exhaustible supply of inefficiency that awaits us.

But if we mine the inefficiency and bring it into the system where it's known, then it seems like it creates value.

I wonder, is any of that commentable?

I don't know.

I hope that made some sense.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes, yeah, yeah.

But before I go on to that, also, Dean, there's this paper, Domesticating Artificial Intelligence.

Is that on the screen?

Yes.

okay so expanding human self-expression through applications of artificial intelligence in prosumption so that's another um another one about this combining different

different uh paradigms of production and presumption and consumption okay so yes so what i was saying about um inefficiency so perhaps i should

explain better what i mean that redundant variation so redundant variation doesn't add it consumes energy and it doesn't add any value so that

that is the the thing that with this leapfrog skills i'm pointing that out that well it serves no useful purpose to have redundant variation variation can add value but not not redundant variation so that's what i mean and also it depends on what people's circumstances are so if people are um

uh living on the edge as many people are then there's just no they don't have any spare energy and redundant variation can uh well we know do you know this term the precariat that people in in the west that uh

that people don't, they have zero-hours contracts and things like that, and they're in the precariat.

But the real precariat in the world are the people who are

living on the edge in developing countries because their staying alive is literally precarious.

Getting water is difficult, and when they get water, it's dirty.

So they've got a choice.

They can drink it to keep living, but if they drink it, they're going to get ill, and maybe the illness is going to kill them.

So there are different scenarios.

And in development work, it's redundant variation.

It's just trapping can keep people trapped in desperate poverty.


SPEAKER_04:
Could you just comment a little bit, as a follow-up, expand on that redundant variation, what that looks like in some examples?

And also just wanted to mention, in one of the groups I'm working with, AllFit,

we're thinking of developing a how many days to starvation app for people, and like the countdown clock in the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, but how many days a person has in their food availability, including what's in their refrigerator, what's in their food desert, et cetera, but it's days to starvation because of that awareness, that precariousness.

But anyway, if you could talk a little bit more about redundant variations.

I'm not quite sure what the concept of what that looks like.


SPEAKER_05:
Can you see this diagram again on my screen?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

So in the difficult-to-form fit and fix on the left-hand side, the shape, if there's a little bit of a twist and a little bit of poor machining,

the timber sections there it can make forming that joint really difficult and then though so those variations they're just they're just redundant they don't they don't add any value they lead to because there is this this the duality of entropy and

There's a little bit of physical disorder because maybe the wood's a bit twisted or the machining was a bit off.

So there's the information uncertainty.

How am I going to make that joint?

So then suppose there's six ways of forming that joint with equal probability, just like a fair die.

And the information entropy is 2.58 bits.

and that 2.58 bits it's just it's just not adding any value at all um that gap of 2.58 bits but with this alternative on the right hand side those uh the square pieces in the corners they can have a rebate formed in them in their in their thickness so there's quite a substantial overlap there's maybe a

nine millimeters or three-eighths of an inch overlap so if if the joint isn't perfect it just covers it up and it doesn't matter so that's a practical example and then if we scale that up to all the

The many, many things that can be.

So why design, manufacture, act, factor and assembly, reduce products assembly times by 90% is because it just eliminated all redundant variation.

Does that help?


SPEAKER_03:
know what what that reminds me of is almost like we talk about aberrant precision we've talked about that on the neuropsychiatry side delusional beliefs failure modes of decision-making algorithms it's okay to not be latched on to the perfect strategy as long as there's this healthy uncertainty

about strategic decision making because it's that uncertainty that's getting kind of coasted on that should the system persist ends up finding an appropriate or an adequate strategy but aberrant precision when there's like high precision um confidence but then also it's off target with its mean estimation things can go awry and so it's like that door frame on the left the mass-produced one

then as you've pointed out it's kind of like a false sense of precision because if you look at it it looks like the more precise one it looks like oh it's sharper or it was machined such and such angle at exactly this angle but then that one degree tolerance what sounds like really accurate on the machining wheel

Now that plays out on the doorframe and now it's actually less precise in practice.

And also like you pointed out the example with the cupboard or the bookshelf being attached to the wall, like you can design for internal precision really well, but then it's hard to take a step back and have latitude for like the wiggle room of real life.

But that's actually where the success or the failure of the product in use is going to be.

So that's very interesting topics that you brought up.


SPEAKER_04:
Just a quick follow up.

One of my happiest days in my life is when I discovered that you can mix sawdust with epoxy and then do gap filling.

And I actually completed projects a lot faster as a result.

One other comment on that is contracts, mass contracts.

We had a lot of negotiations.

I used to work with banks and software companies and things doing contracts.

and it was funny because in negotiations a mass contract has that you get rid of redundant variation right you just get there's no reason to have a different contract for all these things but it constrains the people who have less power in the negotiation but it's funny because people say to you when you're in the negotiation with someone who has a mass contract they'll say

Well, you can't change it.

This is the way we always have done it.

And they're saying this is just it.

And then the answer back to that is, well, let me show you how we're going to do it for the next 20 years.

Because the world changes around these things that have insufficient variation in them.

And so it's interesting when what seems like a system that has eliminated redundant variation becomes anachronistic.


SPEAKER_05:
Are you seeing my screen now?

Are you seeing three circles?

Yes.

Okay.

So, Scott, you were talking about distributed.

And so what's...

I'm working on is this it's this highly distributed prosumption highly distributed and highly efficient compared to distributed subsistence which is distributed but not efficient and centralized which is efficient but not distributed so that's the thing and here is the dark picture of what happens with centralization okay


SPEAKER_03:
That looks like the fovea and retina.

The focus, all the attention is on the heart of the empire and then it's all dark.

So nice images.

And also that distributed model is very cool.

So Steven with a raised hand and then anyone else who wants to raise their hand or a question in the chat.


SPEAKER_01:
I'd like to bring in a bit more on that aesthetics and embodiment.

I put a couple of notes actually in the YouTube chat as well, just with a link.

I don't know if you've heard of the William Morris and Philip Webb Red House in Bexley Heath, Kent.

It talks a lot about the crafts because they actually had this whole thing in the 1800s where they were wanting to redo the crafts in the house and they actually had little holes in the ceiling so they could redesign the ceilings.

in a craft way for different events so this this push against industrialization so i was wondering when you mentioned about the better aesthetics by putting the corners i mean in some ways you you you you gain what could be seen at one level of aesthetic but there again with the craft and seeing some of the variation the the the reach of

And I wonder how you feel about this.

The reach of the embodied inference of the person making it is lessened.

So I wonder what your thoughts are about the ability to infer from the other direction what the process of creation was and how that aesthetic creates more soul, how that is in a way what the soul of objects are.


SPEAKER_05:
um so if let me try to sum up what i my understanding is of what you what you were saying so my understanding of what you're saying correct me if i'm wrong is that if something is crafted then it has more

um inherent value at least to the person doing the who crafted it so if somebody carves a carves a sculpture then that has more inherent value to them than if they

downloaded a model of a sculpture and 3D printed it.

Is that?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And on top of that, the ability for their embodiment of creation, their process of creation or their active inference or an active inference process of creation extends further out into that distributed network because someone who's further removed from that person could see that sculpture

and they could get closer to being them than being closer to being a cdc routing machine operator you know um well


SPEAKER_05:
i don't i don't well i don't know because if i see it if i see a sculpture then i can appreciate it hopefully but i'm far from being able to do it myself and uh so let me give you a more mundane example that

in many parts of the world walls used to have walls and ceilings used to have wet plaster applied to them to make them smooth and so plastering a ceiling getting the plaster on the ceiling the wet plaster on the ceiling and it's smooth it's a very difficult thing to do

And so people would do apprenticeships as plasterers and so on.

And so I can see that I can see, oh, yeah, that looks and maybe I could try to do it myself as well.

And all the plaster would end up on the floor and on me.

And then I'd realize that, oh, this is really difficult.

But it doesn't get me any closer to being a plasterer with the skill to get the plaster on the ceiling.

And if all dwellings depend upon, the construction of all dwellings depends upon such processes, then billions of people are going to remain in bad dwellings or no dwellings.

So if I understood you correctly, I don't think it makes me, but if I see somebody putting up some boards on a ceiling that are designed to give a functionally adequate and aesthetically adequate ceiling, and I see them do that, then I can do it.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool, thanks.

Just one.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one follow-up, just very quickly.

I suppose I could also... I'm not necessarily disagreeing with what you're saying at all.

I think I would also just... In terms of this distributed... Like if you go into a medieval house and you see a more rough-and-ready plastering, you may not know how to do it, but you could imagine the process of someone in bodies that did it, even if you couldn't do it yourself.

So I was wondering about that...

those kind of those removals as things get industrialized um which may be a you know maybe that's why sometimes we add texture back in and sometimes the more expensive stuff that we buy in the shops actually has texture put back in that can be actually expensive to produce


SPEAKER_03:
It reminds me of graffiti.

Like when you see graffiti, you can imagine an affordance that would lead to you having done that art versus like an Apple phone.

It's delivered like in the conch shell with smooth.

And it's sort of the extreme case where at the very least, it's more cognitive to understand how it was built.

And it definitely makes sense.

And things that are well-worn, it doesn't make them like better or more valuable.

It just makes them...

more able to play a part of a story in someone's life like putting up a kid's drawing it becomes about the person and latching onto a broader network of connections versus the very parsimonious and ruthless efficiency of an industrial design process that kind of seeks to um remove the human touch and like you know if it was a craft beer it has a little dirt it's character if it's a mass-produced one has a little dirt it's dirty

so we tolerate um different types of imprecision when we know that we're dealing with like our neighbor versus when we're expecting some international shipment of uh food um so scott with a question and then looks like you want to share something else steven


SPEAKER_04:
You know, it's interesting.

It's kind of the disgust reaction is invoked there, too, and that idea of that rejection.

And anyway, that reminded me of that last bit was there's a black box of AI that we talk about now.

Well, in a way, we have a black box of industrialization, right?

The thing was made, but we don't know how.

and it used to be that if you look this if you look at a shoe you can say i see the stitches and i see there's a cow over there i can see how you get leather and i get it then you look at a nike shoe and you're like i have no idea where that came from how it was made if it was glued what was put together right it's just so in a way we had that black box now me when marx was talking about alienation and industrialization maybe part of our alienation is not knowing our connection to craft

One of the things I talk to people about is in Europe, they have these rights called drop morale.

They're moral rights.

It's a copyright right overlay.

So if I sell you a painting in Europe, you can't destroy it.

I still have rights as an artist, moral rights in the art as a form of expression.

I think it has a Hegelian and Kantian background, but let's put that aside.

In the United States, if I sell you a painting, you can do anything you want to it.

We have a kind of Locke utilitarian notion of these expression and rights and individual rights.

So it feels like there's indifference here philosophically in terms of connection to expressive content.

In the drought morale context, you're not talking about industrial production.

You're talking about a copyright, which gets towards industrialization of guild type production, right?

Because it's a work of original authorship.

Again, maybe not directly related, but I just thought it was really interesting that in a way we're looking at that black box question again and humans being alienated from production.

And I wonder if there's some aspects in the work that we're seeing here of that de-alienating production.

I wonder if you could comment on that.

Nice question, Scott.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_05:
Can you now see a diagram?

It's sort of got a slopey line and some black boxes.

All right.

So it says here, increasing geographical and social distribution of production.

So degrowth.

Now, degrowth centralised industrial production.

This is happening with premature deindustrialisation.

In many countries in the world, they had some industrialisation and now it's going.

And we see that what's coming on is there's distributed industrial, distributed artisanal, and distributed DIY.

That's growing.

But probably what's still going to come from centralized industrial production is materials, formed materials.

And then components, and then local goods is becoming more distributed, then distributed infrastructure.

and then down here this so industrial production so this requires massive capital investment in fixed industrial manufacturing assets then you get industrial mass production and this is all based upon that you get higher productivity from that massive capital investment

but can this produce higher wages more goods purchased is there still scope for that will this lead to increased um by production employment evidence suggests not so this is non-industrial production for one of a better term so with this there's minimal capital investment inflexible

non-industrial production assets, non-industrial production, then there's higher productivity

And that's coming, and one of the options here is you can have higher value artisanal production.

So if shoes are handmade to some extent, as they are with a company doing that that was in Ethiopia, that can lead to higher wages.

And that's more goods and infrastructure made with personal commitment.

leading to increased paid and personal production employment.

And then down, lower price DIY production, lower expenditure.

So with prosumption, you could, for example, produce something with some degree of craft in it.

And that could produce higher production.

sales price higher wages and then at the same time your costs can be reduced so if you if you fabricate your own solar panels and you install them yourselves and suppose you can get all your electricity from that well then your energy costs go down so i'm seeing this as being um is that diagram very visible in your yep i made it large it's what you see on jitsi is not what the live stream is

Okay.

All right.

So that diagram, I think, is addressing both sides of this.

On the one hand, you're reducing this lower price DIY.

So there, the idea is to eliminate all redundant variation.

to drive down costs of essential goods as low as possible, so as many people can access them as possible, so they can fabricate and install themselves.

And the higher value artisanal production, this is using automated engineering, this mass engineering type of thing.


SPEAKER_03:
Pretty cool.

Reminds me of doing more with less and also Bucky.

So maybe we can just each have a final thought or a final area that we want to explore a little bit next week.

And then otherwise, this has been an awesome discussion.

Um, you just think for a few seconds for what would, what would be our, what was something that will stick with us from today or where do we want to take it in our dot two?

So, um, Scott first, then Dean.


SPEAKER_04:
I really like that.

Um, concluding thought on that really feels like that.

Um,

conversion of labor and attention and skills and the into embodied our embodied world and that feels like that dynamic is going to be very interesting to continue to explore in that last diagram there those pathways and the complementary pathways are fascinating and thank you for fantastic discussion thank you scott dean


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I just wanted to, I have to read this because I was listening and thinking about what I wanted to close with.

My takeaway today, besides the fact that I've got a new reference with embedded jet boots that I'm going to have to go and try to hold myself down with, is that perhaps life is an apprenticeship in wayfinding across scales.

So one of the things that I think that we're trying to do in these live streams is popularize active inference.

We're trying to drive down the costs, per se, of that entry barrier.

And so these kind of interaction processes, like we're having today in this point one, I think are giving us more of a sense of how that cost factor can be addressed.

beyond a room full of academics, which I think we all agree is kind of a small niche.

And I think that's something that we're all trying to make available to more people.

So that last reference that you made, Scott, was actually pretty helpful.

I think one of the things that we try to do in terms of an interactionist forward approach is in the point zeros we deconstruct

in the point ones we reconstruct and then in the point twos, which is next Tuesday, which I'm unfortunately going to be on a, I'm going to be away from, but that's where the new or next super ordinance sort of emerge.

And so that, I think the way that we're trying to set this up, whether it's going to,

I don't know when it's going to sort of take off, like when the jet boots will really be fired up.

But I think we're putting things in place for that to happen.

So I think on the one hand, I can kind of laugh about the fact that I'm going to have to anchor myself.

But on the other half, he says, anytime we can get creative with this stuff, it's worthy.

It's enthusiasm worthy.

So thank you for sharing with us today.

I really appreciate it.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you, Dean.

Stephen, and then Bloop.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you again.

Yeah, I really enjoyed it today.

It was a great, great call.

And I'm going to take away the idea of situated entropy.

I think that's really useful and has a lot of legs to it.

And I'm really interested in more about talking about pragmatic approaches to using the variation of expected free energy.

And I think that goes beyond what I was often maybe

pragmatism, which we've had here as a kind of philosophical thing, but maybe pragmatics in terms of design and application.

So thank you.

Brilliant.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Then just my closing thought is, uh, I'm really fascinated by your experience and theorizing and other publications on this, the past and present and future of that continuum or multidimensional space between craft and artisanship, the boutique, the bespoke, everything on that principal component side, and then industrialization and, um,

have we hit peak something you know have we seen the biggest solid state drives of all time in 2019 that was peak solids date or what will be peak what and what's been gonna be what are we at the bottom of what are we near the top of and uh some of the the roads and the paths that you sketched are pretty cool so Stephen Fox if you have any final comments


SPEAKER_05:
Scott, could you email me a link to the organization that you were mentioning?


SPEAKER_03:
I will email Stephen's email address to Scott.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, thank you very much.

Thank you all very much for taking the trouble to read my paper.

I was plowing a lonely furrow when I was doing it.


SPEAKER_00:
Lou with the last word thanks Stephen and you know you gave us so many additional references to read that that's really what I'm looking forward to doing between now and next week is digging into some of this additional literature that I've been made aware of cool so till next week we'll read the papers think of questions invite any colleagues or anyone else so all backgrounds are welcome to join so we'll see you all next week bye thanks bye bye

## MWWV3U-Llk4

SPEAKER_06:
Hello everyone and welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

This is ACTIMP Lab live stream number 27.2 on August 31st, 2021.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll follow video etiquette for live streams and see who joins us the short link is the calendar of live streams of the past and future and we did choose 28 um paper but didn't update this slide so check the link for next week's paper

today in 27.2 welcome to stephen greetings in 27.2 we're um joined by the two stevens as it were and um we'll have a few questions that we can

have slides for, the figures to go through, the paper itself, anything else that anyone wants to add.

And then of course, any questions that people type in the live chat as well, if they're watching live.

So we can just say hello, and then we can leave it to the author last, just to maybe open it up or just bring what they

We're thinking about our second discussion here today.

So I'm Daniel, and I'm a postdoc in California.

I'll pass to Stephen Sillett.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, hello there.

I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto, and I'm working on social topographies and other spatial meaning-making and hoping to find ways for active inference to shed light and all of that.

And I'll pass it to the other Stephen.

Is that okay?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, good day to you.

I'm in Finland, southern Finland, based at the Technical Research Center of Finland, and I'm ready to answer questions.


SPEAKER_06:
Cool.

So again, anyone who is watching can post a question, but then there's a few that we have lined up a little bit.

Just one theme that

stood out as far as selecting this paper was that it was applied.

It was applied to making the kinds of objects and supporting the ability to have the internet and computers as well as just objects like pens and things like that.

So how does this idea of helping us design physical systems, which ends up being our niche modification activity as an economy,

How do we help design, maybe if we're not an industrial engineer, but potentially people working on different kinds of projects that end up modifying the environment, maybe even influencing the same systems that industrial engineers use or using some of the same techniques, but people who are just thinking along these lines and want to take what you translated one step towards application in your paper and then think about how it applies in their own work.


SPEAKER_03:
cyber physical system so the latest trend in this is for example the in in the USA and it's called smart manufacturing and in Europe industry 4.0 and a big thing in this is the idea of having digital twins

or digital siblings or even avatars.

And the idea of this is that there's a physical machine

The physical process has got sensors on it and actuators on it.

And the sensors bring live data to the digital equivalent of this physical process.

And then it seeks to optimize by seeing what's going on.

So at a basic level is, although difficult to achieve, is predictive maintenance, for example.

So if nothing else, at least to stop the physical process from malfunctioning or even worse, stopping.

And there's no theoretical...

um foundation for for these industrial innovations for things like digital twins so of course there's a theoretical background of cyber physical systems but there's nothing to uh

anchor it with in my opinion that's very straightforward so if we look at life sciences generally we know that evolution has had millennia of and millions of years to iterate to develop elegant solutions

so it seems sensible at least to me to to look to the life sciences to see how nature's evolved towards least action and of course a free energy principle and active inference framework or theory are from the life sciences and

are in their essence, I believe, very straightforward, as one would expect guiding principles in nature to be, and applicable to human and artificial intelligence, to artificial agents.

So I believe it's useful to start from that basis.

And with the free energy principle, this very straightforward idea of the

trying to minimize the information gap between the generative model and the world itself so that's a very straightforward idea and I know there's the mass behind it is evolving all the time and there's some debating

uh courteous dispute about that but the basic idea seems straightforward so i believe it's therefore a good place to start and because this is such a basic idea isn't it minimizing the information gap between the the generative model and the world itself is this what i've said helpful in any way


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks for this.

I wrote a lot of it down.

Steven's lit.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, some really good points there.

One thing I'd be interested in to know what your thoughts are is, you know, we can end up kind of

adapting our niche through action as a kind of consequence of like following a path and these types of things.

And then we've got this kind of more constructed sort of deliberative

organizational work um in which you know the in many ways the point of that work can be to construct the environment um in which tools will operate you know so in some ways we we use the tools of our legs or the tools of being in in the world and it can sculpt that niche and also we can be very much sculpting a bounded niche so i'm wondering my question is thinking about

whether you see those that kind of distinction as being significant and how you see um the idea of like the free energy or the implications of the free energy sort of rolling out in the niche versus it

the generative model for that niche being embodied in some way.

So anyway, so how much is there something when it's embodied?

For instance, when you're talking about these total quality management environments where someone is trying to maintain, I don't know, ISO standards of manufacturing or whatever.

So I wonder what your thoughts are about


SPEAKER_03:
that whether there's distinctions there in terms of active inference being particularly involved or you know the free energy principle more more generally so um so i believe that um that that the core of quality management is just a an instantiation of

free of realizing the free energy principle through active inference.

That's what I've put in the paper.

But there's a bigger issue about that in nature, things are evolving.

And as I put in another one of my papers in entropy that, that, so there are no, things are evolving to some degree naturally in,

So if you just take predator and prey, they just, it's evolved.

And if you're a beaver trying to get back to the lodge that you've built, your niche construction as a beaver, and there's a links in, if you see in between,

where you are in your beaver lodge and there's a lynx a hungry lynx standing in your way then it's clear that okay you know this is a predator and i should this is not my as a as a beaver that's not my preferred observation

Whereas my beaver lodge is a preferred observation.

But what goes on in human needs construction and ecosystem and environmental engineering is not so straightforward.

So, for example, highly refined food.

it seems to be naturally to us like a preferred observation because it tastes good.

And so it makes life less strenuous and more stimulating.

So if the company making highly processed food, ready meals, so on, it's acting within quality assurance.

So it's doing, in my opinion, active inference to...

realize the free energy principle but what its output is it subverts the free energy principle the externality it subverts the free energy principle because what it's offering to us as consumers it seems to be

consistent with what revolve to do so it makes life less strenuous and more more stimulating but actually it's not good for our health in the long term of course now and then no problem but if that's all you if you live in a food desert

If you live in a food desert, we know there are lots of studies that show that unfortunately this isn't good for health.

So if you take one entity at a time,

It can be conforming with the three energy principle through active inference, but its output subverts the free energy principle because it makes our preferred observations, instead of being good for us, are not good for us.

But we only discover that 20, 30 years later.

So that's quite a lot to, I have a diagram in, let me see, there's a simple diagram of this in, paper, so the paper's called,

It's called Multiscale Free Energy Analysis of Human Ecosystem Engineering.

Okay.

And there's one diagram in it, figure one.

So it's in entropy as well.

Yeah.

Can I share my screen?


SPEAKER_05:
Sure.


SPEAKER_03:
May I remind me?

There it is, isn't it?

Okay.

All right.

Are you seeing multiscale free energy analysis of human ecosystem engineering?


SPEAKER_05:
Yep.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

So here's this diagram then.

There it is.

So what active inference is leading us to is that, from nature, is that our preferred observation supports survival.

An unwanted surprise, so an unexpected difference between

a prediction of what we're going to experience based on our internal generative model.

So an unwanted surprise.

So if the beaver's going back to its lodge, it's thinking it's going to have an unhindered path back to its lodge.

And there's the unwanted surprise of a hungry lynx standing in the way, and it threatens survival.

So that's natural free energy principle.

But through human

environmental engineering niche construction within that preferred observations can threaten survival so if my preferred observation is a comfy sofa a large

tv screen um and a device to change channels and do gaming and then i can just order some food in it comes and very tasty but perhaps not good for me i could be sitting down for

16 hours and then go go lie down for the remaining eight hours and these may be all my preferred observations but they're not good for me whereas the unwanted surprise that supports survival could be messages that okay we should not sit down for more than 20 minutes we should take lots of physical activity we should eat make our own food and so on so

what's going on in human endeavors which may individually conform to realization the free energy principle through active inference can end up subverting the free energy principle outside of that productive active of that production activity

And here there's some numbers.

OK, so.

So beaver could develop a new generative.


SPEAKER_05:
Right?


SPEAKER_03:
See here.

All right, so in nature, for a beaver, the preference distribution for sensory inputs is, for example, plus 10 for the protective pond, the lodge, 0 for woodland, and minus 10 for a hungry predator.

But then if there's a bit of pollution

you change like, okay, so now this is getting more complicated.

So there's plus 10 productive ponding clear water, plus two productive ponding polluted water, woodland zero, hungry predators still minus 10.

But then...

Or the example in this paper is in some island nations, very small island nations where there's a lot of imported cheap calorie rich nutrient poor food.

And then the preference distribution could be plus 10 imported food, plus two local food, minus 10 no food.

even though there's clear evidence that the imported food is not good okay so there it is okay so did that um did that


SPEAKER_06:
lit up the hands I I wrote down some stuff as well but blue welcome um go for it and then afterwards will be Stephen's life


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks.

So I was really curious about that subverted model and where you're maybe not optimizing, where what your preference is is not optimizing for survival.

And I think that you used it in the human context, but I can think of many contexts where animals do a similar thing, like a moth will fly into a flame.

and like a cat like i have these two kittens now in my house and they're like such trouble right like their curiosity like had my cat trapped in a box earlier today like i mean trapped like under furniture in a box which was like so bizarre so i mean i can think of of models where it's always not optimal and so is this something that you think excuse me what was the last thing you said

Is this something that you frame as uniquely human?

Because I can think of many instances of non-human creatures that also have less than optimal preferences.


SPEAKER_03:
No, I'm not framing it as only human, but what I'm

pointing out is is that so for example the moth flies towards the flame but where did the flame come from and the cat's curiosity luckily did not kill your cats that's good um but they were going into boxes but where did the boxes come from

So are these things, of course, there are misjudgments.

So all living things can make a big, and of course, with predators and prey, that for sure the predators are trying to get the prey, aren't they?

people can have and living things can misjudge the how far away the praise and so on and signaling systems can can get messed up and things but with human beings the scale and the determination of

activities is is much larger so i don't there's a there's an american author who's his latest book i think it's called hooked um that uh he studied the for example the food industry for many years and um he his view is that

there's nothing at all malicious going on but it's just if you're if you're in the in the uh a certain business you want you're trying to get as many customers as possible and you're trying to retain them and

With no bad intentions at all.

It's all good intentions.

But then the effects are, we discover, it can be decades later that, okay, this is what we thought was good is not so good.

Whereas in nature, wherever the flame, suppose it was a flame from somewhere in nature.

It was a natural fire.

Well, the natural fire maybe came from a bolt of lightning or something.

It wasn't a determined effort over many decades of ever-increasing refinement of a market offering.

But so there's more.

So what I'm showing in the paper that you read, that diagram about how the quality management system is like a general, it's like an active inference system to reduce free energy.

So it's optimum for the organization, but it can be suboptimal.


SPEAKER_06:
outside the organization so i think a general word to them for this is externalities just uh two quick things one was trying to explore that distinction between what is human other than the fact that we care about us and each other

What is human?

And I was just thinking of the ants foraging out there in the desert and they don't do margin trading or staking of their seeds to try to get fractional seeds and lending of seeds.

It's like layer one seed gathering

versus the higher order symbolic risks that the humans engage in.

So that and the niche modification to the scale, among other factors.

And then also what you said about misjudgment and the ability to misjudge because a lot of people think, oh, well, you know, if

just say traditional understandings of evolution are about fitness then why why do organisms fail why do all organisms not just maximize their fitness or if active inference is about reduction of uncertainty or using action and inference to reduce uncertainty then why do organisms fail and that's where the engineering perspective comes into play like

things just do fall apart.

And just because there is an imperative, whether to maximize fitness or to minimize uncertainty, the point is of the ensemble, there's going to be a distribution of performance.

Like 100 engines, they're going to have some range of failure times, the LD50 for some pharmacological experiment.

So just because the framework has sort of a...

imperative whether fitness or uncertainty reduction doesn't mean that it's utopian or like pangolossian it means that every single thing always works perfectly so just cool points that you raised


SPEAKER_03:
But also, Blue, I have imperfect knowledge, that's for sure.

And I wouldn't make, I don't know enough, and maybe nobody does.

Like what was just said about ants, of course, those words were coming from an expert, and I know next to nothing about that.

many of the behavior of many of animals i don't know so for sure it's not it's not clear-cut it's not one that humans are doing this and all other animals aren't doing it thanks steven select and then of course anyone who's watching live i think this raises some useful areas where we have spaces where it's very free energy minimizing as the main


SPEAKER_00:
kind of way of getting a handle on things and the broader active inference.

So for instance, when we're dealing with equilibrium chemistry, we're dealing with things which are often boiled or heated or made to be effectively dead, which is what happens in most engineering processes, in most food processes.

I mean, the main thing that Coca-Cola does by putting sugar in is it makes a preservative.

Someone was saying to me, oh, why can't they just use water?

It's an awful lot easier to distribute Coca-Cola than to distribute bottled water because Coca-Cola doesn't go off because it's got so much acid and sugar in it, it won't go off, right?

So what you've got is you've got these processes like you're talking about with TQM.

And I worked in the pigment manufacturing industry.

So they were bringing in the ISO standards there around pigment manufacturing because they were inheriting a lot of these formulas from like 100 years previous.

And it was all about minimizing and to make things reproducible and within tolerance.

But you're always dealing with, you never want things to,

be organic you don't want things to sort of to grow in any place in the in the process you want it to all be i suppose you could say dead right but then what's really interesting as you point out is okay that might be what happens within the containment of the factory or the industrial process but it will go back into the world just like it will when it's out now as a product it will be used in

ecological niche and it will not be a dead niche you know that food that maybe isn't even biologically feasible or some of those chemicals are not there's no biological route to create them there's no way to create fluoride compounds biologically it just can't be done it has to only be done synthetically so what's your thoughts about that

sticking with minimizing free energy more when you've only got dead equilibrium systems and then when it and what and how much active influence is involved in in that i suppose a first order is it only a second or third order and then what how things pop out into the niche in the community or whatever


SPEAKER_03:
um i think this is um open question i mean at one level maybe it's um in world systems theory this uh the the framing is that there are so now we're talking about whole countries rather than just um a company making something in one factory that

But there are inevitably core, I think the terminology is core countries.

So it was the Netherlands, then Britain, then the USA, now going towards China.

And then there are peripheral countries, two levels of those.

the argument is that the the development of the core countries is dependent upon taking from the the peripheral countries and um is this entropy being shipped out of the uh so if if you think of like a a factory as a heat pump

And you're getting all the entropy out of the factory operations.

But then where's it going?

Is it being shipped out of the factory?

And then is entropy being shipped out of the, pumped out of the core countries into the rest of the world where things are confusing?

So I don't know.

i mean that's a bit of a broad sweeping statement isn't it so but maybe maybe on one level that's what's going on if there's if you if you have supply chains value chains and you push all the physical disorder out of those by eliminating all the information uncertainty

then does that mean that the physical disorder has inevitably got to go somewhere else I don't know so but maybe and then but with but for sure there are externalities and

The interaction between levels is, because in human endeavors, it's a shifting matrix.

It's not just a simple hierarchy.


SPEAKER_00:
So I don't know.

Can I just ask one thing, just bouncing back off that?

I think it's interesting.

So in some ways, by...

Why are things sort of being taken out of the ecological niche effectively by putting in a processing plant where it's effectively dead?

You heat up your sugar cane wool material in a vat with sulfuric acid, and it's all dead.

It's basically a chemical process that gets put into whatever foods that someone's eating.

The consequence of having that dead plant

equilibrium based process rather than non equilibrium steady state process is that you're saying it puts a burden back on the ecosystem to try and reintegrate it in a way.

So in some ways, is it pushing entropy out?

Or is it just placing a burden on the system to try and find a way to cope with something that it can't naturally incorporate easily into its niche?


SPEAKER_03:
What do you think, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I'm not sure, really.

I'm not entirely certain.


SPEAKER_06:
on this on this um transfer of disorder it's definitely very important like for example when people say well look at the miles per gallon of this car and then okay but where did the metal come from okay but you know everything is tied to everything and how we evaluate policies ultimately and choices are critical and we do have to understand the relationships of um

the world's supply chains but then i thought well it's not like there's a like we're in a bomb calorimeter or a heat bath where there's a constant um number or proportion of some kind of uh negative activity like there could be an ant colony with of in a niche with very low

nestmate aggression or bodies like there's organisms with low rates of cancer or in certain niches you know it's not like a statement of them across all patterns and times but um but then again it was like so things do fail and there's no perfect state but then at the same time um it's not zero sum in the informational game it's not like we're trying to because we're getting energy coming in

So can we kind of transmute physical order with information disorder?

Do we have to like offload something to another place physically?

Does it bump up against any of the information limits or calculations or density of processing or storage?

Will we not be able to remember enough?

And then there's a catastrophic failure.

I mean, there's so many components to your question.

So I hope that we can all keep thinking about that.

Because it's important at the level of human activity with the supply chain.

And it's also an important long range question.

And if we don't have a long range preference, then we're not going to get there.


SPEAKER_00:
i have one more bit in there without yeah um i think what's interesting as well is there's this question of because i don't really believe there is strictly speaking neg entropy as such so in terms of um it's always kind of a relative thing but it's a useful it can be useful to think about it that way sometimes but ultimately it's always a change so i suppose the question

comes in in terms of how much is it around the ability to infer using entropy as much as it is about how you know how much is it to be able to use change in entropy or dynamics of entropy which can be a complex jungle niche you know it could be a lot of entropy change and a lot of stuff going on but it can be very healthy how much is that ability to

dynamically get at the variational free energy really important for life.

Whereas for us, it's all about, at times, in an engineering context, it's just reducing free energy per se, as a kind of an overall entropy term, which could be actually not so much about variational change.

It's just an overall general reduction in entropy.

I wonder what your thoughts are on that.


SPEAKER_06:
One thought on that on the biological side is what's an industrial engineering relationship, ecosystem engineering relationship that has persisted for billions of years or millions of years or just long time, however you want to see it.

The nitrogen cycle and some of the redox cycles in the bacterial relationships, biofilms, the mitochondria and the eukaryotes.

that's a shifting interface but on the other hand eukaryotes can totally count on that interface the powerhouse of the cell as they say to persist but then there's this other sense in which there is still a game theory and a failure mode and uh probably an interface of maximal uncertainty and the requirement for active sensing and trade-off costs

So, again, it's not like things, I think, work 99% of the time or 100% or 20% of the time.

That is kind of how the chessboard is set up for it to even be a winning board at all.

There's just niches where it can't work.

There's temperatures that the population will just die at, period.

So is our engineering conditions such that there is a path that's going to lead to what standard of life with what precision and uncertainty for what distribution of people?

Like did we way, way overshoot and now it's going to change back down to a different way?

Or is there some critical path to changing the distribution of industry?

Because it's not going to be any way it was from zero to 2021.

It's not going to be that way next year.


SPEAKER_03:
Are you still seeing my screen?


SPEAKER_06:
I'm not.

Could you reshare it?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

All right.

This is...

Let me do that again.

Are you seeing now, figure one meta ecosystems in the Anthropocene?


SPEAKER_06:
Now I see it, yep.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Yes, this is a paper, I'll go to the title.

But

This is not by me, by others, nothing to do with me.

I'm just a reader of it.

And one thing that they're saying that you can just, so here, this is the same, these are showing the same things, but A is where human impact on migration-based meta ecosystem.

It's just sort of implicit.

And on this framing of it, they say, OK, so we explicitly deal with the socio-ecological framework about, OK, so what are human beings, what mental models of human beings got, what regulations arise from that, and then that input into it.

So let me go to the top so you can see the title.

yeah embedding meta on embedding meta ecosystems into a socio-ecological framework and this is a response this is just a short paper it's a response to somebody who replied to that no it isn't actually nope i'm mixing up with another one there it is that's the title anyway so i'm wondering if

that may be that each way of making things has got its own

entropy dynamics and in this entropy and dynamics there's physical disorders reduced information uncertainty is reduced but maybe that then pushes the entropy out elsewhere

And then just doing more of the same thing, it's just not possible.

There's a limit to it.

And with world systems theory, this is the jist of it, that there are these core countries and there are peripheral countries that serve them.

And maybe that if there's one way of doing things,

You can't address the entropy that's caused by that by trying to do more of the same or trying to tweak that way of doing things.

And maybe something quite different has to be done.

And maybe there's something to be learned from landscape restoration ecology.

in this about that about um habitat fragmentation that that uh okay so here are these habitats and they've grown and they're thriving but these ones over here they fragmented they split and this there's nothing from them but dispersal

so as people are dispersing from um parts of the world that are suffering from premature de-industrialization that maybe there's something in uh entropy dynamics that

Could be that, well, doing this type of industrial production, this drives out the entropy, but it's shipping it out.

It's going out elsewhere.

And the entropy that is then in other places, it can't be dealt with other than by another way of existing.

Does that sound in any way sensible?


SPEAKER_06:
very interesting area multiple levels of nested modeling and uncertainty and how informational and thermodynamic uh aspects transmute into one another and arbitrage with one another or relate to each other so it's really interesting area

And one kind of thought on that, and again, to the fast food and things that might be unhealthy for us or policies that might be unhealthy in the long term for an organization, it made me think about being on a road trip

and knowing that there was going to be not just the hyper stimulating experience, which has been argued in many other frameworks, like in reward based frameworks, which is what, you know, dopamine, the reward molecule, reinforcement learning, reward learning.

They'll already have a framing for how those products hyper stimulating lead to failure modes of complex societies via hyper stimulation.

OK, so that is sort of a common stance.

With active inference, we can also kind of highlight the fact that those products have lower variability and that there's actually very bland foods that for reason of blandness or like a TV show or something that for reasons of narrative or aesthetic, just similarity, people will rewatch.

I mean, even to videos of types of people didn't expect,

Why do people watch the log burning or the goop playing?

Because they're sort of like the frontier of optimal foraging is about like how it's going to sound, which is a very small thing to be resolving relative to the more deeper, unsettling levels of information that could be revealed, like someone else's perspective of you or something like that.

So it's just interesting how we can actually

As you pointed out, the supply chains are modeled on one hand by these cyber-physical digital twin frameworks that need a unifying

approach and so on one hand active inference does provide that but then looking at the other side of the equation so what you didn't discuss in our paper for these weeks but where you left off when you start introducing the biological and the survival imperatives then we can also have some new ways of thinking about how those industrial products through precision hacking rather than reward hacking end up leading to maladaptive behavior with or without


SPEAKER_03:
reward incentivization are you um what are you seeing on are you seeing my screen now a different yep bird diagrams you see birds yeah generalist bird gap specialist butterfly

interior habitat but especially so this is another paper um i'll again i'll scroll up to the top she says tile um and it's making this point that uh landscape composition and configuration good different species perceptions and so the first one's a human and then it's different species and as it's neatly illustrated there that the same the same place looks different

to different species.

And so what I'm, and the kind of, the terminology here is that there are patches, habitat patches, and they can be corridors between them or stepping stones between them.

And the stuff, the other stuff is called matrix.

And I personally can't ever see that word or say it without thinking about the movies.

So that is a bit of a problem.

But in the landscape ecology, it is called the matrix.

So I think this could be useful.

of illustrating that well okay that so here's the road to the mine these uh from country companies built the road to the mine they built the mine and they're taking the stuff out and they're taking it back to their country to um do highly efficient manufacturing with it and then they send the completed goods back and but then what's left um

So if you just measure that in terms of GDP growth, then the GDP goes up divided by the number of people and it appears that prosperity is rising.

But if you look at it in this kind of view, it shows that, well, there's a lot of blank spaces left here.

And if we think about it in terms of this restoration or regeneration, it

It's looking at it.

Because of course, the perspective of the human, the generalist bird, the gap specialist butterfly, and the beetle, they're all equally valid.

And so let me see what this paper's called.

Landscape Ecology and Restoration Processes.


SPEAKER_06:
even within the same physical overlap one bug might be underground or in the roots or on the ground in the canopy so even the physical micro niche that different strategies or individuals experience in the same spot in the matrix can be very different so there's just such richness to this ecological thinking and

It's just challenging to bring it into play in some of our cognitive endeavors, but I think that is also changing rapidly.


SPEAKER_03:
So I've taken an ecological perspective in.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
we're doing one paper on meme ecosystems and rhetoric ecosystems by the end of this year but it's not active direct but maybe it'll have some relationship


SPEAKER_03:
Could well do.

Um, are you now seeing a table?

All right.

So what I've done here is I've, uh, done this from a, uh, ecological perspective and, uh, well, you can see these terms, but one thing in, uh, a restoration ecosystem restoration is mobile linking organisms.

But, uh,

that like birds and animals that can travel quite a long way they can go so after this is a forest fire then animals that can travel quite a long way particularly birds they can come they can fly and drop seeds and and things like that so this is an established concept mobile linking organism and i'm pointing out that this is something that we've done in mobile factories

And then energetics, another key issue is that if there's no, if all the energy, if all the matter and energy are flowing out, then life isn't sustainable.

And of course, there we are.

So I've done that.

Relating to my favorite subject, movable production technologies.

okay so um so that's like i think this is decentralized systems isn't it that the second point that was it that was the lead-in the segway okay nice how about oh go for it um stephen

Yeah, so I think this is the thing that if everything's, so at the moment, there's this centralization.

Oh, let's have a look at this.

I've got, I go again, so let's have a look here.

Are you, what do you see now?

Do you see a taxonomy?


SPEAKER_06:
Taxonomy and manufacturing distributions.


SPEAKER_03:
And their comparative relations to sustainability.

Yes.

All right, so here they are.

So there are distributed distributions and centralized.

And as we see, there's plenty of distributed options.

And then I compare them in terms of economic, ecological, social, and institutional sustainability.

And where I think active inference, I've just started to look into this agent environment systems.

and framing it as the agent has a generative model, but the world is a generative process.

The sensory inputs are coming from the generative process to the world.

And I think that this enables active influence to be linked to.

uh ecosystem dynamics and that that what we've been well what i've been saying before about this centralized distribution it um it's super efficient and it's getting uh engineering out physical disorder and information uncertainty but then

maybe that entropy is going somewhere else and maybe new information is needed to activate the more distributed options so do you think do you think that

that if there is a predominant paradigm, which in this case there is industrial manufacturing, based on the 300 years old paradigm, that if the information about how to make things is all about that and how to improve that,

And then

then does it become a zero-sum game?

So if it is shipping out entropy, like a heat pump, out to the peripheral nations, do you think it's a zero-sum game if there isn't alternative information?

So if nobody knows or there hasn't yet been conceived an alternative,

then is it like a closed system?

So in a closed system, the entropy, if it's pushed out of one place, it goes to the other places.

So is it a closed system?

Is it a closed system if all the information is about one paradigm?

So is this like, for example, am I in any way coherent here?


SPEAKER_06:
it's an extremely important question and um you know socio-technical systems political systems tokenomics that last forever are these the the uh perpetual motion machines of the 2020s and just a new level of uh computational uh detail and flourish but the same kinds of fallacies and then um

Whatever the thermodynamics of the Earth are, our niche is finite, and we've now made some potentially, whether or not the sum is zero or even negative, or could be positive but is negative, there may be informational and strategic games that don't resolve like heat baths.

So they can't be understood with some of the at least most tangible physical metaphors that thankfully guide the evolution of theories that are first principle like FEP, like Carl Friston with the wood lice.

Seeing the trajectory of a real thing and that's based upon health and longevity.

Blip.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I had a question about the table that you pulled up earlier, specifically about ecosystem engineering.

And so I'm not sure if it's just a term that I'm not familiar with, or in terms of engineering, I'm kind of naive.

So when you're thinking about ecosystem engineering,

I equate that to niche modification or, like, designing a system, like, even, you know, you could design, like, a world system.

So here it says it does not require overriding the natural evolutionary balance of equal ecological fitness.

But, like, I think about, like, the human paradigm.


SPEAKER_03:
Could I just... Sure.

Yeah.

But that's movable production technologies.

So what I'm saying there is that if you've got a movable factory, so a truck, if you've got a second-hand truck with a second-hand container on the back of it, it does not require overriding the natural evolutionary balance.

So it's specifically in relation to, if you look at the top, it says movable production technologies.


SPEAKER_02:
So how is that ecosystem engineering, though?


SPEAKER_03:
No, it isn't.

Yeah, but the point, obviously, this table is not clear.

And it is my responsibility.

It's not clear.

I am responsible for this.

But so the...

what is meant by this is because further up in the paper it's pointing out that if you have fixed production technologies so if you've got a big fixed factory you build a load of roads huge roads going to it and so on that involves a great deal of ecosystem engineering but a mobile a mobile factory it can just go over rough terrain


SPEAKER_06:
also to uh play devil's advocate against the author the enabling function of a realization of something something physical that can be an ecosystem engineering agent aka niche modifying agent

that it's going to have to be a niche modifying agent.

So this is just sort of then connecting that to mobile organisms.

So you have quote plants, AKA factories that are planted.

And then those can be like, they're not like trees simply, but

they're planted and so they have strategies not dissimilar from other rooted organisms but then you have mobile organ linking organisms so it sort of connects that all the things that mobile organisms like all animals do and can do with what a factory could do ecologically blue


SPEAKER_02:
So it just kind of makes me think about what kind of biological organisms take their niche with them, right?

Like maybe a snail or a turtle, to take a large component of their habitat, essentially, with them wherever they go.

The mobile technology made me think of that.


SPEAKER_06:
Yep, some people like to travel with light.

you know, just the keys or something.

Other people, full backpack every time.

Stephen, Silette?


SPEAKER_00:
I like this idea of something coming out of the factory, going into the space, and then things being secondhand.

That's basically the third, fourth, fifth hand.

Because there is something there that is delivered.

I mean, if you're going to use entropy, I suppose you could say...

low entropy kind of new vehicle, you know, whatever it is.

And slowly it gets incorporated into the ecosystem.

It starts to get scratches.

It starts to get this.

Then you see in India, you know, people start decorating the vehicle, you know, all this sort of stuff will happen over time as

it becomes somehow incorporated into the niche, I suppose you could argue.

I think that's quite interesting how that maybe starts to change the dynamic.

I'm still not sure whether entropy is so useful term or whether it's some other way of looking at a metric, maybe something to do with

pre-energy minimization as a thing, but yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
One other piece of that table that was interesting was there was multiple goals like sustainability and fitness.

So it is not a univariate optimization.

We're not just doing reward or utility maximization.

can choose multiple goals and we can have multiple human goals which is especially important for things that you know we care about but then this one of mutualism is interesting because a lot of times mutualism could be seen as like an outcome like the outcome of these two bacteria's relationship in the niche is a commensalism or mutualism or symbiosis whatever it happens to be but actually using this idea of the um

the outputs like the observation states of a higher level bayesian model being like the priors on a lower level nested model having a goal of mutualism is implicit in the lower level model enacting that mutualism because you're not accidentally gonna metabolically coordinate through millions of generations

so this is kind of an interesting way where uh like we have to want to make it work because we're not going to accidentally make it work and get along but that can be a hyper prior like a belief about how things ought to be or how we want or prefer things to be and then we enact policy along those lines


SPEAKER_03:
And by the way, in another paper, I do point out there are limitations to movable factories.

So I'm not saying that this is a panacea.


SPEAKER_06:
But it's sort of like, let's just say cactus versus like a desert animal.

You know, the desert animal, they have different ways of getting water.

And so, but when we can design the system, we can do trade-offs.

Like you could have something that's stationary, but then isn't just holding all of its own money because its money can be like on a digital system.

So it can have some of the advantages of a stationary organism from an ecological perspective, like a tree, but then like the value of the tree could be protected in some other way because we have some other affordance and or that forest could be de-risked at a higher level because it's like, oh, each one of these is, we expect to fail this many percent of the time or we have these quality control checks on it


SPEAKER_03:
I think a lot of thought is required about these things, isn't it?

I don't think there's one big answer, but at least I think one good thing about the energy principle active inference, it ties into action and that ties into energy.


SPEAKER_06:
so this is good yep when you're doing the thought experiment pure uh gedanken then it's like can be elucidating you know imagine you're going towards the speed of light or imagine you have a physical mass of this size but then there's no constraint which is again double-edged sword on some of these attributes that require action

And so that's an interesting idea that it ties us to active states, which is pragmatic and useful, but also

interesting and then also one thing on the affective system and then blue you can ask anything was just we've talked also about higher order variables in organisms being kind of like affective states whether they were the valence like positive or negative or the anxiety or the relative beliefs of an organism um so just

how do we design for when there's higher order states maybe even ones that could be considered affective either for people or for for organisms or i mean uh organizations that have this kind of organismal structure but blue


SPEAKER_02:
So interestingly, like this is going to touch on what you just said, but also going back to what you said about mutualism and the goal like has to be mutualism.

So I don't know.

I really have to contact the author of the book.

2020 paper, uh, Sims is his name, uh, how to count biological minds, symbiosis, the FEP and reciprocal multi-scale integration, uh, which I have found, um, very fascinating, but I would love to invite him on for a stream someday.

Uh,

the whole point of that is that there's like nested cognition happening at the biological scale and specifically that paper looked at the squid and the vibrio fischeri that like light up the squid in the in the light organ and you know in that kind of context as in an industrial organization there's like this nested cognition happening and where

The point of that was the goal wasn't necessarily mutualism, or in that case, symbiosis.

That's not necessarily the goal, but a bigger, grander organism was constructed out of the union between these two organisms.

And so perhaps in an industrial scale, that's also something that happens, right?

I mean, there's different parts to the organization that'll keep it running and you factor in all the supply chain things.

And so there's this nested hierarchical thing that happens and something bigger that has its own kind of cognition occurs as a result of this like mutual beneficial relationship.


SPEAKER_06:
We see the paper.


SPEAKER_03:
The paper?


SPEAKER_06:
We see the paper that Stephen just put up.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, there's some... I thought it said in here somewhere about

Yeah, it's different types of relationships.

So mutualism is beneficial, beneficial, and parasitism is beneficial, harmful.

But in between those, there's beneficial and neutral.

And there are several, in between mutual and parasitism, there are several,


SPEAKER_06:
other states and I just remember that the one of them is beneficial and neutral if I could give a kind of random thought on that and why the informational sphere might have a different entropy dynamic than the physical like the electromagnetic spectrum

that can have a lot of positive and neutral relationships like if someone's operating on two different wavelengths and one is only on one wavelength then they can be like of mutual service to each other or one could just be totally non-interacting because they can be overlapping in space and time at once and one person might not even have to be aware of it whereas in the tangible um i guess most embodied one can be

you know, only one thing per spot, that's zero sum.

There just can't be two atoms in the same spot.

Or maybe, you know, two laws playing out in one territory.

But informationally, there's probably a lot more multichanneling and that might give enough room for practical success, if not ultimate theoretical answerings.

Stephen Slitt at MBLU.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this brings up a lot of issues.

It's very fascinating.

I'm curious...

So coming back to this idea, and Daniel mentioned hyper priors, i.e.

things that we kind of have fixed.

I actually looked that up, actually, to make sure I understood it.

But things that we have is very distinctive.

I'm again trying to compare these

these types of environments where one where you've got an agent wanting or being able to just calibrate in amongst the noise and ones where you want to just keep it as clean as possible you know so

and and the challenges sometimes when you have a a quality management system in those places so for instance i suppose one thing that comes to mind is the experiment with a rat that they used to have and they've had for years about having cocaine or addictive substances and how they would they only needed to have a couple of times and they would be addicted and it was seen as this kind of proof of principle about addiction and how it works and then the more recent work where they instead of putting them in a bare box

and just having the cocaine or whatever they were being exposed to.

They were in a more ecological box where there was things to do.

And they suddenly found that the behavior of the animal was very different.

They wouldn't necessarily become addicted in the same way because they were in a better ecology.

Now, in theory, the entropy has gone up there, if we're looking entropically.

But for the animal, they've been able to engage and dynamically process that.

That's very different to how you would try and create a medical production line, right?

You want to keep it clean.

You want to keep it sterile.

um you want to have those sorts of things so i'm just curious about that that and then the danger maybe in biological system of this hyper prior say that some sort of kick or something that comes from food not having any other compliments around like as daniel you know so there isn't other things so that just naturally kicks in like the reward goal which may be always there as a default

If there's not other things to compliment, it starts running the show.

And that could be part of how we get into these maladjusted behaviors that you were talking about.

I wonder what your thoughts are on that.


SPEAKER_06:
Just quick point of clarification.

That's not what a hyper prior it is.

That's not a hyper stimulating stimuli.

A hyper prior is a prior over another prior in a Bayesian multi-level framework.

So it doesn't have to be accentuating or differentiating or extreme or maladaptive.

It's a general framework for the relationship between variables.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Well, I was thinking it was more of the hyper prior could give a, it's a, it's a, it's a fairly fixed prior, isn't it?

It's one which is a go-to solid prior and it's useful for being that.

I'm just saying having that present.

Hyper prior could be fixed or learned.

Or learned.

Okay.

Okay.

But it tends to be hyper prior means it's quite accurate, isn't it?

It's not fuzzy.


SPEAKER_06:
Hyper is, I think, a spatial designation like supra, not in the extreme case.

Hyper is only referring to the fact that it's a parameter about another parameter.

So it doesn't tend to be hot or cold or anything.

It's just the general phrasing.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, got you.

Got you.


SPEAKER_03:
so but stephen fox if you want to add anything then otherwise look okay we see the head yes so in now the effective system so here

Here's my diagram.

So in this, it's a little bit so small I can't see it myself, that if there's the same starting point,

but of a generative model.

So if the human being in the human robot interaction knows that, okay, so I'm in the predict, I'm human, I'm in the predictive processing business, that's what I'm doing, and

and um so i've got prior beliefs and i have got generative models then the robot

can be um what does that say personas and scenarios for robot based on the humans uh well that's world view but generative model and human readable model of the robot mind that corresponds to that so that's um and this is in

Aligning human psychomotor characteristics with robot and augmented reality.

In this.

So there's a bit of a model there.


SPEAKER_06:
That's also very related to the Felix Scholler's paper, Trust as Extended Control, Active Inference and User Feedback During Human-Robot Collaboration.

Ooh.

I'll put it in the YouTube chat.

I'll put it in the YouTube chat.

Great.

Go for this one.


SPEAKER_03:
So that's...

it's all in the past experiences physiology so this is body memory in the personality gender culture emotion reasoning in bio cybernetics so this paper i'm relating that to what um how this can affect interaction with robots exoskeletons and augmented reality there it is

We got here a few equations.

There it is.

But, hitherto, as I point out in this, that ... Yeah, so.

In previous production literature, the uncertainty of human behavior

This is true.

So in previous production literature, the uncertainty of human behavior has been recognized as a source of productivity, quality, and safety problems.

However, fundamental reasons for the uncertainty of human behavior have been framed previously as a black box.

So what I was trying to do there was relate it to open up the black box.

Frame it as an open box and then fundamental reasons can be aligned with production to facilitate improved production performance.

So that's as far as I've got with that.


SPEAKER_06:
it's almost like for the uh reward utility driven person you can say there's going to be an increased expectation of performance for the uncertainty minded you can say there'll be a reduced variance for the resilience minded or for the reconfiguration minded that there'd be an increased capacity to rapidly reorganize so i think that we'll have all or none blue


SPEAKER_02:
So my thoughts kind of dated at this point, but just going back to, touching back on to mutualism and the electromagnetic spectrum, when you were talking about how the signal can amplify,

there's also the possibility for the signal to cancel, right?

If the wavelengths are the same and they're heading in opposite directions, they just directly cancel each other out.

And it kind of made me think of cancel culture and also the relationship between...

you know, the parasite is also like a nested biological relationship, even though it's not necessarily beneficial, but there's still this nested layer, like the parasite is unable to function without the host, of course, but

the host embodying the parasite is a completely different cognating creature.

And I think about the zombie ants, right?

I don't know if you guys have heard.

Daniel can probably unpack the zombie ant a lot better than I can.

But it's a parasite that then drives the behavior of the ant due to some rewiring of the cognitive process.

So even in the parasite instance, there's still a greater cognizing structure.


SPEAKER_03:
And going back to neutralism again, the other terms are, so commensalism is where one gains benefit while the others, it hasn't, there's a neutral, no benefit, no harm.

And then there's a mensalism where one is harmed while the other is unaffected.

so they're in between so there's first mutualism benefit benefit then commensalism where there is uh benefit neutral and then there's a mensalism where there's um harm and neutral and then parasitism where there's one is harmed and the others benefits


SPEAKER_06:
I wonder if this has to do with the movement from maybe just its semantic, but from sustainability to regenerative.

Because sustainability, it's like the sustain on the guitar sound or the bell.

Like, let's sustain.

Let's have this car and sustain it or make it...

can be meant to mean more than that but it's about uh sustaining something that exists versus regenerating uh means like we're gonna have to be doing more than just persisting or stabilizing it that it has to be also actively having this process of uh of regeneration which always involves like multiple parts like bucky fuller saying that unity is plural and at minimum two

so then now thinking about how from polyculture of growing crops to monoculture green revolution and everything and then now oh maybe there should be the fish in between the roots of the plants and then the birds and then the mushrooms like this are these stable ecosystems that is what remains to be seen but some human modified

niches like sourdough bread and things and beer have been really successful so maybe there's higher order combinations too that could be really successful and be very productive but um this is kind of a framework that helps us at least explore that so that's quite cool


SPEAKER_03:
I was at, remotely of course, there was a launch, the South African Grassroots Innovation Program.

They did a launch yesterday with five lady innovators, and one of them was doing movable aquaponics.

And she seemed to have addressed

it's quite a sophisticated system, but it's all, uh, it's all set up in buckets that can be carried.

One person can carry the buckets.

That's the size they are.

And then you build up the, the farm by different, just having the number of the different, the more buckets you get, the bigger the, the aquaponic farm.

So that was interesting.


SPEAKER_06:
And then again, with a physical zero sum and then the electromagnetic or informational or financial non-zero sum,

If the overlapping is just given the tools that already exist in the ecosystem that you find yourself in, like you're dropped on Survivor Island, you still may be able to find some synergies.

Most of them you won't know, but over a long time, traditional ecological knowledge can learn about some medicinal combinations and, oh, these two should be combined for the boat and these kinds of things.

design, and this is related to what Steven said about the product being plugged into another external niche and what you wrote about the cupboard being attached to the wall, like we could design some pretty minimal pieces that might really scaffold

You build a trellis and then something grows within it.

So the engineering might not be huge to connect a few pieces that have a latent capacity to work together.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, the word you used there, scaffolding, has that got any...

Of course, I've heard it before, but does that have any basis in nature to your knowledge?


SPEAKER_06:
I would certainly say so from the spicule structures like in bones and the way that physical structures are scaffolded to embryogenesis and the developmental scaffolding of the uterus and the

for caretakers and it's different insects and humans and the family and so I think there's the cultural scaffolding and then all the way down to the microstructural cytoskeletal scaffold for scaffolding enzyme complexes that then can do very efficient things too


SPEAKER_03:
It's interesting because the problem with the challenge with so-called grassroots entrepreneurship and innovation is scaling it up.

That's the challenge.

That's what was said yesterday.

That's what was said in India.

There's this problem that solutions are developed and they work.

but they at best stay where they've been in the village where it's been developed.

It sort of just stays there.

And so scaling up and it's an open source, um,

would it's well there it is the technology is there isn't it open source ecology it's uh it's possible to put all engineering designs and bills and materials and um methods of work and all on the internet where anybody can access it but still things are not scaling up thanks blue


SPEAKER_02:
So I think about scaffolding in terms of like neural systems, but also in societal systems.

In the brain, like my PhD work was focused on finding a scaffold that will promote the growth of neurons across neurons.

across the lesion.

And so when you have a traumatic brain injury, the glia, which is like the natural scaffold, like freak out and form a scar to prevent like the whole rest of the brain from dying because cell death can be like this kind of cascading process.

And so the glia, and it literally results in like a hole in the brain where the injury was.

So I was looking at these bioengineered scaffolds that promote the growth of neurons across that hole.

So like it'll form a bridge or a structure, a scaffold for the neurons to grow.

And then, you know, in terms of the societal setting, I think about scaffolding as infrastructure.

And I mean, even in an organization, like you have to have...

bridges and roads and internet connections and utilities.

And, you know, these things are, it's the infrastructure that's necessary for kind of new branches or systems to start up.

And even in like the farming terms, it's like, you know, the, like, I don't know, here we just call them the ditches, but like the irrigation canals, I guess is probably the proper term.

Like that, you know, the, where you can,

get a river to flow off into different subsections and then irrigate the farmland with that water.

So I think about that as the scaffold.


SPEAKER_06:
Awesome, Blue.

Nice connection and sounds like cool PhD research.

We see your screen, Stephen.


SPEAKER_03:
So you see Grassroots Innovation Program?


SPEAKER_06:
Yes.


SPEAKER_03:
okay yeah so that was that was yesterday um although the press release was in july but it's not it's not detailing the book but there we are this is the um so in south africa there were the rate of unemployment is i think officially it's more than 30 percent but um unofficially it could be as high as 50 percent and uh

This is so they're now trying to address at least partly through this grassroots innovation problem program.

So one, and there are, there are similar, and we know that the book decades ago, small is beautiful.

And Gandhi was before that was promoting this, but it does, it's not scaling.

And so there are these in-between industrial production.

There's just this ever-increasing wasteland.

But efforts are going on around the world.

And grassroots is a good term because it's just growing from evolving naturally, isn't it?


SPEAKER_06:
Sounds like really interesting work.

Thanks for sharing it.

Stephen, select.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, actually, that ties in.

I actually was running a project in South Africa, funny enough, and working on looking at how to create community-driven innovation through strategic conversations at the community level.

And there is an interesting difference between grassroots, I think, and community-driven.

So I think that grassroots is often kind of tied to

It's like the base level of the organizational structures.

You often hear it with political campaigns and stuff.

It's the grassroots.

But those grassroots are the grassroots of a campaign where people sort of get into there, which is a little bit different to the kind of a community-embedded, community-driven scale.

And that comes back to this scaling question, which is the same thing that had the problems that... So the scaling is now... When you talk about scaling up, I think that's a big...

challenges how does stuff get scaled up and they often are talking as well about scaling out if you have a program or scaling deep

So some things might scale up because they go up to a higher level and then they basically get dropped down again.

But how do these things get scaled out?

So there may be some, I think you're tapping into a few multi-level issues, which I think are quite important.

So I wonder what your thoughts are about

going into these kind of embedded local contexts to create new seeds, so to speak, for like adaptability and innovation.


SPEAKER_06:
It's like a seed is a biological planting metaphor.

The scaffold is highlighting the industrial component of a biological process.

Like you still need the tomato seed.

So it's not saying it's not community driven.

It's just like a soil metaphor.

Like how these...

communicate what our vision is and they really do matter.

And so they're really important points.

Actually, here's a comment from Kevin in the chat who wrote, is the scaffolding a schema or is this supposed to be anatomical?

That is, is there some physiological analog in the human nervous systems or genome that corresponds to the scaffolding?

I think Blue made an awesome point about the glia and about connective tissue being an immune tissue being scaffolding physically for like the synapse and for cells.

And then the genome, oh yes, the chromatin scaffolding goes deep in the nuclear pore structure.

And that's a whole cool area.

And maybe there'll be a day for transcription factor active inference soon enough.


SPEAKER_03:
so um what you're saying these hands this is a an organization um uh active in botswana and everything they're doing there there we are you can see yep

yeah so this is led by uh fabisa and he he's um applying design methods in um communities in southern africa with great effects

And this is all, so the idea is that people are, with their own hands, are developing innovations and, as you say, can be scaled out.


SPEAKER_05:
Ooh, yeah.

Scaling, it's almost, oh, go on, scale.


SPEAKER_03:
So for example, in that part of Africa, there are many movements, like many initiatives going on.

But it would be very beneficial if there was a...

framing, a kind of unifying framing of what they're all doing, which can be seen as an alternative form of socioeconomic development rather than just as something that's, well, fundamentally inferior.

to the conventional model of industrialization.

So all suggestions are welcome.


SPEAKER_06:
i just put in the youtube chat a volume uh by caporel grismer and whimsat developing scaffolds in evolution culture and cognition and so the paradigm change as steven kind of hinted at very early is like from systems where we eradicate the life to where we welcome the life and all that it brings

and we don't need to build that and we can't build it we're not going to be able to compose the lipids and the millions of years of fault tolerances into some sort of uh you know monster that helps our living systems we don't even have to though we just have to build an engineered scaffold and the scaffold can be radically different than what the final product looks like the scaffold can even disintegrate if it's biodegradable

So it's a really interesting area that this discussion went, which was like towards the engineering that makes us think of like foundries and some of the technical and precision processes, tying them to some natural processes like this evolution culture cognition volume does and unifying frameworks.

those uh together almost point away towards engineering a scaffold not a booster rocket or just a bunker but bunkers might come into play of doing some scaffold design so that there could be reduction of expected free energy through deep time so pretty interesting um point steven thanks for sharing all these resources too blue


SPEAKER_02:
Just a quick comment.

You were talking about the scaffolding disintegrating.

Sometimes the scaffolding is designed to disintegrate.

I think about in biological terms, we have webbing between our fingers that enable the growth of the digits.

And then it's designed to be eroded in the developmental process.

So sometimes that's part of it.

Or even when you get a wound sealed,

You have the stitches that form the scaffolding so the healing process can occur, but they dissolve inside the wound.


SPEAKER_00:
Actually, that's quite cool to think about that as well in the processes.


SPEAKER_06:
And when we, whether in areas that we live in or areas that we don't live in, when we plan to intervene, are we planning to make something that sustains itself?

Or are we planning to deliver or co-create a scaffold that is planned to disappear?

Those are really different views on local and distal intervention.

Steven, with the screen share?

What's on the screen, Stephen Fox?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

So now this is an initiative called Connected Hubs.

So this is coming from the Southern African Innovation Support Program.

And the idea is that there are hubs which support

innovation and entrepreneurship and these are this particular one is um so as you can see the connectivities here in this part of africa and what the idea is build capacities and support and

So it's connecting different

hubs together and so a hub it's just what that means is it's just that usually they've got a physical location and they there are people you can contact there remotely and physically who've got can help with developing ideas for entrepreneurship and social entrepreneurship so this is something that's going on

it's connecting hub so maybe there's well this is hopefully this is the intention is this persists after the southern African innovation support program is on the second phase now after it finishes so this is one

suppose it's summed up in this uh diagram here this idea that there are more and more hubs in and the european commission is um trying this uh africa eu digital innovation hubs


SPEAKER_06:
We'll see this and then there we are.


SPEAKER_03:
So this is kind of things that are going on.

So I'm involved in this project, sustainable network of digital innovation hubs.

So that's something that's coming down from the African Union and the European Union.

And the aim is that this is a somewhat new way of facilitating socioeconomic development.

And the idea is to try to get auto-catalytic effects by more connections, more dynamism.


SPEAKER_06:
Well, they're always welcome to come talk about active inference at whatever stage.

In the last few minutes, we'll just have Stephen and then Blue.

And yeah, just give kind of last thought or question here as we close out.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, yeah, no, thanks.

Very interesting.

And I suppose with active inference, I think...

very interested in these developments.

It's actually how I ended up getting into this, because I was trying to develop community-based hubs in South Africa, funny enough, in rural Maputo land.

And I think what's quite interesting is this idea of a unifying framework, rather than trying to reduce down all the complexity, which is what I was doing for far too many years, is really amazing.

And the other thing that all of these

aspects that you just shared and that ties in with this lab is it's about participation.

As soon as you bring in participatory processes, you bring in these active inference dynamics, you bring in this complexity, you bring in this need, but also the ability to do what mass manufacturing can't do.

But like I thought you said, it's seen as being inferior in our culture.

And I think seeing it as being vital but also challenging is really cool.

So I think that's something I'm going to take away because I won't actually be able to stay too much longer.

I've got to jump on another call.

But that's something I'd like to take away.

So thanks very much.

Brilliant.

Really, really enjoyed today.

Thanks so much.

Thank you, Stephen.

See you later.


SPEAKER_06:
Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
So just a couple of final thoughts.

John Boyk and his idea of connected hubs.

I mean, he was on like probably six different live streams and he gave a very good overview of sustainability and the, you know, how to build an architecture toward a sustainable future.

So the connected hubs kind of reminded me of that.

And then the one other thing was just about scaffolding and, you know, how do we build kind of a scaffolding for our cognitive architecture?

And is this a scaffolding that's maybe designed to dissolve?

And so I think about, you know, scaffolding for our cognitive architecture as education, right?

Like we send the kids to K-12 and they, you know, form this like shared space.

understanding of reality and two plus two is four and how to read books and so forth.

And this kind of education, maybe Daniel will remember, at least in college, when I started college, in biology, many things are so complicated.

that they just give you like a very broad overview that doesn't make sense.

Or I was always searching for like, but that doesn't make sense, but that doesn't make sense, like in your entry level classes.

And then as you get like deeper and deeper into studying biology or biochemistry, you start to kind of understand electron transport and these different like things that are very like micro, but the macro level doesn't make sense without understanding that micro.

And in my mind, this kind of educational or that way that I was taught in college was kind of like building a scaffold that was designed to disappear.

Anyway.

But anyway, yeah, thanks for the talks today and for coming on.

It was good.


SPEAKER_06:
If I can give my last comment and then to the author for the final comment, I just love this idea of the biochemistry education as the removable scaffold.

You learn at once that there's the essential amino acids and then you never wonder why on the nutrition label is there essential and non-essential.

You forget the details, the side chains, the C minus on the test, that all disappears.

with something that's generalized but otherwise we would look at macroscopic phenomena like why can't I swim when there's this algae in the lake well there's some molecular answer we could know at least how to sense make in that area might even know the specific details but also it can be removed in a way but can it be removed intergenerationally

a chemistry to alchemy reversion with similar or different tools that would be quite something so steven with the um final notes but just wanted to say thanks for coming on these streams and it was just like super interesting discussions


SPEAKER_03:
Well, thank you very much.

It was my pleasure.

And I look forward to further cooperation with you all.


SPEAKER_06:
Great.

If you or any of your collaborators on these projects or your contacts in these hubs wanted to present on this or facilitate in any way, then we can talk another time.


SPEAKER_03:
Very good.

Thank you very much.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks again, Steven.

Thank you, Blue.

Bye.