## 99xQbWozPjc

SPEAKER_02:
All right, hello and welcome everyone.

It is Act Inflab live stream number 36.0 and it's January 13th, 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

And also, if you're watching along live, please write any comments or questions you have in the live chat.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

And thanks, Blue, for helping a lot with those slides and for coming on, because this will be a fun convo.

Go to ActiveInference.org to learn more about how to participate in any of the lab activities or bring some new idea to the lab.

okay here we are in live stream number 36 in the second half of january 2022 and the goal is to learn and discuss this paper by matt sims and giovanni pizzulo from 2021 the paper is called modeling ourselves what the free energy principle reveals about our implicit notions of representation and

As with all .Zero videos, the video is an introduction for some of the ideas and a hasty review.

So it's not a review or a final word.

We're going to have the upcoming two weeks to talk more about this paper and hopefully talk to some of the authors or any other people who are interested in this idea.

and uh get involved if you want to talk about the paper so let's just start with saying hello and an introduction and then what we were excited to read about the paper i'm daniel i'm in california and was excited to read yet another paper on representations and the fep because it feels like we had a stretch back there of five in a row or something what about you blue


SPEAKER_01:
I'm blue, I'm in New Mexico and I really enjoyed Matt Sims paper on symbiosis that we did a while ago.

And I thought this paper was really neat and really a clear elucidation of the different categories of representation and how like there's overarching like representation and non-representation and then several different layers within that.

So I thought it broke it down in a really clear and concise way, even though it's a lot of material to digest.


SPEAKER_02:
Want to ask the big question?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

The big question of the article was, can the free energy principle help us advance or even resolve the long lasting debate on internal representation in philosophy of mind?


SPEAKER_02:
It's a long lasting debate.

So this is like the dot zero of dot zeros because it's clearly a topic you could spend a lot of time on.

So that's our disclaimer is it's a longstanding debate, but here's kind of a meme slide.

So it's the first section of this paper right below the title.

It has this quotation from Walt Whitman and it says, hold it up sternly.

See this, it sends back.

Who is it?

Is it you?

And then here are several different images and just think about your perception of these images and the cultural significance that you might attach to them or the way that black and white pixels or gray pixels on a screen give the illusion of depth or remind you of an experience that you've never had.

So that's kind of trippy and representation gets at some of those issues.

That's one non-philosophical take on it.

What are they going to aim to do in this debate, which we're going to sketch out the sides of in this talk, or I guess this discussion?

Do you want to read it, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

So the authors argue that even if the FEP can't solve this longstanding debate, it can play an invaluable role in revealing our hidden assumptions about the very notion of representation and can create some common ground to discuss and negotiate them.

So they say our general strategy is to use the FEP for conceptual clarification of different notions of representation.

We work backwards from representational or non-representational interpretations of the FEP's constructs to the various notions of representation that motivate those interpretations.

So they claim that it emerges from their analysis that the FEP has been or can be used to implement various kinds of computational models which satisfy the requirements of certain theories of representation.

Hence, the question of whether or not the FEP entails representations depends on what notion of representation one uses in the first place.


SPEAKER_02:
gonna unpack that a lot but just wanted to give the first coat of paint on what they're aiming and what they claim to do so i'll read the first half of the abstract predictive processing theories are increasingly popular in philosophy of mind such process theories often gain support from the free energy principle fep a normative principle for adaptive self-organized systems

Yet there is a current and much discussed debate about conflicting philosophical interpretations of FEP, for example, representational versus non-representational.

Here we argue that these different interpretations depend on implicit assumptions about what qualifies or fails to qualify as representational.


SPEAKER_01:
The next part, we deploy the FEP instrumentally to distinguish four main notions of representation, which focus on organizational, structural, content-related, and functional aspects respectively.

The various ways that these different aspects matter in arriving at representation or non-representational interpretations

of the FEP are discussed.

We also discuss how the FEP may be seen as a unified view where terms that traditionally belong to different ontologies, for example, notions of model and expectation versus notions of autopoiesis and synchronization, can be harmonized.

However, rather than attempting to settle the representationalist versus non-representationalist debate and reveal something about what representations are simpliciter, this paper demonstrates how the free energy principle may be used to reveal something about those partaking in the debate, namely what are hidden assumptions about what representations are, assumptions that act as sometimes antithetical starting points in this persistent philosophical debate.


SPEAKER_02:
There's really two or three pieces to this paper.

There's an introduction and an abstract.

I guess we can delete that.

The first part introduces a short summary on the free energy principle.

And we'll see that action, perception, cognition loop.

The bulk of the paper is in these four segments of each with a dyadic relationship of the representational and the non-representational perspectives.

And that section is a lot like a literature review and a philosophical taxonomy of different perspectives and arguments related to representation and FEP and these four subdivisions.

There's then a

addendum on evolutionary function specifically and that's apt as nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution as they say and then section five kind of turns a mirror back on the process and thought just like those earlier images with the mirror and that's where fep

differences in perspective are used almost as input data for theorizing and speculating about different things, which we'll get to.

So that takes the authors then to the conclusion.

So it's a pretty wide ranging paper.

And the keywords that are here are active inference, free energy principle, predictive processing, generative model, internal representation, action-oriented representation, inactivism, forward model, and Markov blankets.

There's no single path or single slide that would do justice to all these keywords.

So we're just gonna kind of jump in and knowing that some people will be really familiar with some of these terms and others will be hearing about them for the first time.

So first, the big topic is representation.

Now, this is just a quote from the paper.

Whether or not living organisms have or need internal representations is an old and fiercely debated topic.

So we kind of unzipped that citation to add the titles and the links and just some of the images from these citations.

So if these topics or any of this body of literature you feel like is well-motivated or well-reasoned or you've never been exposed to it, that's sort of the continent we're on.

And it is such a large continent.

So the authors write, such a debate is reiterated within the predictive processing view.

So they're gonna tell the story of representation from predictive processing as sort of a implicit starting point from a more specific and mechanistic angle, i.e.

assuming the FEP is a good model of living organisms, does it entail the notion of internal representation or not?

So it's almost like we're conditioning our analysis, whether it's a counterfactual or not,

on fep being used instrumentally so we're going to use it just like we would use a ruler not by questioning the ruler against known objects but by going to unknown objects and investigating them so that's the way that the fep is going to be used in this very large scale topic and complex area of representation any comments blue

All right, another big topic and word that comes up in this paper, but also a lot of other of our discussions is inactivism.

and so who better to hear it from than the radicals so herrick 2014 i think it's a thesis why radical and activism is not radical enough a case for really radical and activism so take it up with the author if this is oversimplifying or that's kind of the joke slash um appeal here it is oversimplifying and here we see three different uh frameworks contrasted against each other

Cognitivism, radical inactivism, and then really radical inactivism.

And cognitivism differs from inactivism on the top row in that cognitivism says basic cognition is representational and inactivism is going to be rejecting that claim on all accounts.

then where this author is saying that you could even go further into the inactive camp or forest or whatever is you could even deny that linguistic cognition is representational so even if it looks symbolic and it looks like it has some representational characteristic and it's the gray zone that makes people go oh okay maybe there is some redeeming aspect of representation you just have to keep on denying it so

Maybe we can pick that thread up again, but that's sort of the lay of the land of maybe the center and activists, the moderates, and then the extremists.

Blue, anything to add?


SPEAKER_01:
No, it's just, it's so interesting to really think about representation and the brain.

I mean, coming from neuroscience, actually, okay, I'll add something.

Coming from neuroscience, it's interesting to really think about, I mean, the visual cortex is very unique in the sense that we like know that there's representation that is replicated in the brain.

But everywhere else, it's just kind of like, you know, we've never found like the word for apple in the brain somewhere.

Like there's no like apple neuron.

So it's just an interesting, I don't know, just a juxtaposition, I guess, about representation and language, thinking about it in terms of the brain.


SPEAKER_02:
Also one really important aspect that we didn't mention is it's about action.

Like it is basically saying that action is, it's related to embodiment and all these other things, but in activism is just focusing on action and what that means.

All right, free energy principle, which we're gonna spend a lot of the discussion on.

It's an integrative proposal on adaptive self-organizing systems that remain far from thermodynamic equilibrium.

So that would be cool if we had one common framework for things that maybe were far or close to equilibrium.

Currently, we only have some of those areas of phase space.

It starts from the premise that in order to survive, living organisms engage in reciprocal action perception exchanges with their environment.

They must do what they can in order to remain within a neighborhood of viable states.

That's kind of the cybernetic regulator insight.

Then the bottom paragraph.

The idea is cast in Bayesian terms by assuming that ecologically adaptive states constitute the priors of the agents.

The states that an agent prefers to visit become the states that it expects to visit.

Hence, minimizing surprise or its long-term average, which is entropy, becomes a primary imperative for living organisms as it permits them to counteract an otherwise unavoidable process of dispersion and loss of integrity, which kind of closes the loop back with the resistance to dissipation that was brought up in the beginning.

So this is kind of one FEP boomerang from starting with a focus on resisting dissipation and then moving through the action and perception loop to ecological preferences and back to the reduction of uncertainty and thus resisting dissipation.

A partitioning that is natural or at least complimentary to the FEP is the Markov blanket partitioning.

And we've talked about this in several other streams, so we won't go into it in too much detail.

This is from 26.

And the Markov blanket condition, at least in its more narrow slash technical sense,

is referring to some set of nodes representing statistical variables.

And that set of nodes that make up the blanket makes some other sets of nodes, two other sets of nodes, which we can call the internal and the external states.

It makes those two sets conditionally independent.

And the edges are statistical influence.

Blue.

What else would you say about Markov blankets?


SPEAKER_01:
They say it here beautifully.

So the blanket states act as an informational boundary between internal and external states.

And that's like the simplest way to think about it, right?

Like my skin acts as a barrier between myself and the world.

The blanket acts as a barrier.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, cool.

Okay, leaving FEP land proper, we can zoom out to some related topics that sometimes get brought up in discussions of FEP, but often don't.

So first is the predictive processing framework.

This is drawn from a citation that was in the bibliography, but not sure if it was in the text, Highway 2020.

And this is a paper, New Directions in Predictive Processing.

so predictive processing asserts that perceptual and cognitive systems engage in prediction error minimization enabling approximate bayesian perceptual inference and some but

apparently not all authors emphasize action.

So Clark and Howie famously and recently have emphasized that action is essential to predictive processing in the form of active inference where the system infers its own policies.

So really emphasizing that the predictions are not just about sensory inputs,

but causes of sensory input, hypotheses about latent unobserved causes in the world, and also one's own action and policies, what one expects to do.

And there's a really awesome supplemental file for this paper that includes a great literature analysis and a lot of keywords and unique information

predictions and lists of empirical evidence.

So this is really awesome work and it'd be great to hear from people who study predictive processing or are more familiar with it, how they see it in relationship to active inference and FEP.

Something that's in the overlap of predictive processing, Bayesian statistical theories, active inference is the idea of a generative model.

So let's recall from,

DCM, the dynamical causal modeling, which we talked about in the previous weeks in number 35.

And here in DCM, it's appealing to biologically grounded models and dynamical systems theory to create a probabilistic generative model of hemodynamic fluctuations.

So what is a generative model?

It's basically opposed to a descriptive model.

So why would one use a generative model in statistics?

Because these types of models can be run in both directions.

They can be fit from data, but they can also be used to generate data.

And then they can be used in different ways because of that capacity.

Lower dimensional generative models can be very computationally efficient because they only have to be updating a few parameters rather than keeping track of every single data parameter.

And then a little bit more on the interpretive layer or beyond the merely statistical, generative models capture some of these open-ended and creative or complex dynamics that are associated with action and perception and cognition.

therefore there are links to not only the cognitive sciences but also philosophy and phenomenology so it's kind of an idea from statistics that gets connected to some of the fundamentals of neuroscience and philosophy and uh anything to add on that blue


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So just when I think of the generative model, having listened to so many people describe it, my favorite description is almost as like the recognition model is more like the hardware or like the states.

And then the generative model is like the software, the action between them or like the dominoes and the like stack dominoes and then the cascading wave, right?

So the dominoes would be the recognition model.

And then the generative model is the relationship between them, the cascading wave of,

I always like to use that analogy.

It's clear for me.

Cool.


SPEAKER_02:
And here's one more slide from 26, where the idea of the Markov blanket, which we pulled from 26 as well, is connected to the idea of a generative model

in the section on predictive processing.

And so in this paper, so go check out number 26 or the paper on Bayesian mechanics to learn more.

But the idea is that it's possible to use that Markov blanket partitioning so that there's the blanket states,

statistically isolating internal and external states and then there might be some systems where those partitioned internal states are acting as if they are doing inference on external states so that would be like if i

said i'm gonna hold up three fingers and put it behind my back and then you had a generative model that was about what was the state of that unobserved variable and uh that's something to look more into from the details on generative model as with other papers and that kind of brings us to our last keyword which is active inference so we'll go into a little more detail here

They describe that active inference agents are self-evidencing, which is to say that because minimizing free energy over time is equivalent to maximizing Bayesian model evidence or self-evidence, engaging in long-term

active inference agents seek out or generate those sensory samples that maximize the lower bound on the evidence for an implicit model of how their sensory states were generated as such active inference agents author evidence for their own continued existence via free energy minimizing model optimization so

active inference is using statistics to operationalize some of the information thermodynamic like formalisms of the fep so it'd be a more narrow interpretation that that carries no or little philosophical baggage or claims to how the world really is it would be a more broad or stronger interpretation to think that this is capturing the actual information dynamics or the actual thermodynamic

relationships of systems but the instrumental usage is more of a statistical similarity or at least attractability argument and that is not without precedent not even close because the variational bayesian methods which minimize or optimize this quantity called the evidence lower bound start maximizing the lower bound for how good the evidence is

And others in many places have motivated this fundamental component of modern Bayesian statistics from multiple different areas.

And it's kind of like equations are true.

So equations can be linked to each other.

And it's just kind of cool that these KL divergences, as well as free energy and the information or description length criterion all align.

And that's not even like an act-inf synthesis.

applying that to inference on action is something that is bringing together a lot of these ideas from variational Bayesian methods with a lot of ideas from control theory, cybernetics, inactivism, et cetera.

And again, we can explore back and find out which ideas came from where, but just to keep in mind is like, these pieces were not tied together by act-inf.

Those are extant relationships in the literature, but act-inf does integrate,

the free energy principle and that center meme that they started with that things have to resist dissipation with all of this philosophy and more quantitative areas that have to do with action and perception and then in the dot one and dot two we'll go more into the variational and expected free energy but

kind of wanted to just give a little thought on active inference and if someone has a different thought it'd be awesome to hear it as well but this paper was very precise and very um subtle in how I thought about some of these areas so I think it's really good to be clear about what we're talking about in this case okay onto the paper all right

So this is going to be a slow roll of the introduction.

There's a growing consensus in computational and systems neuroscience around the idea the brain is a predictive machine, which uses internal or generative models to continuously generate predictions in service of prediction, action, and learning.

So starting with the idea of prediction.

Second sentence.

One of the ways that people are studying prediction in the brain is predictive processing.

So we talked about that a few minutes ago.

free energy principle is extending predictive processing by providing it with a fundamental principle of adaptive self-organization that's the resist dissipation meme that isn't intrinsically within predictive processing framework which might describe audio processing in a radar signal

And so that union of FEP and predictive processing are starting to become prominent outside of systems neuroscience, which might seem like their natural niche or origin, but it's also the case that philosophers in the philosophy of mind are starting to think about it.

And despite that attention, the authors are arguing that some of the implications for FEP's

existence remain widely debated i think we can

agree on that and they're going to focus on one of the prominent discussions that they think is the most prominent which is whether the FEP is representational or non-representational and then to what extent it is also bearing on debates related to internalism action orientation and activism so just it's all over the map it's a multi-dimensional philosophy face space with the FEP and it's not totally resolved but that's what they're going to go into in this paper

OK.

Oh yeah, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So they note here that philosophical discussions or representation wars about the FEP have typically been focused on four aspects of the notion of representation.

So these four aspects are organizational, structural, content-related, or functional.

And the organizational aspects have some variable inside a system that's separated from that which it represents outside the system.

Structural aspects have representational vehicles that are structurally similar to the state of affairs in the world that they stand for.

Content related aspects have internal models that either encode environmental contingencies or sensory motor contingencies.

Specification or description of how the world is taken to be in turn analyzed in terms of correctness or truth conditions.

And then the functional aspects support vicarious use before or in the absence of external events of internal variables of a model.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, it is kind of a woe, but this fourfold distinction is the structure of the paper.

So we're going to do a few fun things to help understand this because it is the contribution and the structure of the paper.

So everyone's going to interpret all of this in their own way, which is awesome.

But we do really want to be clear about what the author's contributions are.

So

in an almost unprecedented maneuver we're going to go to the end of the paper first and then also have the figures out of order we're going to start with what we can learn from this debate so if you're not sure if you want to listen to the next like 40 minutes on going into this for um full distinction you get it up front so

They're going to review some of the most prominent philosophical interpretations of the FEP.

They then summarize those interpretations according to the four different categories that Blue just read.

For each of those categories, they're gonna consider multiple constructs of FEP.

So kind of tools in the FEP toolkit slash ecosystem.

And they're going to argue that depending on which perspective you take on which of these categories and which constructs, you're gonna come to different conclusions about the representational or non-representational nature of the FEP.

So it's kind of like a checkerboard.

That's their first,

salva is we're going to outline a flow chart and a grid and a structure like a taxonomy of philosophical ideas related to this triple dimensional space of aspects of representation constructs of the fep and then the categorical variable representational or non-representational claims and then the whole second part is saying we're going to use that

three-dimensional phase space to shine a light on one's own implicit notions of representation.

So that's kind of like the looking in the mirror, strange loop part.

But the first part is more like a philosophical literature analysis and their contribution in figure two

is to make this awesome flow chart so this is going to funnel you from the start in the four different domains four aspects organizational structural content and functional and then from those four starting points kind of like sorry board you're going to get funneled towards

non-representational or representational FEP, depending on decisions.

And that's what we're going to unpack in the next sections.

Because again, it's kind of like trippy and there's a lot to think about.

This is going to be our map.

So it's going to be at the bottom of all of the upcoming slides.

Which of these eight sections we're in, it's like a cube divided in eight

little cubes or two tetrahedra or some other pattern.

But basically we're gonna see whether we're in like representation camp or non-representation camp and which aspect we're focused on.

And then here's that table, but it's just the tip of the iceberg.

So how can we organize our thinking around philosophy

and increase the rigor and the accessibility of different arguments, because it can be difficult sometimes to parse it in long texts.

And so the authors clearly thought a lot about this.

So it's a really pleasure to read about it and learn about it.

And the flowchart is a great addition.

So that is going to be our map in the coming slides.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks for making such a beautiful map, I have to say.

I had pasted a whole bunch of these ideas and tried to categorize them, and then Daniel constructed them into this beautiful flowchart.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, they made the flowchart, I made the grid.


SPEAKER_01:
The grid, that's what I meant.

The grid.


SPEAKER_02:
Before we see the grid in action now, let's just recall this action perception loop, and we're not going to go into it right now, but that's definitely for a dot one and dot two.

What are these...

nodes and edges and which can and can't happen and what do they represent so that is sort of the partitioning that we're going to be working within which we brought up a little earlier with the markov blanket and in a lot of our other discussions okay so let us start in this top left square so this is the organizational aspect the representational perspective

So the organizational aspect is describing how variables inside a system are separated from what it represents outside the system.

So that's like the architectural take on representations.

I don't know, is it classic representations?

But the pro-representation camp are going to argue that internal states are segregated from the external world via Markov blanket.

Therefore, the brain's activity cast as internal states do represent what it doesn't have access to.

Blue, what do you think?

Or anything else to add on it?


SPEAKER_01:
Nothing I want to delve into here because I'm going to save it for that one.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Okay.

In contrast...

there's other people and other perspectives who are going to in the organizational aspect take a non-representational perspective and so philosophers of the ecological and activist persuasion have approached that same markov blanket formalism

and basically framed it in terms of non-representational view of the FEP.

Like Jelle Brunnenberg's paper, The Anticipating Brain is Not a Scientist, Free Energy Principle from an Ecological and Active Perspective.

So they argue in those papers, in a lot of papers by Jelle and others, that just because you deploy the Markov blanket formalism,

it doesn't imply the behavior of the system is best explained by inferences generated by an internal model the structure of which is representing that which is a model of so read the papers for more detail but it's like um it's an interesting idea and it was also interesting to read in from this paper that uh

the restatement of this argument that these partially informationally encapsulated systems, like we talked about in 35, are parsimoniously understood in terms of achieving high relative mutual information between the non-representational process of generalized synchrony in Huygens, 1673, the pendulum clock.

So you could get like oscillating pendulums that synchronize

but they don't have representations of each other now maybe you need representations to um do something else but that kind of gets to that inactivist radical and activist debate so we'll go more into it later just kind of cool old citation and um interesting idea so

based upon the organization of the system.

There's people who say, yeah, the FEP is representational, of course, because the internal states are isolated, or no, because you can get high mutual information without representation.

All right.


SPEAKER_01:
That's like what Dean called nine o'clocking.

It's nine o'clock.

That's general synchrony.


SPEAKER_02:
Exactly.

Exactly.

there's doesn't need to be a representation of brushing the teeth in the in the mind or the anything of the reader okay on to the second aspect the structural aspects so the question to be addressed is whether generative models are structurally similar to their targets or accurate descriptions of external reality or

whether models needn't be accurate, but merely adequate enough to leverage for adaptive behavioral control.

So does it actually need to represent the thing, or can it be just some other representation that is effective enough?

So here's the pro and the con for representational on one slide.

The top structural representationalist view argues that the generative model has to have some structural resemblance with the generative process in order to be useful for control purposes.

That's really related to the good regulator theorem from cybernetics.

And so the argument there is you're going to need the good representation about it

in order to be on the right page in complex environments.

Others disagree.

So here's one line of argument that the formal constructs in active inference, specifically the generative density G, if it's understood correctly, according to some authors, it would turn out to be non-representational.

Those authors suggested, Rampstead et al., 2019, that generative models do not meet the requirements of structural representations where some internal structure replicates some structure of a generative process.

So the generative model is the organism's model of action.

The generative process is the actual world out there, the niche, that's giving rise to observations.

And so in other words, you might be...

I don't know if this might be a mal example, but like to run, you don't need to have an abstract representation of your own body.

You merely need the action interactions with your body.

And so this is kind of arguing that the internal generative density G in ACT-INF doesn't have to have any resemblance structurally to even the problem which it's being deployed to solve.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, and this, this always goes to the map and the territory and the difference between the map and the territory.

So structural similarity, like what does that mean?

Right.

Like, so, so how similar is there some metric that you're using for structural similarity?

Like how similar is the map of the United States to the actual United States?

Right.

And so what, what does that even mean?

Structural similarity?

Sorry.

Like I'm, I'm probably, you know, poking the fire, but.


SPEAKER_02:
let's hear from um alex keifer or maxwell or anyone else who feels really strongly about this issue because we've had some fun talks on it before and it's just i just liked seeing the pro and the con laid out together and then the authors were very um


SPEAKER_01:
I just like arguing what is the difference between the pro and the con.

I want somebody to draw the line for me.

What is similar and what is not similar enough?


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

OK, now to the third aspect.

So this is the content-related aspect.

whether the generative models need to explicitly model the ways external states produce sensations aka environmental models or the ways that actions produce sensations or sensory motor models this is very closely related to the previous aspect so i think it'd be cool to unpack it a little more but there is a little bit of nuance with

sensory motor systems which we talked about in several places like skilled performance and um basically this is just one uh sub argument within this section a pro and a con um and they're talking about essentially skilled performance how sensory motor models can afford sophisticated cognitive processing and so the first

argument here is that here comes that same yellow burnberg 2016 paper the anticipating brain is not a scientist saying that yeah actually sensory motor loops if you're going to trust the story for one level of analysis then why are more so-called complex behaviors not just more complex combinations of modules which don't uh appeal to any representational content

And then the sensory motor dynamics created by those models may be progressively internalized to support mental operations detached from the sensory motor cycle.

So maybe like walking and chewing gum or something like that, or maybe think about like an insect flying or walking and how much of that is just the shape of its body in motion and just the way that the muscles and the joints just like flex.

And so ascribing the total motion of every joint to cognitive actions,

just is probably asking too much of cognition unless taking embodied and morphological computation as another type of computation and then um firing back for the representationalists um is um coming from the area of schema theory

which is where there is a nucleus of sensory motor models but then they're extended to include external causes of sensations so that just kind of like a flavor of one of the sub debates and it'd be good to discuss i think how the um structural and organizational and content related differ because it is like a nuanced debate and so i appreciate how clear they did make it

given that it's murky waters because these are like four aspects of a philosophical idea oh then of course this meme okay so

The embodied cognition literature has shown some practical examples of how good control can be realized using fast and frugal solutions and very simple models.

This is an example that Dave described on a live stream just recently.

One popular example is the baseball outfielder problem, or the fact that catching a moving ball may not require a full model of the ball's position, velocity, and direction, allowing for trajectory prediction, but a simpler control mechanism that only keeps the image of the ball stationary on the retina.

All right, so here on the left, this is like the physics class model of some of the parameters.

So this is already a map of the territory.

We're not going into the temperature of the ball and the wavelength of the grass.

So this isn't like a world model.

This is just the physics reduced model of the physics of the asymptotic ball in this kind of idealized setting.

And so that's a lot of parameters like parameters.

as drawn out there and here from this wired article how do people actually catch baseballs here's the apparent ball position as a function of time and just showing how if if um you're in the position to catch the ball that there's a simple heuristic line related to the apparent balls position whereas um balls that you're too short or too long to catch

have a very different visual trajectory.

So in other words, an activism is saying, this on the left doesn't have to be the representation

That would be something that might satisfy the most formal representationalist, but then this is sort of a gray area.

Like what if there is a visual representation of the ball on the retina?

So there is something that's featuring information about the real world in an actionable way, but it is of a totally different type than the parameters in the physics class.

And so that can get, of course, a little sticky.

So here is us on the Phillies.

We're trying to catch the fly ball.

Here's Friston hitting it out of the park with the action perception loop and all the work in this field.

So what is the equivalent?

Do we need to have the physics class model?

Or is it possible for us to have some other type of understanding

Just a thought.

What do you think, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So it just really makes me think about blindness, right?

And I know that this seems like a way out there trajectory, but we know the physics of our natural environment.

We know it pretty well.

What about when we remove ourself or remove one sense, like remove vision, right?

Now we have a really different...

perception of our environment.

And we have to completely retrain through kinesthetic memory where we are in our environment if the lights go out.

I mean, I was without power for four hours the other day in the middle of the night, and I was totally freaked out because I live in the country, and there was absolutely no light, none.

So in that, you have to know where all the things are.

So this is a structural map in your mind of your reality that's really different from what you're able to absolutely perceive at that moment.

It just makes me think of that.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

That's just a fun slide.

Various slides.

This is still on the functional aspects.

Here's the functional aspects of representation.

Another way to address the issue of what a representation is and what it is not is by asking what functional role representations play within a hierarchical architecture.

So this is the function, kind of the pragmatics of the representation, what it does.

An idea that dates back to at least Piaget, 1954, is the idea that representation should vicariously stand for something external in its absence and afford vicarious operations, i.e.

mental operations, using an internal vehicle that are executed before acting on the external referent of the vehicle, or even when the external referent is absent.

So it is able to be...

cause and effect within the mental ecosystem, like we'll see from these examples, consider mentally whether one would enjoy eating a pizza with no pizza in sight.

So it'd be like, okay, think of a pizza.

Do you want to eat that?

Now imagine that type of food that I previously mentioned and then what type of restaurant it is and what equipment do they have in the kitchen, like an oven or something like that.

So there's something that's being functionally carried forth in that cognitive sequence.

Can that be uniquely explained, predicted, controlled, designed with just sensory motor loops?

This functional role of representations has been expressed in terms of whether the agent's internal operations are detached from its action perception cycle and hence autonomously generated versus determined or sustained by external stimuli.

So if something were just repeatedly causing visual stimuli and now we're causing like sort of unaware movements,

That might be one category of phenomena, but what about going on a walk and remembering a five digit number by just chanting it to yourself?

Is that sensory motor?

How is that playing out?

And when cognition is playing a functional role, seemingly uncoupled from the action perception loop, which is probably not exactly how Piaget framed it, but that's what that notion is.

And so

Within the functional aspect, the FEP is leading one to ask, what functional roles do internal models play during free energy minimization?

So just like the memorizing the number was like a cause and effect of a cognitive environment, is it the case that the FEP is featuring things that are also causes and effects in the cognitive environment?

And does that resemble vicarious operations in the classical Piaget-based account of representation?

And again, it's going to be the dot one, the dot two when we go into the variational and the expected free energy.

But that's like the big picture on the functional aspect is do these variables play functional roles in a way that's uncoupled from the immediacy of action and perception?

I hope I represented that because I'm also not sure about that one.

Okay, anything to add, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
So I think about it in a different way.

Like you're walking down a path and remembering a five-digit number, but like, I don't know, something that probably resonates with Sasha or like anybody else that does extensive wet lab research, which you've done.

So it surprises me that like it doesn't bring it to mind for you is like thinking about your actions.

Like it's like a dry run of your experiments the next day.

Like do I have...

the tubes I need, the enzymes I need, the reagents I need.

Where are all these things located?

When it's a really important experiment, hit or miss, it has to be done now or never, which you know that there are some that are like that.

It's important to go through and make sure that you've got a cognitive representation.

You build it, and so it's fresh in your mind for when you absolutely execute the experiments.

And so instead of walking down a path thinking of a five-digit number, how about planning?

Like the sensory motor planning of executing a series of experiments, it brings that to mind for me.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, great.

And that makes me think like, let's just say it's a one hour experiment that you're thinking about.

Now, does the motor pattern firing associated with pushing your thumb down on the pipette, does that get engaged during the prospective planning of that event?

Who knows to what extent, but that's kind of what's at play here.

If there's a totally disjoint neural phenomena associated with prospective planning, then the inaction, we're in one camp of representationism.

I don't even know which side of the line anymore.

But then if you do have that thumb neural firing pattern, like it's just like sped up or just shortened or something, maybe we're in a different area.

So...

let's return to these ideas because again it's like very nuanced and it's just great the authors laid it out as simply as they did because this is clearly a lot of literature to go through so that was the um the eight the four times two you know the

I won't even go into it, but four times two.

And that's the bulk of the paper.

And then there was this addendum section on representation as an evolutionary function.

So similar to other cognitive functions like working memory, planning, cognitive control and attention, or perhaps even to functions like flying or swimming,

representation here intended in the sense of affording vicarious operations and detachment from the current action perception cycle may be an evolutionary function so it's kind of like when people argue that consciousness has an adaptive role and that the origination of consciousness could be scaffolded or nurtured or selected for once it arose this is a little bit less phenomenological

and more cognitivist or computationalist with respect to saying how representation might play an evolutionary role.

So let's just imagine that there was this detachment between the action, perception, role, and planning.

Like here's Pogonomimax ants.

Imagine if they're able to

perceive the polarization of light or the intensity of the light or the humidity and then have something like a representation that helps them assess whether it's appropriate to forage on that day, that is going to be a more adaptive nestmate for the colony.

Does the colony have a representation?

What level is the representation existing at?

Is it

the direct target of selection or is it arising from selection on other units?

What do you think, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
like we were just talking about this, right?

Like, like, so it is the niche, the internet, right?

Is that like the, the meta representation of humanity, like the, the web, like that's it.

So, so I, I wrote that here and things to discuss and the dot one or dot two is external representation.

Like what, how do you offload this representationalism into the niche?


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome question.

And I also, I think probably subconsciously was thinking about that.

Like the image on the right is a trail, a trunk trail that the Pogonomyrmex use.

And so it's like, it's not going in every direction.

In this colony, it's only going in one direction.

It's along a tree.

So it's kind of accentuating this natural pattern in the generative process, in the niche.

But then now that is like an externalized,

prior for foragers that's based upon the clearing of grass and then they're less likely to go like walk over the midden pile and forage in a different direction but then it does happen so the trail does move so it's like interesting topics yes thanks for writing down about the internet okay let's continue through a few of these last ideas and i'm glad that we're moving basically through this um long paper

okay so let's keep thinking about that detachment of representation from the action perception loop they write in other words full-fledged decoupled representational capacities might shade off which i wasn't even sure what the origins were maybe it's used in godfrey smith 96.

into other cognitive or minimal cognitive processes the dynamics of which are increasingly more coupled to the environment through action sensory perception so it's like being at a level of cognitive complexity where you can spin up other active entities or like the queen as a reproductive ant is spinning off cognitive but not reproductive nest mates

therefore when taking functional role as contextualized by evolutionary function as a criterion for identifying when recourse to representation is warranted in explanation which is a very complex linguistic clause but we're finding out when representation is warranted the criteria for that would be evolution shaping function

So it's a lot like saying nothing in biology makes sense except in light of evolution.

And then under those settings, it is plausible to interpret at least some processes, the ones that involve vicarious variables related to minimizing free energy.

Under that context, the author suggests that could drive the kind of self-organization that FEP would describe as representational.

So it's layered, but it's very fascinating because it is just like you had said, Blue, with our niche, but it's like just stacking rocks on top of each other.

It's resisting disorder, it displays culture, but those rocks don't have a self-modeling capacity.

It's like unidirectional multiscale integration, the other Sims paper.

Whereas here we have like a human who as part of their niche has made another adaptive active inference entity.

And now they're engaged in this reciprocal multi-scale integration.

And so I think the authors might be suggesting that there's aspects of this setting

that might be described as, or might be warranted to utilize representation in the explanation.

What do you think?


SPEAKER_01:
So I wonder if this is, so I always wonder whether we should talk about multi-scale integration or like thinking through other minds in terms of translating into the niche.

And how do you like decide whether like we're integrating as, I mean, I guess there's always this thinking through other minds aspect of, you know, we leave like stigmatic traces in like our niche environment and then they're picked up by other people.

Or is it really multiscale integration, like in terms of you and I are connecting and forming a bigger unit?

I always, and this is, we were just talking about this like 10 minutes before we got here today.

So this is something to me that's like this fundamental paradox.

Like, I don't know how to distinguish these two things.

Like, we can never really...

I mean, I guess that shared informational channel always comes through the niche environment, whether it's the internet or some knowledge artifacts like a scientific paper or a computer or something else.

But my relationship with you or any human is always through the niche environment.

There's always that filtration.

And whether it's in real time, like we are here now, or sequentially.


SPEAKER_02:
even if it's uh so-called in person it's mediated by vibrating air molecules now it's intermediated through routers and such it's a utilization of the niche and i think this is just raising a super fascinating question well yeah thanks for raising this we'll discuss that and then this is like saying

what it's one thing to talk through the tin cans that's like using the direct um passive active inference agents um even if we could describe the tin can as perception and action but now what if there's a chat bot that's intermediating between the two of us or it's translating between two different languages then where does that put the status of that entire cognitive system

does it influence thinking through other minds when the intermediaries are passive versus adaptive active inference entities so nice questions all right this is the part which also will unpack more in the dot one and two um this is kind of the wormhole strange loop turning the mirror back on itself part so the authors write

in much the same manner as arriving at a representational or non-representational interpretation of FEP.

So that's the whole sections that we just spent the whole time on.

Everything within the realm of actually using the FEP

not taking it as an unknown, but taking the FEP as an instrument and then using it to ask whether it is representational or not on those different aspects.

So now we're gonna put that behind us and consider arriving at FEP as a synthesis depends on which representational criteria are assumed when either considering FEP central constructs or considering specific cognitive phenomena through the lens of a process theory

under fep hence in the end the debate about fep may reveal more about us our criteria for representation and our interests in particular facets of cognition than it does about the representational status of the fep so you know jfk is out there somewhere ask not what the fep can do for you it's saying because you can be all over the map

maybe all of these sectors are in play and all the perspectives in each of those aspects, that means that somebody's posterior confidence in different

claims is probably better reflecting of their priors and update process than some sort of objective stance or consensus reality about what the FEP is as if it could be such a thing independent of how it's specifically deployed as we talked about with model-based science and Majid Benny.

So this is a very nice point.

Want to add anything, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, fundamentally, the FVP is a representation.

I mean, it is our representation, our model.

I mean, it might be the one that we employ with which to... It might be an instrument or it might be a real thing, but...

Still, we represent the FEP with equations and with ideas and memes and I don't know.

I mean, we impute our representation on it all the time.

So whether it is a representation itself or we represent the FEP, but there's some play there.

It's integrated with representation all the time, like linguistically or otherwise.

Or maybe not.

Maybe I'm not a real inactivist enough.

Or what was the radical inactivist?


SPEAKER_02:
Really radical, yeah.

That's it.

Well, I'm sure we'll talk more about it.

So just the conclusion and then a few last points.

So nine sentences in the conclusion.

One, they looked at four different aspects of representation.

Two...

understanding which side of which line to come down on was complicated because the FEP appeals to multiple constructs that don't a priori seem to be strongly linked or naturally linked like it's unclear whether one begets the other or whether they co-instantiate or and that's the kind of work that we're really interested in in the ontology project and in the knowledge corpus engineering of course in the dot edu organizational unit of act inf lab

the fep appeals to multiple constructs and those models can be constructed in various ways so it's good to clear up representation into these four full distinctions however it's complex still because the fep is kind of like a plurality in and of itself three they argue that depending on how you think about things you're going to think about things differently they then turn the mirror back

and suggest that that's an opportunity to challenge, but it's also an opportunity to reflect upon how we value representation and different features in our model selection

related to the main part of this paper.

And then they sort of salvage the utility of FEP, whether heads FEP wins, tails not FEP loses, because the FEP can be heuristic.

So like kind of good for functionally or pragmatically for philosophy of mind, even if not so much to settle the dispute on internal representation, but to unveil and dissect the hidden assumptions in the debate.

So it's kind of like,

deploying FEP into the representation debate, it's not gonna be the judge.

It's gonna be like some other role.

What is the FEP in that setting?

Six, another lesson learned is that some traditional polarizations might be attenuated or dissolved under the FEP.

So here we're seeing multiple uses of the FEP, which is why there's a bunch of different colors on here.

It's a theoretical plurality.

It's also a plurality of applied models.

It's a mirror.

It's a bet hedge.

It's a unifier with traditional polarizations like cognitivist versus an activism.

And then here's a really fascinating part that I know many people in the lab will be excited to talk about.

The FEP advances a unified view where terms that traditionally belong to different ontologies can be harmonized.

So it's an ontological unifier.

For example, modeling and expectation is not used in some of the works that talk about autopoiesis and synchronization.

How does the FVP do this?

It begins with a strong inactivist flavor and a focus on action that's missing from traditional cognitive theories.

So by starting with one foot squarely in action, it brings something that a lot of neurocognitive theories are missing from, and then extends the scope of an activist thinking to territories of, for example, counterfactual thinking and model selection and abductive logic, like we talked about also with Benny.

So it's kind of like coming from actionlandia and bringing in inference, and then starting from inferencelandia and bringing in action.

Almost like it's called active inference or that's like a related idea or something.

And then the ninth sentence is just saying the space of the possible is big.

And we're going to have to reduce our uncertainty by making it happen.

So it's a really great conclusion.

Any other comments on it, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Just pretty epic paper work.

Like, I think it ties together a lot of stuff we've talked about, stuff we will talk about.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

Okay.

Final things and things to discuss in dot one and dot two.

Okay.

So here is a quote from the paper where they say, given that FEP has been implemented in a family of computational models that are by definition fully observable,

Dot, dot, dot, dot, dot, dot, dot.

That's the first part to highlight.

So in what sense are computational models fully observable?

Or what does observability mean for models?

What does explainability mean or transparency mean?

Is that reproducibility?

Is that perturbability?

Is the map fully observable?

Is the territory fully observable?

Are there settings where one or the other or neither or both are visible?

So what is this visual metaphor and what are some of the nuances with like observability and visual perception?

And then here is FEP as a unifier.

it's less surprising if one considers FEP unites notions that are generally considered antithetical.

So meaning like contrary to each other.

Most notably, the notion of internal generative model, which is usually associated with representationalist theories and autopoiesis, which is usually associated with non-representational inactive approaches.

So I think just who considers which notions antithetical?

Some classic examples are provided here, like to Helmholtz and Maturana and Varela, but just who disagrees and why?

And what can we learn by just hearing different perspectives on some of these debates?

And then how is representation related to autopoiesis?

So

Autopoetic systems are those that are capable of producing and maintaining themselves by creating their own parts.

It's kind of a classic complexity idea.

And it made me think about poetic naturalism, and then all these other proposals like the meta poetic naturalism and stuff.

And then

There were zero Google hits for autopoetic naturalism, but I think it's very related to what we spoke about with Majid Beni and science as modeling in the world and about, of course, the title of this paper and the representations questions.

So this is just a very provocative paragraph that brings a lot of ideas in.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, it's also just the middle way, right?

Like, is it this or that?

Or maybe some combination of these two things is the right thing.


SPEAKER_02:
the depth perception, as Dean says.

So then one more sort of general comment, and then we'll go to the specifics to discuss next time.

So this is the FEP as mirror.

So one can use the debate on representation and FEP the other way around, not as a way to resolve the issue at stake, but as a mirror to look at one's own implicit notions of representation.

So here's a paper that I wrote with my colleague, Eric Sovik in 2019,

where we talked about scientific theories for consciousness.

And so instead of using a model of consciousness for granted, like integrated information theory or some other quantitative measure of consciousness, we took the system as the precondition, which was an ant colony, and then reflected back on different scientific theories of consciousness

what that said about what people value about, for example, anatomical versus functional, linguistic, behavioral components of systems.

And so we talked about like forward tests where you're good with your tests, you've got a calibrated instrument,

And so this is like what the bulk of the literature review was in the first half of this paper, which was like, we're just going to go with the FEP as what our framework is.

And then we're going to assess, there's still a diversity of perspectives on representation, even if you think the FEP is totally the go-to theory.

So this does not mean that you eliminate ambiguity.

It just means that you're using your tool in a deployment oriented way versus the reverse test, which is like taking things that are known in the world or some sort of internal reference data and then

shining it back as a mirror on the test and comparing amongst tests, which also does, of course, recurse because it's a test being applied to do so.

But that's where the real revolutionary science happens.

And so this paper by Pizzullo and Sims

showed both modes in total harmony and so i think it's an awesome contribution from philosophy of science perspective so i look forward to talking about that and about forward and reverse tests and then here's a bunch of other stuff what are you excited about here blue


SPEAKER_01:
This is just stuff I wrote down to talk about while I was just taking notes while we were talking today about what might be cool to discuss in the dot one and dot two.

A lot about the sensory motor loop, mental engagement, mental action.

Does that trigger the same kind of physiological response as an actual action?

And then the idea of thinking through other minds versus multiscale integration, what might be similar or different there?

and the independent existence of the FEP, or is it just a mirror we hold up maybe for ourselves?

But I think that this paper was provocative and great.

I have been a big fan of Pazulo for a long time, more recently a Matt Sims fan, but probably I've been reading Pazulo's papers for 10 years and I'm excited to have the chance to really dissect a paper by him with more than just myself.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

Well, Blue, thanks a ton for the awesome work on the .Zero.

I think we were trepidatious to jump into this, Pape, but then it was rewarding.


SPEAKER_00:
You were trepidatious.

I was like, oh, easy.

No problem.

I got it.

I got it.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm projecting.

It's true.

It's true.


SPEAKER_00:
I was like, yeah, that's an easy.

Yeah, we got it.

One week?

Sure.

Three days for .Zero?

We got it.

We're good.


SPEAKER_01:
I read it a long time ago also, so...


SPEAKER_02:
Yep, we just hope that anyone who wants to ask a question can, even if it's long past the .1, .2.

If you're listening to this in time, then congrats, and you should definitely get involved in the conversation.

And otherwise, we'll see you around the lab.

So thanks again, Blue, and thanks everybody for watching.

See you later.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, bye.

## YKn2njZ_ICg

SPEAKER_02:
was just blues entry music hello and welcome everyone to actin flap live stream number 0 36.1 it's january 19th 2022. welcome to the actin flap we are a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

You can check out ActiveInference.org to learn about how to participate in any ACT-INF Lab events, which go beyond but also support the live streams.

And also the CODA site at the bottom will give you access to the table with metadata on the past and upcoming live streams.

All right, today in Act Imp Stream number 36.1, we're going to be discussing and learning and seeing who joins for the paper, Modeling Ourselves, What the Free Energy Principle Reveals About Our Implicit Notions of Representation by Sims and Pizzulo, 2021.

We went over some of the background in 36.0, and today we're just going to introduce ourselves, say hello, what we were excited about in the paper, and then we wrote down some things to discuss, but I'm sure both of you have other random things you wrote down and anything that people write in a live chat we can also look at.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and I think I'm excited to just hear Dean's marginal comments and just see where it goes, because there's just a lot in this paper.

And so it'll be a thick dot one.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I'm Dean.

I'm here in Calgary.

And I really didn't know if I even had time to even look at this paper.

And then I listened in on Daniel and Blue's conversation in The Zero, and it piqued my interest.

And so I read the paper, and I was really happy to read this paper because where Daniel and Blue –

kind of took a path to introducing the material.

This is kind of familiar ground, familiar territory for me, which is very unusual because most of the stuff that we look at, I'm looking at it for the first time.

And so I'm really excited and I don't want to detour anything that you guys want to sort of look at at the point one.

maybe at the point two point of this process, we can look at what the section five of this paper, what can we learn from this debate?

Because I think that section five of this is super interesting and not just trippy.

You guys use the word trippy, which I thought was fantastic.

Quite a good description, but I think we can pull

parts of this out and look at them and reassert them and reattach them in our own way and actually come up with something pretty amazing.

I'll pass it down to Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, everyone.

I'm Blue.

I'm a researcher in New Mexico.

And this paper, it was great.

Like Dean was saying, it was familiar to me, but not because of my background.

I thought it really explained and summarized a lot of different points in the FEP and active inference and how we use it to model ourselves.

And it pulled out a lot of really...

important questions I think that I'm looking forward to discussing with you guys.


SPEAKER_02:
So we wrote down some things to discuss, but maybe let's start with just a blank slate.

Dean, what do you think would be some approaches that we can take or some starting points?

Because we already have other cards up our sleeve.


SPEAKER_01:
I don't want to be a guy holding up a flag and detouring your conversation.

One of the things we might get to near closer to the end, hopefully, is the authors speak to the possibility of

You know when you set up your table, Daniel, one of the things that they potentially talked about in the section five of the paper is the idea that the lines are a little bit fuzzy here.

Maybe they're broken.

And the idea of, in some cases, our ability to move from the non-representational into the representational

it's kind of a big deal because you can have the debate that says, here's the parts that would align with a non-representational view.

And here's the lines that would, or parts that would align with a representational view.

But then they insert this part that says, but maybe we slip into and out of these representations, kind of like we slip into and out of the Q density.

And so maybe at near closer to the end today, we can tap into that a bit.


SPEAKER_02:
let's start with that grid yeah because this is the structure of the paper and the uh elucidating contribution and also i think dave left a youtube comment or something like there's other dimensions so this is kind of pointing away towards an interesting

approach to uh making sense of some philosophical debates kind of laying them out in tables like this so how should we approach it there's the representational and the non-representational perspectives or stances or modes or archetypes that is definitely very blurry because of course it depends on what do you mean by representation

and that can have some fundamental ambiguity.

And then that representational versus not continuum or dialectic is then separated into a few domains.

I think we could talk about what are the similarities and differences, because some of it was a little nuanced and I wondered if there was other categories or,

They were organizational, structural, content related, and functional.

So then this is your game board of eight lower dimensional projections that the thought can be in, or it's something like one of these eight octants.

And then a lot of the papers going through some of the literature and rhetoric for and against each of these.

using the FEP as kind of the interpretant?

What is being interpreted to speak for one of those eight cells?

What do either of you want to continue with there?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, on the action domain, so on that sensory motor stuff, and Yelly Broomberg talks a good argument around the idea that

For example, I could be in a flow state and there is no model or plan that I'm necessarily following.

And that's true.

If we're talking about extension and embedded as two of those four E's, you don't necessarily have to move to that place that requires something to work off of.

You could just be flowing and working in something, right?

that rate of change is you extended.

So there are times when you literally don't have to be working off of a plan.

You could also be moving from a blueprint to some kind of outcome that you want to achieve.

And then it's pretty obvious then that the representational piece has to exist.

So, maybe the argument isn't that both aren't at work, it's how we transition from a density out of a density and then back into a density.

Something to at least have a conversation about.

Because I think Blue was touching on this last time too.

She said, I just want somebody to be able to show me how these lines in this sort of structured relationship exist.

And when I heard her say that, I was kind of like, no, I think that's a fair question because those lines seem to be blurred.


SPEAKER_00:
So something that came up yesterday, um, is the idea of free will.

And, um, I just wonder how that might play into these different grid boxes.

Like, like is there free will in all of these or in none of them, or is that even related?


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Let's write it down.

One interesting thing about this is it has a little bit of that visual illusion with the black grid and the white dots at the junctions.

So it's kind of a perceptive artifact.

It's just sort of messing with our

visual representation and visual representations are are uh you know when you see it you believe it that kind of focused system in a lot of the active literature and vision uh okay so let's let's save free will and the the blurriness for later and then come to some of the things we wrote down for the previous list

okay so in what sense can or are computational models or any other kind of models be fully observable can i can i give maybe a possible real life example that maybe speak starts to speak to that sure okay so


SPEAKER_01:
In the paper, the authors say, however, these differences matter if one considers structural aspects and the degree of resemblance between hidden variables and environmental dynamics.

So I was thinking about your question, and so I wrote this down.

If dynamics, then the material, i.e.

the content, the structure, and the organization is going to have a different change rate

than the function.

So the first three columns are going to behave differently than the fourth.

For example, the screwdriver as tool remains very stable, hopefully, relative to the spiral effect or function that it can generate on the screw.

To the one driving the screw, there are now two rates to juggle.

The assumption that the tool applying the function as a rule is stable and consistent and the effect sought will be a form change, meaning action orientation where a new representation outcome happens.

You quite literally start and end with a dance between the stabilities and the dynamics leveraging off of each other.

So back and forth.

So we need to keep open the possibility that the stable or the representational and the dynamic, which as Yelly points out, can be non-representational as well, are both in play.

And then I wrote here, because I've used the expression, when in doubt, zoom in, zoom out.

When Markov blanket, zoom in, zoom out.

So in terms of the computation, there's actually two computations, one around what we think should remain relatively consistent and one which we then apply that consistency to something that we actually want to see a rate change expedited.

So there's actually, I think there's two calculations here to the person that's trying to figure out

how they're going to see what's on the other side of the blanket.


SPEAKER_02:
Very interesting.


SPEAKER_01:
Lorenzen Laplace.


SPEAKER_00:
So I like this idea of zooming in and out with a Markov blanket.

And I think it speaks to

the way that agents are nested or anything is nested, I don't want to necessarily ascribe agency or free will to different levels of organization, but

I think when Markov Blanket zoom in, different Markov Blanket zoom out, different Markov Blanket.

So for me, like it speaks to multi-scale systems and how applying Markov Blankets is kind of scale friendly or like imputed onto the system in question.


SPEAKER_02:
one extension or maybe example of that we've probably talked before like the table it's in the process ontology it's material that's tabling but then that material is also process space so sort of this multi-scale process ontology and the identification of a given system of interest at stationarity like an object that can be tracked

But there's objects that are too fast to be tracked, and there's objects that are too slow to be tracked below the just noticeable difference.

And so within a given measurement or active inference regime, a given entity can have attention on a given system of interest.

It can't have attention on things that are slower or faster, like out of its frequency band.

that's discarding 99 of the system to not consider outside of the frequency band it's like the observables are just one they're they're very bounded and so that the slower things are the larger things and the faster things are the smaller things so that's kind of a nice


SPEAKER_01:
And let me just piggyback on that.

And if we're talking about specificity or scale-friendly versus cosmic and scale-free, that's also part of that zoom in, zoom out exercise.

Because there are quite literally elements of this that are still scale-free.

That if, again, as they said, modeling ourselves, we can start from that position of scale free and then find the specifics or we can find the specifics and ask ourselves how far out can we extend our confidence that the stability will hold.

So that's again, piggyback on what you just said, Daniel.

There's all kinds of ways of interpreting zoom in and zoom out.

And I think maybe that's one of the insights

that we get when we don't get ourselves hung up on being a really radical and activist, even though I'm of the camp that says we start out in the non-representational and activist leaning side and then the plans and the representations and the effects of that are representational.


SPEAKER_02:
All right, I'll think of an example, a wet lab example.

So I'm thinking of doing PCR or a wet lab technique where you're not observing perhaps the outcomes of what's happening for multiple steps.

And even then it might be a color change or a number on a screen.

And so then you get limited observables.

those are sometimes your degrees of manipulation like in a thermocycler that's changing the temperature the only thing you're measuring during the reaction is the temperature sometimes you might also look at like the optical property but usually just changing the temperature and then it's very representation like to have a mental or a cognitive representation which can include extended

phenotype like the notebook and the computer but that's pretty representational to have counterfactuals about what molecules would do that have never been visually observed um and so science becomes representational and i think um

how far does that reach back?

And it kind of blurs off into increasingly non-representational forms.

Not saying that science is the most representational thing, but what are the most representational things?

And how do we move back and forth on that is what I'm seeing with the two feet in, two feet out.


SPEAKER_01:
But you just hit on a really important point because you said science becomes.

So what makes up the becomes?

Like what exists in that space prior to it, us all agreeing that it's now science?

And I think that's what this, I think that's what this modeling as opposed to us as model asks us to consider.

That's a really, you touched on the big deal here.

Abductively, so what makes up that, what has to be present for us to be able to say, okay, now you've crossed a threshold and now we're talking science.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

It reminds me of the paper of Brunberg, Anticipating Brain is Not a Scientist.

And we can just take the always prescient titles and content of these papers to be targeting attention point.

Is the Markov blanket a valid or useful construct?

More recently, but back several years ago, identifying some similarities or at least a area of interaction with the anticipatory and cybernetics of systems, which is pretty system agnostic, can apply to very abstract systems

representations as well as perhaps real systems and then the physical brain hypotheses and the inactivist and ecological perspectives on cognition with this activity called science and the role of a scientist and so

A few ways to parse science.

One is as we heard from Majeed Benny recently with model-based science.

So that's one like relevant way that we learned about it and talked about this recently, like science being the application of models, but then other systems are perhaps doing something different.

Well, what is science?

Anyone in the live chat should definitely respond, what is science?

And also, I would like to hear what both of you think and how that relates to anything we're talking about here or ever.


SPEAKER_00:
So I always think about science as the application of the scientific method to anything, right?

So observations, hypothesis, experiment, et cetera.

And because I think of science like this, science itself is just a model also, right?

So we use science.

We build a model of whatever phenomenon it is that we're trying to replicate or observe or test or whatever.

And we do, we experiment with our model, like essentially.

So, so the scientific method itself is a model for doing science.

And then the process of doing it is creating a model of, of the world.

So it's like nested models all the way down in science, in my world.


SPEAKER_01:
So Blue, can I ask you a quick question?

What do you think precedes science?

the engagement with what you're describing?

Because the authors always say assumptions matter.

What assumptions do you think goes into a person saying, okay, well, now I'm going to use scientific method?

Are there things that priors that we should sort of pull out and examine that are consistent when a person gets to a place where they say, okay, well, I'm going to do that?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, so there's a lot of stuff that's in the scientific, when I say the scientific method, it's like, I mean, it encompasses things like scientific bias and positive control and a negative control.

And so all of these things are kind of this, in this like umbrella category, when I say scientific method and experimental design, like it's not always simple, but definitely like what,

precedes any science happening is simply observation.

So you have to be observant.

And to have observation, you have to have some instrument with which to measure or gauge the phenomena which you're trying to examine, even if it's just your brain.

which is probably the most powerful instrument of all of the instruments because it's fundamental to any testable instrument that tests anything in the world.

So I think, yeah, like that.

So that's a lot of priors, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
So is it fair to say then that to get to a place of adopting a scientific method, one might...

first possess, before they can actually get into the formalities of that, a field-seeking curiosity and a way-finding bias?

And those are two different things, right?

One is I can be a spectator.

The other one is I've got to get in the boat.

I've got to get my skin in the game.

Do you think that those two things are necessary to adopt...

scientific method or to commit to scientific method.


SPEAKER_00:
So I'd like for you to unpack those a little bit more.

So yeah, can you just describe what you mean about those two, the wayfinding and the curiosity?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, the field-seeking curiosity.

Well, curiosity, I mean, it's kind of got four parts.

There's an epistemic piece.

There's a sensing piece.

I can't remember what the other two are right off the top of my head.

But bottom line is that curiosity doesn't just... It's not sort of a monolith.

And part of that...

determination because you don't know but you you still you're you're you're prepared to put in some time and effort uh to get past not knowing means that you can take one of two essential paths you can find out right you can go to a source that already knows or you can figure out um based on sort of collecting and and curating

So that's the field-seeking piece.

Wait, wait, wait.


SPEAKER_00:
What's the difference between finding out and figuring out?

To me, those are the same.

So whether you're collecting evidence from Google or from... That's epistemic, right?


SPEAKER_01:
But to figure out is to not have a source already identified.

not a single source of truth.

That would be the difference.

So one, you can find a truth source and then either believe it or not.

And the other is you have to develop your own truth through, it takes a lot more time because you have to go around and gather a whole bunch of other bits of information that aren't necessarily prepackaged for you.

Does that make sense?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and also like what is truth, right?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, right, right.

I mean, you ultimately have to be the one that decides that, right?

Whether to trust and have confidence in something or not.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

A lot to say there.


SPEAKER_02:
Go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
No, go ahead, Daniel.


SPEAKER_02:
So let's pull one level back from, or two, from one and a half fractal dimensions from the curiosity fourfold distinction.

Okay.

There was like the personal factors.

So the question was, what precedes the type of engagement that might be called scientific?

Right.

And there's some personal factors.

They're basically psychodynamic or like situational behavioral archetypes.

But they're things about individual behaviors.

people, humans.

What other kind of factors, even if the individual is the nexus of agency, what other factors come into play and what precedes the kind of engagement that might be called scientific?

If the person is our system of interest, how do we zoom in and out from there?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, that's my question.

My question isn't, I don't have an answer necessarily, but what I have is, so, you know, before the Big Bang kind of thinking, we don't know, but is it possible that there actually is something that we can put our finger on that leads someone to have confidence in a scientific method and not just sort of remain in a kind of in a

place of stasis and not be curious, right?

Because there's lots and lots of people who are kind of quite comfortable just going along with whatever is happening around them.

But then there's others that appear to have a potential for a deeper commitment.

So for example, when we were talking prior to Majid coming on with us, Blue raised the specter that

Genes don't necessarily have to have time in order to be considered prediction matter expertise because it has both the cause and the effect included in the structure.

So that got me curious, right?

For some people, just making that statement or asking that question,

blow right by them.

They wouldn't even give it a second thought.

But then for some people, just making that claim arrests them, slows them down, and gets them asking questions on their own.

Now, so that's why I'm asking this in the context of, so why would somebody now go from, I don't care, I don't give a rat's backside about science to, I'm very passionate about science.

I'm very interested in learning this method.


SPEAKER_00:
So I think science really is seen by many as a kind of truth finding endeavor.

Because whether it's through mining previous knowledge or generating new information, maybe knowledge, either one of those is definitely like a thinking of the truth.

And in that way, like,

aren't we all just looking to minimize our uncertainty, reduce our uncertainty?

So I look at science like it is an uncertainty reduction task.

I mean, that's the point of it, perhaps.

So I don't know what factors...

you know, other than the fact that like maybe we're in a simulation, like we could go there because that would like precede the scientific endeavors that we undertake in our truth-finding efforts.

But really like the knowledge of science as a way to determine truth, I think might be

Part of it, I mean, and maybe not everyone is taught that.

I think about like, you know, in Western culture, we're all like indoctrinated with the scientific method from, I don't know, fourth grade on or something like that, right?


SPEAKER_01:
Indoctrinated.


SPEAKER_02:
And then they give you the PhD at the end when you're fully indoctrinated.


SPEAKER_01:
But here's the thing, Blue, and this is a, but you bring up a really cool point and, you know, fourth grade indoctrinated.

And I think one of the things you and I have kind of gone, we volleyed back and forth is so yes, science.

And so somebody has, has said, this is a, this has got some practical things and some truth finding things, but I've always come back with great science and,

Plan.

These are material things.

My question has always been when?

And you bring up the, well, we've decided when it's grade four, but I'm not sure that someone who's grade four, let me see, that'd be about nine, 10 years of age is the same science as for somebody who's 29, 30 or 39, 40, right?

So we can say plan now, but what I'm suggesting is that before the plan or the science, there's something before that, some really important things that we're just assuming or willfully ignoring because now we're onto the plan, right?

Because that's what has been reified and given the holy blessing sort of thing.


SPEAKER_00:
So I think you're hitting something that's critical and it's why I'm disagreeing with you.

So I don't think that the science that you're doing when you're nine is that different from the science that you're doing when you're 39.

And the perfect example of that is Feynman.

Like I was reading, I don't remember, maybe it's in the meaning of it all, like maybe it's in that book, but he talks about

how like for him, he just plays, right?

And so for a lot of his science is like, oh, I get to like make this toy and play with it and try to look at it.

And I keep playing with it and I keep playing with it.

And so this is something I think that's like innate in us, like to just the figuring out part, like the truth finding part.

So even as a baby, like from the time you can sit up, like what is this block?

Like what is this shape?

What is this slinky, right?

Like it's finding out and figuring out

like what are the affordances of the objects right right and um some of them are imposed by the outside like don't stand on the chair um because kids will use chairs as tents and step stools and you know like so it's some of it like that we impose some structure on you can't use this toy in that way

But really, kids, they don't know.

They'll use anything anyway.

They do all kinds of crazy things.

They'll slide down a mountain on a trash bag or something.

So they don't know what the limits are.

And so they'll explore new limits.

And I think that scientists, at least the ones that really love to do science, play a lot also.


SPEAKER_01:
So again, the trial and error piece can be like the triangles piece.

It can be scale-free, and I would never push back on that

piece.

The epistemic and the specific is what you just described.

The other two parts of curiosity are the distributed and the sensing.

And that's kind of the sort of the more active part where you have to kind of go out and do the skin in the game.

You have to get in the boat and cross the South Pacific.

You can be doing the epistemic and the specific as well because you can be taking samples.

But

you can kind of see that there's another side to this.

So my question around the when isn't around the ability to see the scale-free part of it.

My question is, if I'm a 10-year-old and there's something before the plan, how sophisticated is that something relative to the something before the plan as a 40-year-old?

I just don't think that the experiences that a 10 year old has and the resources that they necessarily draw upon are the same.

So I do think there's also a specific and a scale friendly part to this.

Would you push back on that?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, I think that we all kind of just operate on whatever level that, like, I do agree, like, that the knowledge of a 10-year-old isn't the same as the knowledge of a 40-year-old.

But I think, you know, we just operate at whatever level that we're at.

Similarly, like a baby, you know, like, they're just doing their own kind of truth-finding.

So the process is the same.

Like, even though the priors may differ, I think the process is similar.


SPEAKER_02:
This reminds me of in the linguistics guest stream with Elliot Murphy, how there's the view of language as the construct, like subject, verb, object.

And then there's the language as learned by each learner.

And so I'm almost hearing like language.

Blue saying it's the same process.

Everyone's on the same trip, but of course recognizes that each learner is going to have individuated factors, including like what they specifically know, maybe has some correlations or whatever with age or with other features.

And then that's,

I feel like maybe partially reflected with a specific of the curiosity.

Like if, yeah, is the nine-year-old and the four-year-old learning the same science?

It's either pan-scientism or uni-solipsism-scientism.

Everybody's in their own scientific niche.

And so it's just a million different granules.

And then the other hand, the other end of that extreme debate would be it's all one integrated extended cognitive process, which I wrote some notes on.

So Dean, go for that.

And then we'll think about it as more of an extended continuous process.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And again, I'm not trying to...

I don't want to sort of shoehorn something in here.

So I would always hear from people in my history the expression, well, I know that's a problem there.

I guess you're just going to have to get creative.

You're going to have to think outside the box.

And being the insurgent and the

non-compliant person that I am, I would come back with, and I was reporting to people, I would come back with, so tell me about this box.

What makes up the box?

What makes up the process?

And of course, that didn't make me very popular because nobody could get specific about what's inside or what makes up that three-dimensional space.

And I think it's the same thing with we can say, well, there's a process.

Well, tell me then why a 10-year-old thinks in the same way as a 40-year-old does.

What evidence?

What are you hooking that assumption on?

And again, I'm not trying to be a pill here.

I'm really curious.

What would make a 10-year-old think the same way as somebody with an additional 30 years of experience?


SPEAKER_00:
They want uncertainty reduction.


SPEAKER_01:
That's a generalization that I can agree with.

But what about the specifics?


SPEAKER_02:
I'll give a specific and a general.

I think that for disciplinary education, some of the questions might be very similar.

Like, why is this leaving group superior to that one?

in organic chemistry i think if somebody were very precocious and 10 and learning about the halides as leaving groups or if they were learning about it in adult education they would ask that question and then once they got the answer they would have moved on in their learning in that disciplinary finding out way like here's the periodic table here's why the trend is this way so that's not the whole of education but in that mode

which many of us have come from and exist within, that was the education.

That's educational instruction.

that's the instructionism component and then i think it becomes different as you move away from that spotlight um so then a few other comments like about the specifics of how the different age would be different um there's the the biology of how the individuals would be different like in uh

some of their cognitive features whatever it meant for that person from working memory to the specific long-term memories and other capabilities they have perspectives they've learned about um they're a different complex system but they can be a complementary part of a system like older people providing mentorship for younger people but i think that's what kind of

comes to some of these notes on science as an extended cognitive phenomena, which is partly what has been got at.

So science has many different possible goals.

And sometimes scientists in an ad hoc way will appeal to different components.

Like science is correct because there's technology.

Like it's demonstrable or it's useful.

Not always providing a null hypothesis for what we would have.

if we had done something different.

But there's all kinds of different ways to look at it.

But it deals with individual cognitive features and learning and action in their niche.

But it also refers to broader phenomena.

Like maybe a differentiating question is, can one person on an island by themself do science?

And if the answer is like, yes, they could explore and hypothesis test, then that's one perspective.

Another perspective would be you're only doing science when you're using this interpretation of the scientific method and you're using science as a body of knowledge, like you're using the literature with the DOIs.

And some people go as far to say that you need to have a career in a certain specific institution or a specific degree or a specific training or approach, right?

So that is clearly not applicable to the one person on the island.

And not that one of them is better, but that whole apparatus that's part of the extended niche.

And then also there's, at least in our case, the emphasis on the digital or at least informational stigmergy.

Like there's a recognition in science in a different way than like there's many books you could read on tying knots, probably a lot of YouTube channels.

Is there a DOI for information on knots?

Probably not.

But that in science is a big emphasis, reading and writing the literature, at least in the way that we know it today.

But again, that could also perhaps not be as much of a core component.

Anyways, just like a few points that this...

Maybe now we'll bring it back to this paper, but science is kind of the representational paradigm.

And I think Dean's question is getting at what is before.

What's the before and the after or the subconscious or the submerged of science?


SPEAKER_01:
And that when we're talking about that representational piece and when we're talking about science, we typically talk in terms of isms, right?

what is, where is, how is, when we set up our hypothesis.

And I think what this paper, if we're bringing it back to the paper, I think what section five of the paper speaks to, especially when we're talking about the functional dimension, is the if, the counterfactual, and how they talk in there about how, I'm not sure if it was Clark or Hoey, or one of them talks about the fact that, so a bacteria doesn't typically ask the question, what if,


SPEAKER_02:
when it's sampling its environment so that's that's pre-science yeah i think that relates a lot to martin boots's uh guest stream i think 12 on the event-based cognition and how if there is an event-based structure to cognitive events then for any given parameter in that model it can be otherwise you could say like the ball is rolling off a table

ball is not rolling off the table.

the cup is rolling off the table.

Like you can start to just do single mutations, especially the important counterfactuals for linguistic structures.

And then that might be closer to what we've seen discussed in other Sims papers as the adaptive active inference agent, going back to earlier papers citing that, but just that was our previous discussion with Sims.

This paper has Sims, like the pendulum,

does not have a counterfactual about whether it could go on a different axis.

It's mechanically constrained, whereas cognitive structures can engage in counterfactual play in a way that the pinball machine can't, even if the pinball machine has chaotic or other types of seemingly agentic behavior.


SPEAKER_01:
And in that context,

in that space, I can be at the top of the ski hill prior to a gradient descent, and I can be adaptive, meaning I can close my eyes and do a visualization, and I can also be variational, meaning that I can try to recreate through my proprioceptive sensors a sensation of floating pre-pushing off and engaging with that process, right?

So again,

The when of this, I think, is something that really matters.

I think we gloss over it or we don't even pay any attention to it typically because we want to get to, in the paper, it's figure two.

We want to get to figure two.

But I think before there was a figure two, before there was a plan or a representation, we might want to ask when planned.

If I'm engaging in counterfactual inference prior, then doesn't everything in the diagram depend on prospecting up the nodes in that representation?

Do I not have to provision up a format that will be potentially something that others can comprehend?

as now organized, and don't I have to propose alternative paths as links?

All of those things are pre-planned.

All of those things have to be present pre-science.

So we can say, well, I'm not paying attention to that now because I'm busy processing something that I can now transfer to other readers and viewers of this diagram.

But I think to ignore those things is to ignore the difference between a 10 year old doing a science experiment and a 40 year old doing a science experiment.


SPEAKER_02:
Let me give one thought on that.

It actually speaks to this question of whether science is the same for everybody or different for everybody.

Is this the board exactly as laid out that everybody has to play by?

That's like the game of life.

um the board game not the cellular automata simulator but the board game there's one path or there's limited points of agency and then everybody on the board on that layer one is moving through life on the same or on a constrained set of trajectories so it's like are these the immutable railroads of decision making and thought

Or might other people have different connections or different decisions or totally different railroad stops or different dimensionality or just represented in a different format?

Is it like, well, here are the battle lines that are always going to be the case for philosophy.

And there's going to be some people whose situation and neurodiversity leads them to be on this side or this quadrant or emphasize this component of the regime of attention.

Or is even that layer shifting because there isn't any stability to be found in counterfactuals?


SPEAKER_01:
There you go.


SPEAKER_02:
Back to the questions.

It was a great early point about the rates of change being different, because also that does, at least talking about rates of change, kind of evoke numbers, gets the scientists excited.

Because could there be like a number?

Could it be a sentiment score?

Or could it be like this sentence is totally consistent with both?

Or it's inconsistent with this?

Could we annotate the literature and measure or do surveys or...

um actually measure those rates of change in individuals on their learning trajectory or in fields like how could it go from just being a really insightful philosophy paper with a lot of scholarship into being something where we can use some numbers or something so i see the first three columns organization structure and content as the more stable


SPEAKER_01:
I think you had another diagram where you were showing that going out over longer periods of time, right?


SPEAKER_02:
So which one do you think is the most rapidly changing?


SPEAKER_01:
Functional.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, so let's kind of recap them.

So organizational seems to be related to the encapsulation of the organization, like the architectural structure.

features of the world such that the representation is separated from the what is represented so like you could have representation of the sun but then that's very far physically from the sun yeah the structural aspect is related to representational vehicles toot toot that are structurally similar to the state of affairs in the world they stand for

So that is the abstract structure of the representation having some congruence or isomorphism or like similarity to what is being represented.

This one is super dependent on the definition of representation because someone go, well, you can't represent a car in your head because your head's not a car.

Content related.

having internal models that either encode environmental contingencies or sensory motor contingencies, specification or description of how the world is taken to be turned, analyzed in terms of correctness or truth.

So that seems to be more consistent with the car content.

You know, it's like the YouTube content.

The car content can be represented if it stands for something.

The content of that message was an invitation to the birthday party.

So that is related to the information or like the memetics, especially in a actionable way.

And then the functional role, this is where we're going to highlight and hopefully, Dina, I want to hear a little more about why this one is different.

Supports vicarious use before or in the absence of external events of internal variables of model.

That was discussed in the paper a lot in the context of sensory motor detachment.

And there have been some blurry lines found there for sure, like motor replay and pre-play.

So we know that it is on the spectrum of existing that neural dynamics, but cognitive dynamics involved during are involved, echoes or anticipations of them are involved in the before and in the after, as well as counterfactuals before and after.

So what is happening with functional representations and then maybe how does it relate to active and FEP?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I don't I didn't know, I know enough about dreams, and subconsciousness, just just to get me into trouble.

But the first three, when we reorganize through our dreaming, and whatever those representations are, non representations, depending on your, your wish, those are all backwards looking, typically, and then the functional, that's what segregates it out, it's it's forward and backwards.

So that's, to me, a huge differentiator right there in terms of how much or how long we expect something to stabilize versus how much we want to act on something and generate that change or outcome that we're seeking.

That's why I get back to that search field being different than a framework.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, it's a lot to think about, but it's interesting.

The organizational, maybe there's some dissenting view from this, but this is related to how the system is arranged.

So this one can be thought to be slowly changing because we're talking about things

which means we're talking to something that has persistence.

And so the organizational aspects of systems tend to be the slowest changing perhaps, like the organization of the servers changes on a very slow time scale relative to the processor.

Then the structural aspect, also it's very important that it has persistent, like storing a variable in memory.

Like you want things to stand for each other for a long time.

You want the DOI to be a representation of that paper for a long time.

Those are also related to like,

it's sort of the functional side of organization, like form and function a little bit, but I know functional is used later, so not to confuse the term function, but this is related to some of the performative aspects of organization and infrastructure and architecture.

So that's also, you don't want the screwdriver to be a different thing

in your hands that's too slow but maybe it'd be cool if you could modify or tweak the tool or like you know unscrew it and bolt something in a little slower to make it different but usually you don't want to change too fast then um but what about the content related this seems to be also changing somewhat faster because environmental or sensory motor contingencies

That seems like that could change on the fly.

And then I agree that the functional role as defined here, like vicarious detachment, including counterfactual and self-modeling counterfactuals, this is like some of the most rapidly mutating.

But what do you think about content also changing fast?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I think whenever I make a mistake and I accidentally hit the delete button on my notes, how upset I get because the stability of the content is lost.

So I actually see it as still relatively stable as opposed to something that's changing rapidly.


SPEAKER_02:
So these four columns here,

there is a different temporal aspect which relates to what you asked earlier about when representation.

So instead of the possessive, do organisms have representations?

Or the identitarian, are organisms representations?

Or the definitional, what are representations?

This is the temporal or the dynamical, when are representations?

Well, that's not complete.

You have to say what it is.

You can't just say when it is.

Well, couldn't you just flip the words?

Wouldn't it be just the other person's perspective?

You can't talk about is without when.

So why is that one?

Okay.

Why are there papers about what is a representation?

What is it like to be a bat?

Rather than when is it?


SPEAKER_01:
I don't think it has to be, or I think it's both.

The other thing that I think we need to maybe think about a bit is the first three tend to be on a continuum that's orthogonal to the fourth.

I can organize, I can structure, and I can content build.

Functional now is orthogonal to that.

I will.

because it's going, it's used before.

So again, back to that temporal aspect, it's both.

And I wouldn't drop any of the four columns.

I'm just saying that I think that the fourth column is maybe on a Y axis relative to the first three that are on the X plane.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, a few notes here.

So before or in the absence of.

Now, isn't it the case that usually anticipation entails something being both before and in the absence of?

I wonder what it will be like when my friend comes over.

That's in the absence of the event and it's a counterfactual before, but it may happen.

It's a prediction, it's an expectation.

And maybe even an active inference, it's a preference.

So I agree, like even the way that the authors have written it, these are related to architectural and performative features of like basically functional or structural definitions of representations.

what they are what they do and then this is even uses temporal words as well as counterfactual words though um and those are probably like used elsewhere in the paper but that's a very interesting uh distinction and so it's like there's our map but you know how easy is it to just lay out the map and go all right here's northern california here's a map

Instead of the temporal aspect.

And I think that also shines a light actually on another feature of what people would call science, which is like science, the metric system.

then like okay you've gone too far with the metric time but then pretty much on a lot of the other fronts except in the united states um the metric system has um hold as how people are sense making in terms of like distance and time and other units and that's chronos like like like um chronology and time in the decimal time and then kairos is like the timeliness and there's other ways to think about time so we kind of open it up and it just

makes me wonder, okay, what else is handed with the map?

Is there a time object?

How do we share time along with the map?

Is that attention?

Is focus, times, time, times, all these other things?

So how do we convey the temporal aspect instead of just this gene regulatory network or this is the map here?

or the map and the math and the territory, how do we bring the temporal along?


SPEAKER_00:
So I wonder about the temporal also, and especially now that we're kind of delving into quantum aspects,

Because the simultaneous existence of more than one state is possible.

And so is it possible to be building and executing your model at the same time?

Is it input then output?

Is it always sequential?

Or is there some kind of simultaneous

happening, right?

Like that's going on there.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, Blue, that's perfect for the next question I wanted to ask.

So is one of the assumptions here that there's a continuum, like if then, between I can and I will?

Because this was a debate that I got into with people forever when I was in education, that there's some sort of an assumption that because I can, therefore I will.

Well, I wouldn't jump off a cliff, even with a parachute on.

There's no will for me to do that because that's just not my...

It's not my jam, but, but if orthogonally speaking, if, if, if organization is on the, on the X and structural is on the X and content is on the X, but functional is on the Y. Now I can separate the two things out.

And as you said, if I go back to the quantum level, now I'm pre-decision branch in that diagram.

Do you notice that the diagram is basically unidirectional?

It's always heading to a particular outcome.

It's always, I can make this decision branch moment, therefore I will arrive at representational or non-representational.

And I'm

With you, I'm not so sure that previous to this that it isn't bidirectional.

It isn't functional.

It isn't orthogonal.

I think it could be all three of those things.


SPEAKER_02:
Lou, would you like to say anything or can I?

All right, two points I would be remiss not to make.

First, the tetrahedron and Fuller's synergetics gives us a mnemonic to have four spatial dimensions.

So this four column scheme, all of them can be four intersecting spatial dimensions.

They're coordinated at 60 degrees, not 90 degrees.

And then the second...

point is like this um one directional maze reminded me a lot of the way that people study decision making and path finding or figuring whichever one may be in ants which is there's some laboratory maze like a y maze or a t maze or maybe some branch on a tree in nature and then

for the purposes of the science so-called the paper it's going to be like we counted them as going down a certain branch making a decision at the node when they went five centimeters past the branch point and didn't return so it's like this is the the line that you trip when it goes from zero to one on that number and that's what gets fed into the scientific uh process and the method the observations the literature and the statistics and all of that but then if you're watching the ant or if you look at the video

Maybe they dwell at the node or they turn around or they walk down one and then they come back or like even they go far down one and they come back.

So it is very interesting and it's a subtle graphical point, but one that would be almost seen as like, what do you mean?

How could these be undirected edges?

Well, what if we say, hey, let's start at representational FEP.

It's just where we're going to start today.

And then let's pull back to the vicarious use of variables.

Now, where can we go from there?

To sensory motor detachment, or we can take no, and all of a sudden we're a non-representational FEP because they're only one step away because they're both outcomes of the decision about the vicarious use of variables.

So I hope those are some interesting points.

And I think that relates a lot to the discussions that we've been having in EDU about cyclic curriculum.


SPEAKER_01:
And you touched on it.

I'm going to reduce it, not over-reduce it.

I'm going to reduce it to your point, Daniel.

There can be a yes, there can be a no, and there can be a maybe.

And the maybe part is what's being left out of this.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

I'll read a comment from Serval in the chat, who I was also thinking of when we talked about science as a human phenomena and all of that.

I think Serval has a lot to say on that.

Serval wrote, considering many world... Hey, Dean, I'm going to read Serval's comment.

Considering many world type theories, is it possible that can entails will?

It would be a distributional property, though, not a trajectory property.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, I have to think of that in terms of how I set up entailment.

Maybe.

I'm not trying to duck.

I think there will be times when my confidence through my ability to say that I've done something before leads me to a lower threshold around will.

But then sometimes it doesn't.

So I'm not trying to be evasive, but I can think of times when it can entail, and I can also think of times when it very much does not.


SPEAKER_02:
So will, it's a short English word.

It could refer to something that will happen.

Like the ball will go to the bottom of the bowl unless anything else stops it from doing that.

Or it can refer to sort of that motivational psychological energy, which is related to agency.

And so it's kind of an interesting congealed word because agency is,

and will are very related and uh I'm just trying to think if they're positively related like to feel that you have the choice is to have the agency and that can be seen as willpower whereas willpower doesn't come into play in situations where there's no agency if you just need to sit in the seat on the airplane it doesn't require any willpower or agency

for that action to occur.

So I'm just thinking about Servel's comment and the distributional property, like counterfactuals, do we engage with them as a possible cosmological reality, like in the many world type theories or just cognitive possibilities so they can be engaged with without taking on like a cosmological meaning?

And then what does that mean about our n equals one trajectory, the specifics of our kind of entity in motion, and then the distribution of perhaps different types of counterfactuals or different kinds of possible stochastic rollouts of the system given really similar starting conditions?


SPEAKER_01:
And that's where the will can entail the can.

I can start out by asking what if, but I still have to select the can, the which if.

So that's what, again, at some point we can have, we can see a relationship of entailment, but I think as a quantum question, they're orthogonal.

Can and will are not one leads necessarily to the other.


SPEAKER_00:
So just to kind of, like, play on words and loop back around to what I was talking about earlier, like, can is an affordance, right?

Like, so if you have an affordance, like, that doesn't mean that you'll use it, right?

And will, like, means I will choose or implies that you have some agency, right?

I choose to...

not start a fight with a flight attendant while I'm sitting in my seat on the airplane or whatever, because you can do all kinds of things.

You get many affordances.

And I just wonder how this ties into these representational and non-representational aspects of the FEP.

Like really when I was talking about free will earlier, if internal states are a direct representation of external states,

It seems to me like I kind of feel like there's less...

options there.

Whereas internal and external states have coupled dynamics that kind of leaves some like mystical fluff outside, like that I can potentially leverage with my own choice or something like that.

I mean, I don't know what to call it mystical fluff, but, but it leaves something unsaid, right?

Like there's a coupling, it's like a hidden, there's a hidden states there that like are only that that's where I can impose my will.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I'm going to put that fluff on a pedestal.

I'm going to honor the fluff because I do think that there are actual times when the ability not to be captured by our observations is actually an advantage.

So mystical?

Meh.

Maybe uncertain?

Yes.

And are there advantages to that at times?


SPEAKER_02:
yes so we can call it fluff but i think sometimes um we don't pay it enough respect i think that relates to the cloud of unknowing which is perhaps a text if somebody wants to go into a more esoteric avenue but i'd like to return to the figure and ask what either of you thought about figure one

How does that play into this conversation we've been having?

What does this entity and action partitioning have to do with science?

Is this partitioning unique to active inference?

Are other partitionings possible?

Could it be another way?


SPEAKER_01:
I think this is a pretty stable representation.

And I think it does honor to the scale-free aspects of what the free energy principle is pointing to in terms of a statistical pathway.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

I mean, how many debates and uncertainties could be prevented by saying this is a representation of an entity and having people know what was meant by representation?

Because it's like, I made this representation of an entity.

I think it does this useful thing.

Those points cannot be false.

They're assertions by a person.

And what would be disagreed with?

that it's not a representation.

Someone could say there's a more useful representation or more good, true, beautiful, simple, but then let's see it.

And then we can use science to compare representations because that would be okay.


UNKNOWN:
Right.


SPEAKER_02:
And then you said it does honor to the scale free.

So the only thing that kind of hints otherwise is the person and the world kind of gives a scale

uh indicator for this model but without that iconography it would uh be and also adding in perhaps a legend or description of what the edges mean because it does say schematic of reciprocal exchanges and it uses statistical vocabulary

but it also uses actual like ontological vocabulary in the terms of actuators.

So are these the physical things that are doing the actuating or are they the statistical or informational exchanges?

Or is this the representation, the form of the scientist's model?

So we're only ever talking about scientists using these models.

So we're only ever talking about that kind of nexus where we're referring to both loosely.

And so it shouldn't be interpreted as

either of them specifically.

It's just dialogue.

There's a lot of ways to interpret what the edges are and they might have similar different labelings and different schemes.


SPEAKER_01:
But it is statistical.

It is quantifiable.


SPEAKER_02:
It's amenable.

It's a qualitative topological partitioning that's amenable

and beyond to certain quantitative analysis.

Like if you can draw it like that, you might be able to do a Bayesian graph and then there's software toolkits and there's implementable algorithms.

And then there might be some quite interesting guarantees or tendencies with certain architectures, for example, to perform predictive processing or to have learning anticipation and memory or to engage in control or anticipatory control.

that's definitely some of the most core iconography that we've seen i mean 50 of papers or what we'll find out blue have the action loop because what what little side hustle of you blue got going here we're trying we're trying to um read more papers together and learn about them okay

But it's interesting how often this has come up and sometimes authors draw on the same image.

Other times they do different.

And sometimes the arrows are just the clock, like just a unidirectional flow.

Other times there are some bidirectional arrows and there are several guest streams on the more technical aspects there.

But let's return to the general questions.

Anyways, anything else to say on figure one though?

Like just on this...

Like, what is this and how does it matter?


SPEAKER_01:
I think this represents better the eye fixating on the pot fly than it does on the physics model.

And so I think it's until somebody, as you said, until somebody comes along with a better representation, one that seems to give us the maximum amount of information that we need

versus the maximum that we can handle, I think this is a good rep.


SPEAKER_02:
Great and very satisfying conclusion.

Yeah, go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
Sorry.

I really think that what's not shown in this representation and what I feel like is always left out is the fact that the...

some states are hidden, right?

And so where is the hiding here?

What is hidden from what in this?

And so the sensory states, we don't even know if we perceive, I mean, we know that we all perceive temperature differently.

Some people, I'm cold in this room, but many people would be comfortable.

And some people, my favorite color is purple, my daughter's favorite color is yellow.

So we don't perceive things in the same way

And so there's always something hidden from everyone else.

And I think that this schematic kind of leaves that out.

I've seen the hidden states represented well in other action perception loops.

But I think that it's important to recognize what's obvious and what's not.


SPEAKER_02:
If I could give one thought there then, Dean.

So I think there's two levels of what are the hidden states.

From the perspective of the internal states, the system of interest, the external states are hidden states.

Implicitly or explicitly modeled, but they're the ones that are never directly observable.

They're only...

observed through their proxy sensory states and enacted or the transition frequencies are modified through policy selection through action.

So within the model, within the tetrahedra, the hidden states are relative to the internal states on the other side of the Markov blanket.

And then there's like the implicit tetrahedra, which is like us modeling this fourfold partitioning.

And then everything that's not included as a variable in that statistical model is like implicitly a hidden state.

But then what is that?

But then we'd have a different model if it wasn't a hidden state.


SPEAKER_01:
And the other thing I think is that the vertical line between sensory states and action states, if you tip that 90 degrees, it would look like a blank, even though it has two points on the end of it.

And I think that blank is, by definition, hidden state.

It's to be filled in.

So I think, again, you can fill in the blank or you can leave it blank and say, because it's blank, that is by definition hidden.


SPEAKER_02:
So another related point, thanks for bringing that up, Dean, is...

There's one edge that's not shown here, but has featured very importantly in recent discussions on ACT-INF, and that's the sigma or the mapping function from number 26 and number 32, the mapping function of internal states to external states.

Look at Axel Constant and Jelle Bernberg's work to think about how the niche is also doing like anticipatory modeling of the individual, so the other way, but let's just focus on the entity and its mapping to external states.

It's predicting external states, or at least acting as if, or can be modeled as if.

So there is an edge there that we've seen in modern work.

It's not drawn here, which actually might suggest either the inheritance of a legacy graphical pattern or some,

preferences or conclusions about what these edges do represent.

Again, even though they're unlabeled.

So that's one edge that we've been hearing more about.

And then I think another edge that Dini just highlighted is this one directly between sensory and action states.

And again, the clock flow doesn't have this.

The one that's just internal action, external sense, that doesn't have the sense action bridge.

And

It depends a lot on what these things mean, but it'd be cool to understand what is meant by the backwards connections, as well as by the vertical connections, and why are there not backwards connections

between action and internal and sensory and external.

It's like, it's really a four by four matrix with some connections.

And that's how we've seen it represented as the sparse connectivity matrix in number 32.

And thinking about the way that we model complex systems and generate approximations that sometimes can also retain some other features like the highly operative exponent.

So some thoughts there, Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
So we've definitely seen internal states and sensory states, like that reciprocality happen.

But I do, I always wonder why, like, especially since we did the mental action paper, like how...

action states don't influence internal states and so for me like when you take action like when you practice playing the piano that affects your internal states totally like not just through external states or even mental action like where you're doing nothing with external states it's entirely internal um and so i always wonder why that action and internal um

But I less so wonder why there's not a reciprocal loop between external states and sensory states.

Like I never want the sensory states to go back to the external states.

For me, that doesn't make sense.

And maybe you guys have an example where it does make sense.

But I always want the action and internal states to loop together to have it bidirectional.


SPEAKER_02:
Here's one possibility on the sense back to external, but it depends of course on a specific interpretation of those.

A photon, let's just assume it's out there.

It hits the retina.

If we talk about the retina as a sense state, using it very loosely, not the statistical variable correlating to the sense state, but the actual retina, it's the absorption of the photon that changes the niche

to be sensed.

Like if you're going to be sensing molecules from the ants' cuticle, you have to take some.

You could sense from the ground, the ones that have already been deposited, but if you want some from the thing, you have to take a sample.

And so that may, whether that would be better understood as being an action in the niche is another question, but like you do have to change the external state to be half skin in the game.


SPEAKER_00:
No, and I just thought of it as you're saying that, like the observer phenomenon, right?

Like, so there's that too, right?

Just the act of sensing it changes it.


SPEAKER_02:
Or is the observer phenomena, does that come from sense?

Does that come from internal states?

Does it come from action states?

Are the observers just acting in a way that might fit in within an action state?

But those are really interesting questions.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
No, I just think you're right.

I think both of you are... We're getting closer.

I don't think we'll ever fly directly into the sun, but we're getting warmer.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah this uh we'll have another few minutes to talk this has been a really great discussion and i look forward to like re-listening to it and discussing more then of course feel so appreciative that we'll have a dot too as well so we can return to some of our early ones free will maybe save it for the dot too or if we want to talk about it now

I think we've blurred and fuzzed some of these lines a little bit.

So we did kind of get there.

Let's see what else we had down.

And of course, if anyone in the last 30 minutes has any questions they want to write.

So Steven wrote, I like your method to work backwards in the flow diagram.

Start at...

representative or non-representative assumptions or perhaps conclusions like starting at those endpoints as assumptions then looking for prediction errors in our action perception this maintains uncertainty in ways that does not happen when following the causal effective correlations

That's sort of like 20 questions.

It's framed as a game of... Oh, I'm sorry.

I didn't know that mentioning common children's games was funny.

That's framed as a game of going from the most uncertain towards more certainty.

Like if you were asking uninformative questions...

what are you doing if you're not if you're just getting like and that's information theory kind of exemplified you're reducing the set of what you can be um guessing with the preference to like win within 20 questions and then this is as steven is pointing out kind of the other direction but then what does that look like and that is almost inflating uncertainty at least in the information theory sense

So here's Steven's question, and then either of you, if you have a thought on this.

Do we model the temporal lags in dynamical change between sensory state in relation to changes in action state?

So maybe a related question would be, how do time scales and temporal lags play into our modeling of action, perception, and cognition?


SPEAKER_01:
This is why I kept saying to young people, when in doubt, zoom in, zoom out.

And it wasn't just zoom in, zoom out in a sort of a, in a visual sense, you have to zoom in and zoom out on a temporal sense as well.

You have to think about the

You have to think about the unit of analysis, both as an object, but also the length of time something can remain stable or not.

I don't think we're naturally inclined to include the timeframe as much as we're inclined to include the, did it change?

Did it float?

Did it burn?

Whatever.

Whatever it is that we're waiting to see what happens next.

We don't tend to give as much attention over to how long did it take.


SPEAKER_02:
I'll give a complimentary thought, which is more related to the kinds of models that we've specifically seen in ACT-INF.

So the deep temporal models or sophisticated active inference.

In, for example, a three time step model, at time step one, it's doing inference on one, two, and three.

That's planning as inference and anticipation.

At time step three, it can still be calculating the model in light of incoming evidence about time step one, two, and three.

which is related to memory and learning and all these other sorts of so-called backwards looking types of inference.

So there's like anticipation, there's now casting, and then there's reconstruction of your recent and long-term past and how that's related to identity.

So I think that the question

Do we, or how do we model the temporal or just the temporality of sense and action states?

The answer from model-based science is what's the time horizon parameter on the model that we ran?

Oh, it was 15 days.

Okay.

Well, then we modeled the temporal lag up to 15 days.

And that is what we modeled.

And that is sort of where the...

Scale-free becomes the scale-friendly becomes the scale-specific.

And then that's the most that it contracts down to is that one specific model as deployed by those researchers.

Here's another question from Steven.

When do we sense and when do we act?

When do our sense states update?

When does our generative model update?

And when do our action states update?

I'll start with the model-based science one, which is, again, it would just be the specifics of how the pseudocode and the actual computer code were written.

Which line of code updates first?

That's the narrow answer, but what about a more broader answer?


SPEAKER_01:
Does it depend on how open we are?

How confident we are in staying in an uncertain, non-specific,

space and can we necessarily know going in how long that will be?

I don't know.

I don't know how long.


SPEAKER_00:
And what about precognition, right?

Like if we, you know, expand to that possibility, like I knew that was going to happen.

I mean, that happens to all of us, right?

We all experience that, like, oh, I knew that was going to happen.

Like if I, you know, step on this ice cube, it's going to, like this ice pile, it's going to crack through to water or whatever.

Like I knew that was going to happen.

So we're able to kind of perceive things before they happen.

And so, I don't know, like, is there not necessarily the temporal,

separation, this makes me think back to Shanna Dobson and the flattening of the time diamond.

So really, is it necessary that there's sequence here, or can it just all be happening simultaneously?

That kind of relates to what I was asking earlier, too.

Is there some kind of

simultaneous update sensing action possibility.

And I think that there is, I mean, I don't think that, um, not, not in a computational model because, you know, code just runs like it is, but, um, I think in our model it's possible.


SPEAKER_02:
okay one more general and then more specific comment the 4d spatial model tetrahedral synergetic geometry you have space and time four dimensions spatially represented rather than the xyz you have three spatial dimensions and then there's like the special question of how does t come into play so some is known there and some is not known there but when and where and how are of course very linked

And if we take model-based science seriously, then they're also very enabled and constrained by the kinds of models we have.

So maybe it's related to how we think about geometry.

And then the sense and action, are they continuous or are they discrete?

we've seen recently dacosta at all like the synthesis of active inference on discrete state spaces and then we've also seen some of uh alex chance's work on the continuous control settings with like the mountain car which is not just um the discrete case so it's just interesting to see how

Some of the theory goes out in front, and then there's parallel lines of mathematical development with continuous and discrete modeling, like digital and analog modeling.

And sometimes those types of modeling scientifically are very well reconciled, and other times they result in pretty fundamentally different patterns.

Like there are certain equations where the discretized form or the version that's computed without really high precision numbers on a computer has really different behavior patterns.

than the other kinds of models which gets at the importance of thinking about how the model is is framed and then also applied because like if the precision of the processor matters for what the paper discovers then shouldn't that be a part of the consideration

Okay, here's a few of the other comments for 36.1.2.

So by the way, we'll write down any other questions.

So if anyone in the last few minutes has some questions, they can ask, and we'll be just writing things down, getting excited for .2.

And if anybody wants to join who wasn't here today, they're also very welcome to.

How is representation related to autopoiesis?

So Refresher, autopoetic system is capable of producing and maintaining itself by creating its own parts.

So how does representation differ or does it differ for a system that is just engineered and secreted into the niche like a computer versus potentially something that is reassembling its parts continually?

Why does that matter if it does?


SPEAKER_01:
Is that a thing to look at in point two, Daniel?

That sounds good.

Not trying to push it on, but I mean, the reality is that we can take each of the different segments, the organizational, the structural, the content related, and then put them through the autopoetic grinder and see what pops out the other side.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Great suggestion.

Apply this to the four columns.

Okay.

what other things would be fun to discuss in dot two or what else can go through the four column grinder or what would be any other question that any of you have in the in the in the point two also if we can we can spend a little bit of time on some of the


SPEAKER_01:
some of the comments that were in the section five of the paper specifically around how we face state from potentially they didn't say that this is true but they said if if this claim is true we could be faced stating from non-representational to representational maybe maybe could we spend a little bit of time not just looking at the autopoiesis aspect of that but how does

How does that density form in relationship to this idea of modeling ourselves?


SPEAKER_02:
Great question.

Here's a question that Steven wrote.

So feel free to give a thought on it or we can push it.

It was, will robotics or neuro phenomenology help most in testing these complex temporal dynamics in a realist way?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm just going to say that's a great question, and I think we need the person who asked the question to come on and chat with us about that a little bit.


SPEAKER_02:
We're just delegating so hard here.

Blue, go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
So something that I've brought up, I think in the dot zero is like, I would really like to tease apart the similarities and differences between like structural aspects and content related aspects.

I'm not entirely certain, like that's a fuzzy blurred line for me there.

So maybe we could get into that a little bit more.


SPEAKER_01:
I agree.

It's fuzzy for me too.


SPEAKER_02:
These are awesome questions too.

Thanks for writing this all out, Blue.

Well, we have multiple pages.

So we have autopoiesis from non-rep to rep and back and forth or whatever else.

How does that form in the context of self-representation?

I think there's a few Hamlet quotes that'll come into play there.

Then Stephen's question about technology and realism.

Structural and content aspects.

Detached representations in the neurobehavioral systems in the sensory motor loop.

Niche modification.

Stigma G in the digital case.

Extended cognitive systems that include digital and mirror adaptive systems.

Steven's singing 80s songs in the chat, I believe.

Thinking through other minds in multi-scale integration.

One of Sims's other papers.

How are they related?

Does the FEP exist independently or only in the mirror?

A lot of ways to answer that one.

One part we could look into now or maybe in the dot two would be the expected free energy and variational free energy and how they play different roles in the FEP.

are also some things like if people are watching live or in the next few days then they can write a comment on it or get in touch with us or like if they want to submit a question or they can come on and discuss it in the dot too variational and expected free energy there's a lot of parts to the paper

Oh, and action-oriented representation.

We didn't get to that slide in the dot zero, but just what is action-oriented representation?

We've talked about representations today, but then did we talk about, were we implicitly talking about action-oriented representations?

Are those a subclass?

How are they different?

Any other?

Yeah, blue, blue.


SPEAKER_00:
In our system, in human cognition, there are some hard-coded representations that we have.

Action-oriented may be one of them, like kinesthetic memory and also visual recognition systems.

And it's really interesting that... And perhaps easy to apply the FEP to...

specific cognitive systems like subsystems but it's really much more difficult when we have like multiple competing processes like we're not just playing the piano and we're not just looking at the piano keys like we're doing both of those things at the same time and lots of other things like we might be you know having some memory of one time that we heard the song that we're playing or something like that so it's really interesting to think about um

representation and all the ways that it exists also even in memory, right?

Like the memory representation is, it's like a, it's not, that's not a hard coded thing.

It's really squishy and it's subject to change through time.

And, you know, we might remember a situation like you can tell me your phone number right now and I'll remember it, you know, in five minutes, but in five days, no, like, or something like that.

So I don't know.

It's really interesting.

to think about the FEP and how it can apply in this overarching way where there are multiple competing goals and priorities.

And yeah, that.


SPEAKER_02:
One thought, I hope I'm not misrepresenting an empirical result, was in fruit fly, the Drosophila.

They found that short-term memories didn't require protein synthesis, like just second to second.

Some sound or some symbol could be associated with a preferred or repulsive outcome.

But preventing protein synthesis blocked the consolidation of memory.

And perhaps that's similar to other systems.

And so there's kind of like the resonant neural structures that are just using the system's connections as they are.

That's sort of one perhaps faster mode of cognition.

That's like running around figure two.

And then there's a restructuring mechanism

that requires changing the model like structure learning but that also connects to realism because we're talking about the synapses and the neurogenesis like of specific cells that could be maybe measured and then the neurophysiology and the behavior can be observed as well if we have integrative frameworks like actinth so like it also relates to dean's comment about the scales the time scales of change

Neural circuits cannot be changing at a timescale faster than neural firing.

So how does the spiking component or the other sensory transduction or other chemical components, how do those overlapping timescales coordinate?


SPEAKER_00:
This reminds me too, Daniel, of something that we talked about, like the very first time we met, because it was a recent experiment at that time about the memory transfer between snails via injection of RNA.

So that was like an interesting possible memory storage.

And I'm not sure what else has developed from that, but also we've talked about ants and how they leave like,

like you told me like that they're just throwing up RNA, like they're throwing up all the time, all over the place and like maybe leaving chemical like RNA traces for each other.

We talked about that too.

So maybe, I don't know if you wanna expand on that or does that tie into this protein synthesis thing?


SPEAKER_02:
One thought on that, it was a recent ant paper where basically the act of mating, which we won't describe on this family friendly discussion,

directly infuses neurotransmitters into the recipient and that changes their behavior and induces all these other hormonal changes and so the realism of cognition like the embodiment and the physicality of these systems it is perturbable by infusions of neurotransmitters in other neural systems and in us so that's sort of where realism can't be eradicated

amidst all of these representations because things do hit our head and molecules do diffuse.

It's kind of like grounding it.

And that's, I think, why it's such an interesting and integrative area with a lot of contention because the 4E side is holding down that real side.

And then the science side, so-called, is holding down the abstractions and the representations.

And then cognitive science, especially as applied to humans, is kind of where it meets in the middle.

It's like, well, yeah, you're talking about embedded cognition and inactive cognition, but that's your cognition.

That's modeling.

And so then you get all kinds of fun viewpoints and ideas because of how mixed and complex that area is.

Thanks Blue and Dean and those who participated in chat for this really great discussion.

I hope you can digest it and learn in the next week and reflect on some of these questions and that anyone can ask more questions or start to prepare some thoughts so that they can also be involved because this was really fun.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

We've got one question.

Yes.

Statement.

Every one of these live streams, I don't know ultimately how it's decided which order that we do them in, but the fact that we've gone

from Connor's paper to Majee's paper to this one, whether it was done with some sort of intent and looking back, allow back to the future, or it was just, okay, well, I think we'll do this one next and see what happens.

I think the order of these last three papers in particular has been pretty, just the order in which we've looked at them has generated a whole bunch of

interesting ideas including sort of the the idea of intransitivity in the last paper now potentially influencing how we've discussed this paper so again i don't know how much pre-thought goes into that but if there was some pre-thought that went into putting these papers in this particular order um it's been very uh helpful and one other thing if uh

If I find something happy because it's true, I'm going to laugh.

And if I find something happy because it's playing a game like 20 questions or any game, I'm going to laugh.

So if I can't enjoy and really appreciate the sophistication of the conversation here, I probably wouldn't show up.

So thanks to both of you.


SPEAKER_02:
You can make me read active papers, but you can't make me have fun.

But just to give it one closing answer, information for anybody who wants to like get involved with the discussions, here's our coda for the .coms unit.

And so here's the live stream table, the one that gets represented on the viewable public one.

So we have all the papers planned, like in this case up till 37, 38, 39, 40, up through the end of March.

So we try to plan the papers in advance so that people can have time to read them and commit to collaborating on the .zero background video.

and then we have papers to potentially discuss and so here people add papers and then they click a heart and Dean we just sorted by hearts and then we picked the papers that were on the four top papers and we said okay we're going to read these four for um 36 7 8 9 um

Yeah, those.

And then we emailed the authors of different papers and we said, well, what dates might work?

Because we always will prefer to schedule a paper that we want to read when the authors want to join.

And so that's kind of our first, like the way that we pull papers out, like we set the dates for the quantum free energy discussions in March.

And then we work backwards from there and then just try to not do too...

not even overlapping papers, just try to provide rhythm and novelty and philosophy and technical details.

So it's sort of a local decision-making based upon the votes that people provide who are participating in the dot coms unit.


SPEAKER_00:
And pretty random.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and just what people surface.


SPEAKER_01:
I was going to say, that's a pretty serendipitous order then.

That's fantastic.


SPEAKER_00:
It's fine.

And if anybody watching or listening wants to suggest a paper for the live stream, please do so.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

All right.

Thank you, Dean and Blue.

So see you all next week for The Dot 2.

Bye.

## Lo95GakwV5w

SPEAKER_03:
Hello and welcome everyone.

This is Act-Inf Lab live stream number 36.2.

It's January 26th, 2022.

Welcome to Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Check out activeinference.org if you want to learn more about what Active Lab is up to, or if you want to participate in any of the activities, which include live streams in the communications organizational unit, but a ton of other stuff is happening.

today in 36.2 our third discussion on 36 we're going to continue to learn and discuss this paper by sims and pizzulo 2021 modeling ourselves what the free energy principle reveals about our implicit notions of representation and

We're going to have a nice jumping off dot two as we do and have some questions written down and prepared.

Other things will spontaneously arise.

And if anyone watching live wants to just write a question in a live chat, we can also address that.

We'll start with an introduction.

So we'll go around and introduce ourselves.

People can say anything they want, and they can also add just what got them excited about the paper in general or for this DOT2 discussion specifically.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California.

Just excited to see how this representation discussion influences our own self representation and that at the individual and the lab scale.

Moving forward, I'll pass it to Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Blue.

I'm an independent research consultant in New Mexico.

And I am excited by this paper because in our previous discussions we're, as usual, left with more questions than answers.

And also I kind of am finding myself swayed by the different representational, structural, content-driven, non-representational

like these different arguments.

And I just find them very interesting.

And I just want to know if at the end of this, if I'll be swayed more or less in certain directions, or maybe just be more open to other interpretations of FEP.

And I will pass it to Danielle.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello, I'm Danielle.

I'm a cognitive scientist at Google with a background in language evolution, language development.

I'm really interested in thinking about how humans evolve the ability to model other minds.

So interested in how this discussion can contribute to that and generally interested in how really good frameworks like the FEP can help kind of encompass other frameworks and revise them.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, I'm Dean.

I'm up here in Calgary in Canada and a little bit of recency effect.

I started watching Ozark the last season and so I'm trying to plug this paper in through what would Marty Byrd do?

So that's kind of my little twist on modeling.

So back to you, Daniel.


SPEAKER_03:
Who is Marty Byrd and what would he do?


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

Exactly.


SPEAKER_03:
Great question.

Well, that's all we prepared for today.

So we'll go into the discussion.

But we have some things written down.

Is there anything just off the bat that anybody wants to just ask or jump into or like a figure or a quotation to begin with?

Or we can look at some of the things that we had written down.

Okay, let's just start with what we've written down and then of course at any point we can branch off.

Okay.

I think a big theme that we'll probably return to again and again is this idea of moving back and forth from non-representational forms to representational forms.

In the paper, they introduce

four different facets of representation, and then how each of those facets can be approached in a representational or non-representational way.

And although the image here shows some solid black lines, that was kind of the discussion was, is there movement across these areas or blurriness?

So maybe Dean?

What is there to say or start to explore with representations emerging, like almost precipitating or crystallizing out of something non-representational, and then the reverse process of something that is more representational submerging back into something that's less?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, one of the things the authors did talk quite a bit about in terms of the functional aspect of this was the vicarious nature, and then they also talked quite a bit about

whether or not somebody who's sort of moving in that radical and activism space still has to be able to differentiate and include some of the temporal aspects of what might pop up and become something that we can stabilize in model representation form.

But then it has to also be able to disappear, right?

It also has to not necessarily consume everything in terms of our attentional fields.

So I'm not really sure exactly how that works itself through.

But I would think that it's difficult to say that

even if we're in a flow state that there isn't some moment when we do reflect in that mirror.

So that's kind of where I'm at.

I don't have any answers per se, but I don't want to get stuck in the idea that it's just a on off switch.

I think that there's a bit of a, a moment of dimming and then re relighting.

So.


SPEAKER_03:
That makes me think about certain paths that our thought takes over these eight cells.

Like when we're in the representational side, when we're dealing with the representation, how do we take that tetrahedra and look at the four different sides?

And then how do we stay within a column looking at just the organizational aspects of a system and then move

north and south on that.

Do these kinds of knowledge or cognitive transitions happen all the time?

Do they have other names that might be more familiar than using some of this philosophical language?

what is it are there any times in our days where we're dealing with something representationally and we shift to a non-representational version within one of these categories or across categories so i was just thinking of that actually like um


SPEAKER_02:
What does an organizational representation look like?

That is like a map, like a structural representation, a content-related representation, and a functional representation.

And what do these representations look like?

And how are they different?

I was just thinking about that.


SPEAKER_03:
Let's go to the definition of the organizational representation just to kind of remember.

The fact that FEP requires internal states, states that encode the recognition model that are statistically separated from the external reality.

So the organizational area

is about how variables inside of systems are separated from variables outside of the system.

The pro representation take is there's an evidentiary boundary, the Markov blanket, and there's something on the inside that is doing something like a representation on what's outside.

So that's the pro-representational take.

Then the non-representational take is where we get into the ecological and the inactivist persuasion.

And that's where the authors say that some have approached this Markov blanket structural formalism, even though we're talking about it in the organizational, not the structural facet, in a manner that suggests a non-representational view.

And they argue that just partitioning two coupled systems like agent and environment with a Markov blanket doesn't imply that the behavior of the agent is explained by anything related to an internal model that's doing anything like capturing the structure of the outside world.


SPEAKER_02:
So you just use like organizational and structural, like in this like big hobnob.

But so my question was really, what does an organizational representation look like?

And so I'm hearing that you answered that there are clearly defined boundaries in organizational representation or partitions between internal and external states.

So like I have a clearly, when I have a representation in my mind that's organizational, it is like,

your boundary is different from like, is it only your own boundary or is it like the boundaries of each individual agent are organizationally represented in your mind?

Or is it just the boundary between you and the outside world?

And how might that differ from structural and content related?

Like what do these different representations look like?

That's what I'm trying to see.

Like would they be maps and how would the maps be different?


SPEAKER_03:
The structural, which does come up several times in the organizational definition.

So we see structure coming up, the structure of the system in how it's organized, but what is the structural specifically?

Okay.

Having representational vehicles that are structurally similar to the state of affairs in the world that they stand for.

The pro-representational structural side is kind of like the good regulator theorem of cybernetics.

So the organizational side is highlighting that there is some sort of informational encapsulation, we might even say, like our previous discussions, but some sort of organization of variables such that there's an inside and an outside that are separated.

The structural side is saying that it's like if there's three things that are connected in the outside world, then not just that there are variables that are organizationally separated in the internal states, but that the structure of those isolated variables is gonna do something like recapitulate or have a structural resemblance to the generative process.

Generative process, that's like the niche, that's what's outside.

Generative model, that's what the agent has on board.

And so if it's to be useful for control purposes, then it may have to have some sort of structural resemblance to the actual connectivity of the generative process.

So generative model and generative process being separated is what's captured in the organizational side.

Them having similar resemblances or similar structures is what the structural side is.

the structural non-representationalists are suggesting, this is, I think, tale of two densities with Ramsted et al, or modeling ourself.

The author suggests that generative models do not meet the requirements of structural representations because the process of exploitable structural representations, so posterior beliefs in the entity,

is enacted and so it doesn't necessarily have to recapitulate the form of the generative process so maybe one could be skilled in the performance of driving without having variables connected in the way that a car pieces are connected.

It comes back to a theme that Active presents to us, perhaps more as a question than an answer, which is how much do we have to know in order to act?

Do we have to have an internal model that is very similar to the process?

Uncorrelated in how similar it is?

Anti-correlated in how similar it is?

And can we have a framework as researchers that helps us compare the structure and organization of generative processes and generative models of those processes?

Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Go for it, Dean.

So I'll put this out there and then people push back or say it doesn't make any sense.

From what I read in the paper now, because I had to go back over and look at it again.

If I were to try to draw a simple comparison between organization and structure, organization would, you could see it as being something as being either in or out.

So you could be inside

It could be inside a cell or outside of a cell.

And in our mind, we can tell, we will draw those partitions and then we'll decide what's in or out.

Structural, I think, takes on more of the entailing question, something that Sirval brought up in the chat, which is, so once you've decided whether something's in or not, is there something else that now can be seen as being superordinate to that?

from the perspective of sort of what's wrapped around now the thing that's in, or what can sit upon

theoretically the thing that you've now decided is foundational to whatever it is you're looking at and what can be set aside as not being important to what you're looking at.

So again, pull that apart and say that that's wrong, but that's kind of what I try to read into what the readers or what the writers were saying.

So it's just my interpretation.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
So I just wonder in this organizational representation, do you draw a distinction between, I mean, clearly there's one between like what's internal and external to yourself, but are you also trying to like

draw distinctions between what's internal and external to your computer or your refrigerator or your best friend or your child?

Are you making a representation of everything that's internal and external to every other thing?

Or is it only with respect to your own self versus environment?


SPEAKER_00:
I would think it's when you do that.

I don't know that it's implied that you do it all the time.

But if you choose to do that, I think that that's something that's pretty easy to tell the difference around.

So again, I'm not sure that they were saying that we do this, we're always constantly doing this.

But I think what they were trying to do is show the difference between knowing when something's in or out versus knowing when something's first or second.

from a structural standpoint.

Again, I don't want to put words in the author's mouth, but I did hear that in the words that they were doing to try to parse those two things and give each their due, as opposed to saying they're just the same thing overlapping.


SPEAKER_03:
Let's try one little thought loop.

So let's start with...

Blue's question of what does an organizational representation look like?

So we'll start in that very top left cell and then shift the focus towards the structural components and then challenge the structural representation, but stay within the structural domain and then see if that can result to us making it back to a non-representational organizational framing.

So what is a good organizational, what's something that is classic vanilla organizational representation?

Well, that's something that is well separated in terms of variables inside and outside the system.

So we're not worried about the structure of the variables inside or outside, just that they are separated.

So,

Computers seem like pretty clear cases where within a program you could have variables that by design are separated through like an intermediate variable or computers and hardware, like two computer systems could be totally separated except for an interface like a USB port or something.

But of course this paper is about that strange loop

when it's a cognizing agent, an adaptive active inference agent doing that representing not necessarily a mere active agent, but should we use a computational example or some sort of enacted human


SPEAKER_00:
example but you got you got a good example right here on the page so how would we how would we shift across the y-axis between organizational representational because i'm assuming we're going clockwise to representational structural that's not that's not a hard example to to make yes um


SPEAKER_03:
yes so um in the human case this would be like um so two humans in a conversation they are in a conversation yes perfect outside of the conversation yes two humans when two humans are in conversation right there is separation in terms of their sensory motor

So we have checked the box for organizational, representational, starting in the top left cell.

All right, now the question would be, is there structural representation?

So that would be like maybe if one person thought of a sentence and then said it, and then the other person thought of that sentence too.

would that qualify as a structural representation because there's a structural resemblance in the model of the two conversions um yeah we could also find out if if both of us were talking at the same time and suddenly stopped turn taking that the structure of of that


SPEAKER_00:
model would would now fundamentally change it's still representational and two people arguing over top of one another to the third party isn't necessarily something comprehensible never mind to the two people that are inside the conversation right hello


SPEAKER_02:
So when I think about conversation, something comes to mind recently.

Like, really, you need to have, like, the order of the language specified.

Like, my son is reading now, and he's five.

And, you know, he's taking the book, like, hop on top, the Dr. Seuss book, and he'll turn it upside down, and he'll say, dod, no, do.

And, like, he'll read it that way.

And then he wants to read, like, every sentence backwards, like, from the end to the beginning, which I'm like, I don't care, as long as you're reading, because it gets him practicing reading.

But it's completely...

but the context is completely um different right when you're reading like each word in the opposite order so like when you're talking about a structural representation of a conversation i think that there needs to be like a literal representation or at least like a coarse-grained representation of in what order things are said in order to glean some kind of meaning but then are we bleeding into the content related but like as we're you know that's why i really feel like

like what are these different maps look like and trying to maybe elucidate what the representations are is valuable because i think when you have organization okay inside outside like this is the sentence or he said this and she said that or whatever and then you try to put structure on it like that gives it then content or context that they can then you know and so on and so forth dean


SPEAKER_00:
No, I don't have much to add to that other than I just don't think that this loop that we've just selected this.

We said there was going to be a certain amount of randomness in the last live stream.

And we've chosen this now.

Let's walk through it.

I don't see it being difficult.

to follow that path and find examples.

So we have a superordinate right now.

Structurally, we want to carry out this directionality from the representational side of things to the non-representational side.

And Blue, if your kid wants to turn the book upside down, that's actually a feature, right?

Because they're not already stuck in this only one way of doing it thing.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Let's complete the red loop and then the green and the orange will come into play.

Okay.

So we started with two people in conversation.

That's organizational separation of cognition.

This brings us to the structural facet, which is where there's a structural resemblance in the representations of the conversants.

So there...

Maybe it is the case where they're both thinking about a similar topology of variables.

So there's some structural representation.

But now let's stay within the structural column, go from B to C. Okay, so the two people are in a conversation.

It's kind of like a dance.

So what if those two people's representation

is so different that it's actually not structurally resembling.

So maybe one person is the more experienced in the discipline and the other is less experienced.

Like one person's super good at fixing motors, the other person just has no idea.

So the representationalist take would be like, well, they're both thinking about the motor, but then when we start to see like a cognitive asymmetry, all of a sudden,

we fall out of structural representationalist between these two systems because their cognitive models don't necessarily have similar structure.

Yes, Danielle.

Oh wait, unmute it then, go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
So I might be missing something here, but I thought that we...

can only start to talk about the structural dimension here once, in this example, the two people in the conversation are representing the same thing.

And then the question is, how much information, or how does each of their representations, do each of their representations have to look similar to one another?

But part of it has to be that they are representing the same thing.

Is that a necessary component?

If they're not representing the same thing, then we're having a different conversation.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, that may come to the functional, that might come to the content related, like the novice and the expert, the representations are both about the engine, but they're so structurally different.

in their representation of the engines so that although the content, the aboutness of the representation is similar, so still qualifying as a representation in that sense, there's a structural non-resemblance such that by that criteria in that situation, we've fallen out of the representational cell B into something non-representational potentially.

Blue, what do you think?


SPEAKER_02:
So I think two people in a conversation can be trying to represent the same thing.

Yes, they both need to be trying to have the same representation.

They're trying to converge on a conversation, a meaningful conversation, presumably.

But they don't always converge.

And then that's where you get misunderstandings or we both think that we think the same.

We both agree that we're thinking that we have the same structural representation, but perhaps they're different and then the communication breaks down.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, so the structures are so different that we're recognizing it as a continuum from total overlap of structural resemblance to total non-overlap, but it would be important to specify that null hypothesis.

So we've kind of scooted into C.

How do we stay in that space of like the novice and the expert who have different cognitive representations and then use that to challenge even organizational representationalism?

Blue, then Dean.

Oh, Dean first and then Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Go ahead.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.


SPEAKER_00:
I just thought I want to just go back to the to Daniel's point.

So if we're if we're structuring a conversation, normally we turn take.

But if we're playing in a band, we're all playing at once and then we stop playing.

So I think we can start with structure, too.

It's just deciding how we want to signal.

Right?

So I don't think there's necessarily an order that we have to start with organization first.

We can actually start with structure first as well.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and I think a conversation is a particularly challenging example because we're representing two things.

We're representing what the other person is trying to say and then presumably what the conversation is about is something else in the world that we could be representing.


SPEAKER_03:
Exactly, yeah.

Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
So I think we're representing...

a degree of information sharing and I think that this is going to like lump into autopoiesis which I've been really wanting to kind of get into but when we have like I'm my own person and I'm communicating with Danielle from you know 50,000 miles away we both

feel like we're getting on the same page when we actually like do get on the same page like do we form some kind of like separate cognitive unit like at what degree of model overlap is the degree of information sharing so high that then we are

worthy of our own Markov blanket.

We're sure that we understand that we are the same unit.

And I think that this idea of self-assembly and information sharing and model overlap, I think that there's an important path to traverse down this way.

Because if you don't have full overlap of the model, or do you need full overlap to form a self-assembling system to form a higher level?

It's just an interesting thought.


SPEAKER_03:
that's kind of where the c to d transition takes us which would be like so we have um the drummer's waiting for this and has a model resembling this and then the singer has a totally different structure and then when we think about the whole cognitive system it

it doesn't deny what we recognized in A, that there still is like the sensory motor separation, but we've reached that point by those people or roles being part of a larger non-separable extended cognitive system.

So almost by recognizing the interaction, so here we focused on the separation.

in A and that's what granted us the representational cell.

But we've returned to seeing that partial information encapsulation within some type of broader structure where none of the entities have like the band level representation.

So hopefully other people can think of other like ABCD examples.

But when we were at B,

we kind of started branching off into like talking about the content related things, the aboutness.

So here it's like two people do have a structural resemblance in their internal model and it's about the same thing.

But then what if one person sees the aboutness in such a different way that again, we fall out of the content related

representation and then how would we move from there back to C, where all of a sudden the cognitive models in a sense don't have structural representations, resemblance, because they're about different things now.

Danielle?


SPEAKER_01:
So would this be like in the case of two things that are so analogous that they share a lot of structural similarities and things of like Dedrick Entner's work that

you can actually draw lines between the individual aspects of, of the concepts, but they could be about totally different things.

But two people talking about these things can, can form some sort of structural similarity in the representations.

And it's just like an entry point into being able to think about all other things.

But the aboutness really has nothing to do with it.


SPEAKER_03:
Dean, then I might want to ask me on that.


SPEAKER_00:
I don't know if this answers that, Danielle, but from my space, I'm thinking the difference between, say, a distracted driver who's looking down at their phone between the seats and somebody who's got that information in a heads-up display on their windshield.

Right, so content twice, but structurally presented, one as a distracted state and one as a contiguous state.

So I don't know if that answers your point, but I think we could, we know the difference, right?

In terms of where the content is structured and how we're trying to contextualize each matter, so.


SPEAKER_03:
Again, staying with this sort of educational setting, what is it important to see a transference or a new emergence of?

Is it that the structural model of the learner is moving into more resemblance with the teacher?

Is it that the aboutness of the learner is moving towards the same aboutness of the teacher?

Or let's just remind about what the functional is.

Supporting vicarious use before or in the absence of external events.

So does the teaching conversation

Will it be a functional representation when vicariously without the teacher, the student can carry out what the teacher could do, which might be having aboutness or not.

It might be with a structural cognitive resemblance or not.

It might involve total informational isolation.

putting a squarely in A, or it might involve some type of challenging of that in D. The reason why there's not gonna be, I think, a precise answer, because as the paper lays out,

even for the same scenario, people do have different perspectives.

So it's not like we're trying to take a scenario, then classify it into, well, that one's like an A, B, E, G, or an A, C, E, H. Like that is probably not what one of the outcomes could be, but these are all perspectives that we could take on a given scenario.

And they do reveal interesting things about the systems of studies.

Anything else to add on this sort of like looping around the cells or should we push on?

Push.

Push.

Okay, Blue, what were you thinking here?


SPEAKER_02:
I was just taking notes.

And so like if, so maybe we should talk about content related and functional.

So I was just taking notes on, you know, what these are organizational, like how are the representations?

And I was trying to draw a picture.

So if you, I will draw my picture.

If, if you will talk about maybe functional representation, like what does a functional representation look like or content related?

What is it?

What's inside of those?

And then I will draw my picture and then you can show it.

All right, I'll just start while you're talking.


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

So the content related is whether the generative models need to explicitly model the ways external states produce sensations, environmental models, or the ways actions produce sensations.

Is it really important that internal states resemble external states or is it sufficient that they afford accurate action control?

So let's just say there's a spotlight that's shining photons onto the eye.

the content of the cognitive representation would put us more, we'd be more in the representational camp if the cognitive model were truly explicitly modeling the ways in which the photons hit the retina.

Maybe.

But this or is a bit challenging because

The ways actions produce sensations, that could be a model of like, well, if I blink, it becomes darker, and when I open my eyes, it's lighter.

But that's a totally disjoint question from understanding how a spotlight works.

But those two scenarios of the spotlight's cognitive explicit modeling, the environmental model, or

The sensory motor model of blinking and it becoming darker, those are both content related.

And Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I don't know if this helps or not, but one of the things that I used to bring up around this idea was the...

was the the puzzle concept i.e so you got a box and it says a thousand piece puzzle and when you open up the box is that representational or is it not representational until you've figured out whether all thousand pieces have now been

duly assembled right so from a from a content perspective do you have what you need in order to be able to tell the difference between something which is representative and that which is not so again i don't know if that's helpful in terms of sort of trying to see a difference between that say and structure like where it's placed relative to the context or not but that was the way i tried to


SPEAKER_03:
One evolution or handshake that hinges on that or of the environmental models and the sensory motor models, they do unpack a little bit.

So one approach consists in starting from the sensory motor models.

So that would be when I blink, it becomes darker.

When my eyes are open, it's lighter, but progressively extends them to incorporate extra variables that describe external causes of sensation.

So like if there's a light on one side, but not on the other side, then it can be the case that that blinking is true, no matter how you're turned.

But then that could be enriched or augmented with a model of parameters that describes external causes of sensation.

Like there's a light over there and not over there.

And so actually that little loop that we just took

was from the sensory motor B, the sensory motor model in B moving to a representational model of the content, like there's a light over there.

And then does that, well, at least that was the BTE move.

But then maybe that could do something else.

So maybe Blue will clarify there.

But let's go back to just review functional.

Like what is the functional?

And it's good to revisit these in the zero, one, two, three, four, five, because it's the contribution of the paper.

And maybe there are other facets, other columns to add.

And there's just a lot of complexity, even as this is.

So the functional one,

is about supporting vicarious use before or in the absence of external events.

So in that story with the lights and the blinking, that model only has to be instantiated while in that room with the photons hitting the eye and the blinking happening.

However, we can imagine a situation that's vicariously detached

or before that setting like what would happen if there were a light over here and a light over here and it was the case that blinking made it darker and this is where they trace back to Piaget that representations should vicariously stand for something external in their absence and afford vicarious operations

So there's a light over on the left side.

You reach over and you unscrew it.

What is in your hands?

Now that is seeming to be in the functional facet because we're talking about the role the representation is playing.

and the fact that it is standing for something external in the absence.

There's no physical light that we're talking about.

It's not like we're unscrewing it and then verifying that it's in our hands.

Who's for and against that?

What?

What functional roles do internal models play during free energy minimization?

And does minimization require the internal manipulation of variables in ways that resemble vicarious operations in the classical Piaget account of representation?

Yes, Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
So this might be like, I don't know, maybe it's the easiest and also like the hardest to get a grip on.

So I think about, um, like, do we, so if we have a representation of internal variables that like are functional, like a functional representation of a functional internal representation, is this like doing, um,

like you manipulate the variables internally and then manipulate them externally.

Like you plan to reach for the cup to take a drink of water, and then you reach for the cup to take a drink of water, but you have to have like the internal execution prior to, or maybe simultaneous with the external execution.

Is that like functional representation?

Like you plan the action and do the action, maybe separate or maybe together,

Is that what functional representation looks like?


SPEAKER_03:
Let's go with a reaching for the cup, because as Danielle noted,

Conversation, improvised, spontaneous conversation of reflexive entities is one of the hardest cases, but it's the one that we have.

So that's awesome.

But we're going to be talking about a adaptive active inference agent reaching for a mere active inference agent.

So in the Sims other paper we discussed, now we're talking about the case of unidirectional

integration rather than the multi-scale reciprocal integration so the person is separated from the cup there's a separation of the cognitive model of the agent from the cup

The structural side, if the internal model is cup-like or it features a cup variable touching a table variable, and then another edge that is engaged of the hand touching the cup, for example, that might be a structural similarity.

But I think that's part of the debate is how could there be a structural similarity when it's not a cup in your brain, which we kind of talked about last time.

Like how could you have something that structurally resembles a car

if it's your brain and body.

The contents related, encoding environmental contingencies or sensory motor contingencies.

So it could be the case that a certain sensory motor action will result in picking up and grasping the cup, whereas another sensory motor action is gonna result in the shattering of the cup.

And that could be analyzed in terms of correctness.

The functional representational question would be like the vicarious detachment of the sensory motor loop from the cognition.

So then it would be like, if you were to pick up that cup, then you dumped it, what would happen?

And then someone says like, well, water would fall out.

So in that case, it is like there's a functional representation, whether or not

it resembles the structure of the cup.

There's a functional representation because that idea of grasping the cup, it's able to be operated on internally vicariously in the absence of direct stimuli related to the cup.

Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
Do you mind if I just read right from the paper for a second?

Because I think it helps in terms of this difference between the automaticity and reflective aspects of this action.

One important implication falling out of this diagnosis is that when considering functional rural aspects, it's often how the details of our chosen process theories are fleshed out

and contextualized by the kinds of cognitive phenomena that we are attempting to account for

for that skew, our interpretation of FEP in one direction or another.

For example, one may consider that there are core aspects of FEP, such as the possession of a Markov blanket and more ancillary aspects, and I think ancillary is the key here, such as the possibility, but not the necessity to engage in counterfactual inference, which is only required for planning.

And it is only the latter more ancillary aspects that call for a representational interpretation under a given process theory.

This would imply that when using functional role as a sole criterion for representational processes, only some FEP agents, mainly those that can engage in counterfactual forms of inference would meet the criteria for representation.

It is only this subset of FEP agents that would be equated to full-fledged predictive processing agents.

So there is an automaticity part to this.

where it's really not a Markov blanket.

You just do it almost subconsciously.

And that's, again, the authors are trying to point this out.

Yes, if we fail, I drop the cup and now I reflect on that.

That's the representational piece.

But prior to that, I was just going through the motions.

I didn't need a set of instructions telling me to reach out for the cup.

So that's just in the author's words.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks a lot for clarifying that.

It's like, yes, if one is reflexively grasping at it or accidentally, then grasping the cup, like if you're groping around in a dark room and then you happen to grasp the cup, it doesn't have to be representational because there isn't a counterfactual.

So

And that's very interesting how like they say that it is ancillary.

So that's kind of like secondary or not essential to it because we can imagine an active inference entity that's taking in sensory observations, updating its generative model, engaging in policy selection, and then resulting in some action output impacting the niche and the cycle begins again.

that can be just like a single layer model that doesn't engage in counterfactuals.

But they raised that notion that it's only the counterfactuals in cognition that actually like give us the space to have a functional representation.

It's like if the shell just represents the shell, can't be anything else.

but then there's another kind of entity who can see the shell as financial or can see it in a different way.

And then it's those counterfactuals that enable the shell to play a functional representational role in that it stands for something else.

Blue, what is this imagery on the bottom?


SPEAKER_02:
So I just was trying to really look at or try to visualize what would these different representations really look like, right?

So if we take the idea of

to a person and a cup even, right?

Okay.

So on the first one, right, we have organizational.

So like I am a thirsty body.

I'm contained within me.

There is a cup that contains water over there.

Like I know my boundary.

I know the boundary of the cup and the representation looks like this.

And then a structural representation is just me and the cup

And that my relationship between me and the cop, right?

Like, so do I have to also have like, like, so, so my, my real question here is do these perhaps build on one another?

So, so here you have the structural and, and, um, then the next one would be content related.

Do I also have to have this connecting line in the content related?

Uh, is that required?

Like, do I have to have an idea of the structure to understand the content?

And then in the functional, do you need to know the content and the structure and the organizational to have an understanding of the functions?

do i need to know like the content related like i know that there's water in the cup right i assume that there's water in the cup to find out i have to realize that there's an inside of me and outside of me and inside of the cup and outside of the cup i have to realize my relationship between me and the cup and then to find out the content like i have to go sample the cup like to see what's inside of it and i have to know what's inside of me and then the function like like can i only

I wonder if there's water in that cup.

And then if I go to drink it and there's whiskey in it or something, I'm not going to understand the function until I have all of those things layered on top of each other.

And so that's kind of really my question here, and Daniel's drawing on my drawings.

But really, I just wonder if there's levels of increasing complexity between these different kinds of representations, or if it's just merely the structure, the organizational, and I don't need these boundaries between self and cup in these other models.

Maybe it's just the line without the circles in the structural, or...

the no external circles and content related so i just want to know like what you guys maybe think of that if there is a layering here because i was kind of layering them up but i don't know if that's really the right mental representation thanks blue dean um


SPEAKER_00:
I'm not muted.

Good.

I think there's two parts to this.

One is that we are able to differentiate, which is what the table allows for.

And I think that the second part is the curved arrow that Daniel drew, which essentially represents boundary crossing, number one.

So the difference between something that's static and something that is translatable.

And then the second part of it, I think, without going back down the rabbit hole that we almost fell into in the point one of this, when we started talking about free will and can and will and the orthogonal piece of that, I think

What it speaks to, maybe, is that it's not a question of free or encapsulated.

It's a degree of dependency question.

When you throw that curved line on

on this sort of tiled representation and start moving across a boundary.

So I don't want to call it degrees of dependency will up to a point of passing through zero, but I'd like to, because I think there is an aspect of that.

And that's why I think it's kind of crazy if we just focus on the static things instead of the moving around.

The moving through four squares is what I really think gives our minds a good workout.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep, so here's another little workout.

So blue had two circles in relationship.

So here, the circle is going to reflect an adaptive active inference agent.

or the full-fledged predictive processing agent, one that can engage in counterfactuals.

So the top is two adaptive entities in relationship, and the triangle is going to reflect a mere active inference entity like a cup or just something that doesn't engage in counterfactuals.

So organizational is the separation of the systems.

So that's very similar because it's just describing there being a Markov blanket separating the systems.

The structural representation is having vehicles that are structurally similar.

So it's simpler in the lower case.

Triangle out there in the world, is there a structural resemblance?

That would be very representational.

Whereas if they were cognitively imagining something different than a triangle, that would have less resemblance.

But that gets challenging with adaptive-adaptive because...

We're modeling ourself, modeling each other, blah, blah, blah.

So here's them modeling the conversation.

And that's where there's sort of like very complex dynamics, which is how can we have a structural similarity about a conversation with another person?

But it's simpler in the adaptive mirror case.

The content related representations encode environmental contingencies or sensory motor contingencies.

So like in this case, the triangle, it is the case that it can rotate clockwise.

And so this entity does have a good content related representation if it can actually turn the dial to that way.

And again, that's a little bit more complex in the reciprocal case.

But in the unidirectional case, this red arrow is a content-related representation of the actual motion in the world.

And then this last case is the functional representation.

And here it still is, it could be more structural.

So like more about the actual motion

structure of the cognitive model, or it could be more about the encoding of the contingencies.

But the key piece is this isolation, which isn't a Markovian isolation.

This is actually the true vicarious separation of.

So here the person or the entity is able to engage in either structural pondering of the triangle or functional pondering of the triangle in the absence of seeing the triangle or grasping the triangle.

And again, though, that's a little bit complex when you have multiple counterfactual cognizers asking each other questions.


SPEAKER_02:
I just added a counterfactual to your question.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, exactly.

The red one is... Then there's the blue one.

It could go a different way.

And then this is how we know that it's a true...

cognizer and a true functional representation yes great call thanks a lot blue because it has to do with the vicarious nature with not directly seeing it but it also has to do with that representation whether more structural triangular or more functional red arrow could be different so there's them having a counterfactual um

action contingency and here they're also imagining a counterfactual structural position okay i'm gonna go to a question from steven in the chat steven asked

how do we resolve the use of the term functional as used in correlational dynamics?

So that's referring to some of our earlier discussions on like functional and effective connectivity in neuroimaging and the term functional in use, and the term functional in terms of having cognitive counterfactuals.

So how is the functional here related to

effective and functional connectivity in neuroimaging and time series statistics.

I'll give a first thought.

It's not that it can't be linked or connected, but they are different namespaces and they're totally different.

The functional connectivity in the time series is...

about how changes in one variable through time influence another variable through time or are associated with changes in the other one through time.

So it's not a mechanistic causal relationship per se, but it's just that changes in one variable have an edge reflecting how changes in some other variable change.

that does not engage either of the pieces that we're highlighting here, which is the vicarious or standing for nature, nor the counterfactual nature.

So it is a different use of the term functional.

Functional is an overloaded word.

And so, yeah, it's not that you couldn't have a paper that was looking at functional representation.

and using neuroimaging and using functional and effective connectivity of brain regions while individuals were engaged in functional representation.

But that would a little bit be like the star was the star of the movie.

It's just using a word in multiple senses in a way that may give some ambiguity to those who don't parse out the different senses extremely clearly.

Is that fair to say, or does anyone have a different thought?

Functional can also mean teleological, like the function of something essentially.

So there's many uses of function, and I think it's interesting that it has come up in these different spaces.


SPEAKER_02:
So I do agree that they're disconnected, but I am able to perhaps see a relationship in functional connectivity and also in counterfactuals.

So when things are functionally connected, one drives the other, right?

And then the counterfactual is when things are not functionally connected, there's no corresponding correlation, right?

so so in the exploration of functional connectivity you have to have all of the data points like over a time series so you have to um like you understand functional connectivity through the exploration of counterfactuals does that make sense okay how about this functional connectivity the term it is a functional representation that cognitive scientists use


SPEAKER_03:
because it could be otherwise.

They're engaging and they're saying region A and B have functional connectivity because I did the time series statistics in SPM and we got this value.

And so that functional connectivity value is able to be used in subsequent internal cognitive representations.

It stands for something and it can be engaged with in a counterfactual way.

Like what if it would have been stronger?

Then what would our conclusion have been?

Or what if it would have been weaker?

What would it have been?

And then Steven wrote, these are definitions and ways to name.

Could be where the ontology working group could have a future role.

Yes, ontology development in active inference and...

How will we even make the decisions of what terms to use and what senses and disambiguate the uses and the different corpuses that we are looking at?

So pretty interesting, this graphic, actually.

I hope any of the authors or anyone who is interested in this topic, what do you think about these doodles?

Do you agree?

Disagree?

Let's go to Blue's question about autopoiesis.

What is interesting or that about?


SPEAKER_02:
Just really where it comes in, and I think we kind of brought it up earlier in the sharing of a model.

So is sharing of a generative model necessary for self-assembly or even the attempt to share?

a generative model.

Is that a necessary component of autopoiesis?

And at what level?

Like, organizationally, structurally, content-related, functionally, like, at all the levels?

I just wonder, like, how these things are related.

And when we were talking earlier about having a conversation and trying to make your models align with one another through information sharing, and like we saw with the computational boundary of a self about

self-assembly and autopoiesis via Mike Levin, just about the informational sharing between subunits leads to the formation of a larger cognitive unit.

And so I was just wondering about model relationships and forming a larger cognitive unit.

Like we were talking about the conversation and then we formed with complete overlap of, yes, we get it.

We grok, we're there.

And then we form a larger cognitive unit.

Um, and is that on all aspects?

Is it just related to content structure, organization or function or all of the above?

Um, just what anybody thinks about that.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.


SPEAKER_02:
So we saw this actually in Matt Sims earlier paper, the biological symbiosis, right?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

The autopoetic system is capable of producing and maintaining itself by creating its own parts.

So it's kind of like the ship of Theseus plus crew.

They're able to be modifying and reconstructing the material basis of the system.

On one hand, that maintains an organizational separation of like the cell and the surrounding in terms of the realist interpretation of a Markov blanket.

At the same time, the autopoetic process does not need to have, well, it involves ingressing and outgressing material.

So that does blur the boundary.

And structurally, it doesn't need to be the case that the autopoietic process of the cell has like a blueprint or a structural resemblance of the cell.

It could just be subunits that are non-representational.

They cannot engage.

It doesn't even make sense to ask whether the cognitive model has structural similarity with the target

because it's a non-cognitive entity.

And similarly, on the functional side, the enzymes can't engage in counterfactuals that synthesize the lipids and add them to the membrane.

So is information a representation?


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know.

I mean, we're getting into the quantum now.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Where's information in this?

It comes up in the paper 18, 17 times based on local information.

Information comprises the generative model.

Past and present information, future information, information gain, no additional information about internal states, that's the Markov definition.

High mutual information can be in the context of a non-representational generalized synchrony, like the pendulums that synchronize.

Where is information in this eight-fold distinction?


SPEAKER_02:
So the author talks about here, if I can read a quote quickly,

If one only appeals to the organizational aspect of representation, the presence of environmental or sensory motor or complex or frugal model does not matter insofar as the internal variables of the model are understood to be separated from external reality by a Markov blanket and the generative model is leveraged

to infer the causal structure of external reality via self-evidencing.

However, these differences matter if one considers structural aspects and the degree of resemblance between hidden variables and environmental dynamics, as opposed to action or information gathering dynamics.

So, I don't know.

Here the content of representations is used to draw a further distinction within the representational view between an internalist, sometimes called intellectualist or encodist,

versus an action-oriented perspective.

So.


SPEAKER_03:
Probably one of the most thrilling academic debates.

Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, please don't judge what I'm about to say next.

Just bear with me.

Be kind.

So in this representation, for example, where we've got this table,

if we were to look at those lines, each one of those horizontal lines, because there's three IC, and each one of those vertical lines, because there's four IC, and we realized them as a standard XY graph, we know that there's a relationship between X and Y, that every one of those horizontal lines relative to Y has a zero component to it.

And we know that every one of those vertical lines relative to X has a zero component to it.

So most people will look at the blackness of that relative to the white background and they'll just see something material separating.

But if we actually look at it graphically, and we take Daniel's idea of the tetrahedron, every time we round an edge and change direction on that tetrahedron, there is a zero element that allows for that boundary crossing that we, again, don't pay as much attention to.

And so from an autopoetic standpoint, you can actually see where something like a Markov blanket both separates

and leaves the potential open for that transfer or that crossing or that transition.

So when we're modeling ourselves, the last paragraph of the section five of the paper, they wrote, arriving at an FEP as synthesis.

So some non-zero number and zero,

view depends upon which representational criterion we are assuming when either considering FEP central constructs or considering specific cognitive phenomena through the lens of a process theory under FEP.

Do we include the zero piece of this or not?

Tentatively?

Fully?

Or do we willfully ignore it?

Hence, in the end, the debate about FEP may reveal more about us

our criteria whether we want this to be a material thing and not not include the zero aspect of it and our interest in particular facets of cognition than does about the representational status of fep so i just want to kind of bring that again don't judge me because i i could be way wrong here and i may be overfitting but i think that the autopoetic part of it

We can see both the separation and we can see the portal in a line if we choose to include both.

That's kind of what I wanted to bring up.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Very interesting, Dean.

Thanks.

Here's the unfolded tetrahedra.

There's a few shapes of paper that can be folded into a tetrahedra.

One looks more like a parallelogram and one looks more like an equilateral triangle where it just kind of like folds up like the petals of a flower.

So these zero lines.

So there's the zero point of within a facet,

representational and non-representational that's almost like the two sides of the paper like how many triangles are here oh four how about eight how many units how many triangle units of paint do you need to paint this four no eight two sides so the zero is like the thickness of the paper and that's also when you fold it up that's like inside versus outside of the tet

And then these zero Y lines are like the movements from one face to another face, where it's also thin enough as to be imperceptible, especially when it's laid flat, but it makes all the difference to move from one side to another.

How do we use...

Moving through zero in this eightfold or other cognitive models, how do we use that to increase the efficacy or the fluidity or the accessibility of models?


SPEAKER_00:
Does it help us in explaining that we're not locked out of that self-organization loop?

That we can actually participate in it?

Is that the first thing that it tells us?

That we're not locked out of that ability to self-generate?

That was a question.

I wasn't questioning.

It was like an honest, sincere question.


SPEAKER_03:
I think so.

One supportive or complimentary component would be, this is sort of a map.

This is like a cognitive map.

And someone could say, this side of the paper is better than the other side.

And this is my favorite face.

it's presented as part of a larger knowledge structure such that the learner could engage in counterfactuals like what if we were on the other side of the paper or what if we were on a different face so this allows for example individuals to reflect their understanding of the lay of the land but also communicate their preferences

And as the paper shows, different individuals do have different outcomes in terms of their cognitive conclusions.

And that's what reveals the super fascinating thing about us.

And that's why the paper is modeling ourself

what the free energy reveals about our implicit notions of representation, not free energy principle modeling representation, what the free energy principle reveals about representation, which would be a slightly different paper and title.

So just the scholarship and the sense-making phase that only very few have to engage in, like Sims and Pizzulo have, is to make these

maps and then bring the perspectives that were not integrated to be shown as just different locations in a phase space like we put four zeros but so it's not as simple as just like two numbers but you know if there was if it was just two topics being against each other

Every perspective could have a position in that phase space.

And then what do we do with that?

Yes, Danielle.


SPEAKER_01:
I guess I'm thinking about the ourselves part of modeling ourselves.

I'm not really thinking about...

all humans and the way that our minds work.

It's more of the academic conversations that have been happening around the sort of intellectual tradition that's been happening around representation.

And so the contribution of this paper, as I see it, is that, look, we've got this framework that does a lot of work for us in a lot of different disciplines.

And if we apply it to this conversation, this intellectual debate,

that's been happening, we can reveal implicit assumptions of the debate itself.

And what emerges is that perhaps as an artifact of particular examples that have been used to understand representation, we see one side of the coin or another.

We can see these, we pull on these different dimensions that are

laid out in this paper.

So I guess it's just important to think about and disagree if you disagree.

But the ourselves is really just about the way that philosophers and cognitive scientists have been thinking about this.

Nothing is true.

This is not revealing something about cognition per se.

It's more about the implicit assumptions that have been kind of unfolding and how we're thinking about the discipline.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks for that.

Just like there was a sort of hinge on the functional being used in two different ways, another sense of representation, one that might be more commonly used outside of cognitive science would be like representation in terms of different perspectives or identities in a group.

And then that made me think of nothing about us without us,

which is used in different contexts, but basically has to do with participatory decision-making that decisions are not being made in a way removed from the people who it influences.

And that has to do with representation, no taxation without representation, for example.

And so cognitive science is,

is actually in a nothing about us without us.

Because if there's just an academic discussion, especially an unexamined one with a lot of implicit baggage about

a hyper-intellectualized, hyper-abstracted scenario.

Or like, we like to study representational organizational cases where it's super clean.

These are the ones that we study.

These are the model systems.

These are the kind of careers that have been built in academia, for example.

But it's about us in the broader sense, like humans, and then even us as cognitive entities.

And so...

it is the philosophers and the literature that is in this paper, as Danielle kind of highlighted, that's the modeling ourself.

The selves there are the participants in the discussion around representation, which of course has been textual, abstract, English speaking,

qualitative, other adjectives.

So it's another interesting connection there.

Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
So definitely the subjectivity that Danielle highlighted is a big part of perhaps why we have these organizational, structural, these different viewpoints.

But maybe something that I don't think is really emphasized too much in this paper is

is kind of the realist versus instrumentalist viewpoint of active inference.

And so there's a pretty big argument in the literature.

And I think probably the math is not the territory maybe gets into it the best, maybe, or in the most detail of the papers that we've studied here on this stream.

But there's,

people that say like active inference is a way to model the cognitive process or the action perception process that we all undergo.

And then there are people who say that this is actually happening in a computational way in the brain.

It's not a model of, it is how it works.

And so there's this ongoing like vision fusion feud

happening in the active inference community also.

And I just wanted to highlight that because, yeah, because you may not know.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks a lot, Blue.

I pulled out a few quotes because I also noticed that when we, it was one of the earlier quotes when we were talking about the, I think, organizational element.

So look at how often reality comes into play in these conversations.

Discussion, so internal variables of a model.

Okay, so we're talking about instrumentalism, right?

Like models are understood to be separated from external reality by a Markov blanket.

Wait, reality?

And the generative model, model, is leveraged to infer the causal structure of external reality.

So it flips four times in that sentence

from reality, from model to reality, back to model, back to reality.

It doesn't make it right or wrong.

It's just a very interesting epistemic artifact.

Because within the reality of the model,

like the reality of the map, it is the case that the internal variables are separated.

And if the model is trying to do determination on that level of reality, like maps trying to infer maps, that is reality.

But then that's not the sort of layer one

external reality in the sense that many people often mean or use it.

Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think, Danny, if you take the words reality and model and push them out into even more extreme tales, you could see the model.

You could see people who are pushing back against the model idea, and they're arguing you're just too rigid, right?

You're just too stuck.

And you can see people that are taking the non-representational sort of reality view, the variance view,

maintained or retained view as say, you can see the people that are on the model end of the continuum saying, that's just chaos.

There's nothing about that that we can actually make sense of because the cognitive overload right now is just swamping me, right?

And so I think what these authors were trying to do is say, well,

Can we move back and forth instead of getting stuck on those really far out positions in terms of this way of being able to see when we have these densities, right?

And then how do those densities re-reset back to some sort of invariance and then re-reform?

Right?

So I think that's, I hope that kind of speaks to what Daniel was saying too, because sure, we can point out the most extreme example, like at the very end of the continuum, or we can actually talk about how we're going to draw these unidirectional or bidirectional lines and boundary cross.

And I think that's what they were trying to open our thinking up to, but...

Maybe I'm just being Pollyanna here because I really like the paper animal.


SPEAKER_03:
Interesting point.

Realism is also used in another way, which is kind of like it's a school of literature or a thread of literature.

And so then I found this paper, Affect of Realism, Evoke Realism Beyond Representation.

And so this is in the case of literary expression.

So that's an activity that cognitive entities are engaged in.

And we just see a lot of terms that we talk about in ACT-INF, like agency, affect, process.

And here it's not about reality, realism, territory, it's like realization.

And realization is an interesting word.

And I know Verveke and others use it as well because realization, it is about the model.

But when something is realized, it becomes real in the model.

But usually we wouldn't say that something is realized like, oh, I just realized that zebras have nine legs, right?

It's like you engaged in a counterfactual, but is it a realization if the model is updated in a way that isn't concordant with reality?

And I agree that the paper gives us a lot of nuance to talk about these areas because we can talk about how, well, the isolation of the variables doesn't change, or the structure of the legs and the zebra

doesn't change or it can still run, right?

So why not nine legs?

Is it still a zebra?

There's a lot of open threads, but the way that they use model and reality in light of a lot of the other discussions we've had is really illustrative.

Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
So one of my favorite things to think about in terms of the realism versus the instrumentalism is the Markov blanket.

I was looking for the picture of the person sleeping under the Markov blanket.

Really, as a partition for a system, do systems have Markov blankets?

Or can they be modeled with Markov blankets?

And I always just like,

Think of that cute little picture with the little person sleeping under the Markov blanket.

Like, do I have Markov blanket wrapped around me?

Um, because that's really where it, um, tends to break down in my mind.

It's like, yes, there's a boundary.

Um, but I'm not sure that it's a fist and blanket or a Pearl blanket or a Markov blanket.

Like maybe it's just skin.


SPEAKER_03:
Um, yes, Dean.


SPEAKER_00:
I hate answering a question with another question but in the conclusion of the paper the authors speak specifically to the free energy principle can be very heuristic and so I'm wondering in the instrumentalist versus realist debate whether it has to necessarily get up to that abstract level of Markov blanket or whether we can just say that sandwiched between those two are rules that we demarcate, that we

we lay down and that we have act as a parsing mechanism.

I don't know.

What do you think, Blue?

Like our rules are rules, things that we can just get our hands on right today instead of having to go all the way up to figuring out what a Markov blanket is under this set of circumstances.


SPEAKER_02:
No, I think definitely rules, right?

So, I mean, we all agree that there are laws in physics.

Like, if you drop an apple, it will fall to the floor.

Like, we all abide by these rules.

They might not apply at every scale, but I definitely think that a rule-based construction or understanding, like, does that then bridge the realism versus instrumentalism debate, perhaps?


SPEAKER_03:
So...

Building on the point that the ourselves in the title is the people reading the paper.

So not just like people in the psych department, but it's the ourselves, the people who are in that epistemic commons.

So using that, but also the content related representations in terms of correctness or truth.

So if the ourselves are those who are pondering FEP, then the heuristic that they refer to, we conclude by highlighting the heuristic power of the FEP to advance our understanding of the notion of internal representation.

It is pretty meta because we're representing the debate about people representing the debate about representation.

However,

the fact that it has a heuristic utility within the content related aspect at the very least it does have representational impact i'm not sure where that takes us there's probably other ways to take it but i think something about um the diversity of conclusions that people have and how that shines a light back on us or is a mirror

and how the FEP has been applied here in this paper as a heuristic for sense-making in this meta-debate says something, I hope.

Danielle?


SPEAKER_01:
I hope I'm addressing what you're saying and not taking this in another direction.

Stepping back, I'm thinking of FEP as just one of many different tools of thought that we have that allow us to align our representations.

And if it is an effective tool, we all start having a conversation that makes sense to each other, that's mutually intelligible.

In this case, it is kind of meta because it's about how

the academics, the intellectual conversation about representations have failed to converge on something.

There's this debate.

There are many layers of the debate.

And so what it reveals is that we haven't yet converged.

The community hasn't converged.

And so FEP is

is this thing that we can use that reveals those things and allows us to then better, because it's revealing these things, we can all attend to those things that were implicit and are now made explicit.

We're converging our representations.

So I think that kind of addresses what you're saying.

It's about representations, but it's also this tool, like there are many other types of tools that allow us to realize what we've been taking for granted and align our representations.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks a lot.

Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just to add on to that, if you're like me, you think rules and tools are interchangeable.

And the other thing you think is that if it's a heuristic, it speaks kind of to that vicarious function in terms of content.

So I just want to throw that on top because I think there's some agreement around that.

We use the rules to make that next vicarious play before we make the next move.

So, I mean, anybody that doesn't is kind of kidding themselves, I think, but maybe I'm wrong.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, here's a little bit of FEP in a heuristic case.

So we've talked about the Helmholtz decomposition of vector fields, like in stream number 32, about how there's this pragmatic or sort of hill climbing or gradient descending component, whether you take the optimistic biology, climbing mountain probable, go straight up the mountain of fitness, or the physicist's

gradient descent into the bottom of the well.

In either case, there's that irrotational component that's associated with pragmatism.

And then there's this epistemic component that's associated with the solenoidal isocontour.

So we've talked about that Helmholtz decomposition.

So here's one way in which the FEP is being heuristically applied.

So Danielle said, the academic conversation on representation has not converged.

And it has not converged.

And it has also not even cohered.

Like there isn't a shared ontology.

There's not a shared narrative.

There's not shared words or regime of attention or what people are even focused on.

And so what the FEP is doing literally like they did here with this distinction, it does a few things.

It holds space for not overfitting.

Like let's just say in 2055, all the people in the world or all the cognitive scientists, they all agreed.

Oh great, we converged.

Let's lock that in.

But FEP even then will remind us like not to overfit

and also not to center one side of the tetrahedra.

We could say, this is the side that has these attributes, or we focus on this side for these reasons, and no one goes there to this other side, or there's a reason why we don't go there, or we take a journey, we travel through there, but we don't live there or something like that.

It brings a level of coherence to the discussion that

doesn't necessarily have the goal of perfect static convergence but still there'll be solenoidal flow and differences in opinion even then um who said the fep wasn't useful


SPEAKER_01:
Well, and maybe this is obvious, but is that not what any good theory does?

Like Blue said, well, gravity is true because if I drop an apple, it will fall.

Yeah, so the theory of gravity does the same thing.

It allows us to kind of converge our representations.

It's just that the theory of gravity is not itself about representation.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, this is like the hall of mirrors, this paper and conversation, because it is like, it's the group of people in the hall of mirrors and they're all wearing mirror suits in a weird way.

But it is our gem for building the kind of frameworks that then can reduce our uncertainty a ton

potentially in similar cases.

And the strange loop of reflexive cognitive entities is going to be this open-ended bount for a long time to come.

But just like how we started here with a really complex reciprocal case of two adaptive entities, but then it was a lot less ambiguous here.

And I wonder if...

active informed system design will frame an increasing amount of pieces especially in a digital world into this bottom tier offloading some of the repetitive tasks attention consuming tasks anxiety producing stimuli into these type of interactions which opens up new spaces for these kinds of interactions with the two adaptive entities

To return to that having or possessing a Markov blanket, just one quick point was, which we already even read the quote, which was a core aspect of FEP, such as the possession of a Markov blanket.

So is the Markov blanket the system?

Or does it have one?

Those are both realist.

Or is it modeled as having?

Is it modeled as being?

Those are instrumentalist ways of similar framings.

And how do we know what the core aspects are?

What

does that stem from so there's a ton to learn and discuss there and then let's look at any in just our last few minutes any of the other topics and if anybody wants to highlight one of these or also maybe as we jump off from 36.2 to 37 and beyond

when we discuss free energy a user's guide but also we just continue on our paths like why does it matter not all these papers maybe make the argument for why this whole representation debate matters so what is the pragmatics

that make this meaningful, make it important to fund people working on it or the way that it influences the technologies that we're developing rather than just a pure info gain reduction of uncertainty question.

So any topics here or any like thoughts on how this will or could or should influence our action selection going forward?


SPEAKER_00:
I'm comfortable with long silences, but I'm going to throw this out there.

I think people will be able to use this tool to become more creative, not just be able to reduce or minimize their prediction errors, but actually have the confidence to come up with new and different ways of looking at problems that we probably didn't have in our toolkit before in terms of being able to come up with something different.

And so I think

the first thing that it does is it allows for a boundary crossing that maybe we constructed in our minds before, but we're seeing less and less of it as being a hard stop.

And there's now maybe a little bit more

More say in whether to go or don't go.

So that's what I would think that this kind of work is maybe opening up.

Unless somebody comes and shuts it down.

And I can't speak to what outside forces would find terribly threatening, but I'm sure there are some out there.


SPEAKER_03:
Outside.

Luke?


SPEAKER_02:
so I'm not sure if this has any pragmatic value, but I'm, I'm certainly interested in kind of really exploring like sensory motor engagement and structural representation and maybe like synesthesia.

I know Daniel's been to Meow Wolf, but like,

You know, when you're playing these invisible, like the invisible harp, you know, and it's like, could you structure a room, like draw a map in a room?

And your goal is to like, kind of like an escape room, but your goal is to find, navigate your way through based on sound, right?

Like you ting the things and you have to find the right sound.

You're playing Mary Had a Little Lamb and then you get to your prize at the end or you get to get out of the room at the end.

So I wonder creatively, like Dean was saying, like really these maps, these representations, can we get literally out of our own representation and into the feeling of an alternate representation?

And what would that feel like or be like?

And that's also why I brought up like blindness.

Like, you know, if you ever wake up and like a totally, like my power went out the other night and it was like black.

I mean, no moon, nothing.

It's just like, whoa, total darkness.

No little blue light from the plug or nothing.

So in these total darkness situations, you have this representation of what does my house look like?

Where's my flashlight?

You have to be able to navigate yourself in a totally dark situation, which is very foreign.

to go find a flashlight.

And so I like these kind of boundary pushing experiences because they really force us to examine our own model and perhaps allow us to explore the kind of models that other people use.


SPEAKER_03:
Thinking through other minds is this case with adaptive agents in dialogue.

And it's like thinking through other representations and this paper and discussion opens up not to then simply converge, but opens up and holds ways to think and act through other types of representations, not just the same type, but in a different cognitive entity.

it comes up a lot and it'd be awesome to see how just as so many other themes that we've had raised by very prescient papers like 14 math is not the territory 20 emperor's new markov blanket and some of the further nuancing about the markovian assumptions

this representational and non-representational and these words like organization structure content and function they will come up again and maybe they'll be citing this paper maybe they won't but like

It's almost like when we see in a future paper, just one facet of the Tet and they'll say, here's how it is.

It's this one side.

It's like, well, no, there's other sides and we could be inside or we could be outside.

And someone could still say, I prefer this one, but we know there's a bigger system that we can at least come to the table around Dean.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm not marketing, but it's going to come up in 37.

It's going to come up a bunch of times in 37.

So that's just the next paper.

So anyway, hold on to your socks because if you think you have to wait for it to come up again, it's going to come up again next week.


SPEAKER_03:
Don't touch that dial.

Thanks a lot for the awesome sequence.

This was a somewhat complex or intellectual paper.

I mean, they're all written, but this one was like challenging topics, a lot of different perspectives.

And then not only did they

hold it open for all of the different perspectives, but then rather than pick a winner, they flipped the table in the end and posed it not as an answered competition for us to then have like domain specific clarity of action within, but really a challenge on multiple levels.

for researchers who are familiar with FEP and not.

The big question we asked was, can the free energy principle help us advance or even resolve the long lasting debate on internal representation in philosophy of mind?

We certainly asked.

So,

If anybody has any last comments they wanna make on anything, they're welcome to.


SPEAKER_00:
The last word, so I'll get this in real quick.

I think that if we're still arguing about whether or not representation and modeling is heavily dependent, like that there is a dependency, I think that the more philosophical

views that we see come up around FEP and active inference, the harder and harder it is to make the case that we can remove that dependency or somehow just see the scale-free aspects of this tool.

That there's actually a heavy dependency on what we're going to get out of representation or non-representation

based on our awareness or our realization that every time we cross a boundary, that is just an independent act.

That's a highly dependent act.

So that'll be my last word.


SPEAKER_02:
So I just want to give a final comment.

You know, we talk about instrumentalism and realism, and then there's like the third axis of utility.

And I really think that this paper was super useful in prompting new questions and holding up these different views of representation and non-representation and in these different categories and allowing us to really kind of view them through like a partitioned framework that I think will drive

future questions and really be useful in helping researchers formulate their theories.


UNKNOWN:
Great.


SPEAKER_03:
Danielle, if you're still here, thanks for joining for your first stream.

Do you have any last comments?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, this was a wonderful introduction.

I'm curious how representative it is of other conversations.

It was super heady in a really pleasant way.


SPEAKER_03:
It was not representative or representational of other conversations.

No.

Thanks a lot for the awesome convo.

Everyone's always welcome to join these discussions or other lab activities.

So thanks again to the authors and all the participants here.

See
