## INRaCBikpso

SPEAKER_05:
hello and welcome to the active inference lab to our first ever applied active inference symposium today it's june 21st 2021 and we're very honored to be here with professor carl friston and many of our lab participants

Just as a way of quick introduction, the Active Inference Lab is a nonprofit organization that is a participatory open science laboratory.

And we're working to curate and develop applications related to the Active Inference framework, something that hopefully we'll be going into a lot more in detail today.

And this is a screenshot of our website.

As far as the overview of the symposium, there are three organizational units in the lab, .edu, education, .coms, communication, and .tools.

And each of these units are going to facilitate a 45-minute or so session, and we'll have a short break in between sessions.

So in our weekly meetings over the past weeks for each organizational unit, we've been developing questions and getting excited about things that we wanted to talk to you about.

As far as a few overarching themes that were kind of spoken to,

really through the whole journey of our lab, but also across organizational units.

The first theme is applying active inference across systems.

Again, something that will come up probably in all sections.

The idea of research debt, the idea that we don't want to be developing

Research frameworks that have a huge burden on those who are learning and applying, and that especially early in the formalization of frameworks, it's extremely valuable to increase the accessibility so that we don't end up with major headaches and incompatibilities later on.

Collective intelligence and the ways in which that is manifest across different systems.

transdisciplinary teams, projects, and communities, which are kind of like nested levels of organization, but transdisciplinarity is something that is necessary for the type of work that we're all interested in.

And also just modern challenges and opportunities for research and all that that means related to online and everything else and

of course, anything else that you have tumbling around and wanted to bring to the table thematically.

So there we are with our sort of lab overview and introduction.

Let's go to our first organizationalunit.edu.

The goal of .edu is to scaffold and create a participatory and dynamic active inference body of knowledge, which we'll talk more about in a second.

And our progress and actions this year

have been to release a terms list v1 which benefited greatly from your feedback and also we're now updating the terms list to version 2 which now includes five complete language translations and many references and citations for the terms

way that we're approaching the development of the terms is by using approaches that place ontology and progressively more formalized versions of ontologies as kind of the backbone of an educational body of knowledge so we started on the left side here with a terms list in the first quarter of 2021 and the ontology working group is like a train that's pushing to the right as they're learning ontology by doing

and developing progressively stronger and stronger ways of relating the terms and the concepts that are essential for understanding active inference.

And this will help us develop principled educational material that's also able to be translated rapidly.

Alex, do you want to give a quick thought on where knowledge engineering comes into play?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, thanks.

At this slide we are showing this work with ontology with system engineering approach which we are also using in the lab and considering possible deliverables of working on educational materials and creating them.

We should have at some point of time textbooks and educational courses.

And actually, maybe this lab is started from the idea that textbook for active inference should be created.

Also, we see some connection that can be applied to organizational management for creating translations to make it multi-language from the beginning.

And also we should see for some domain-specific use cases that we can understand in terms of that ontology that we are going to create.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Alex.

So on to the questions section.

We're going to start off pretty broad here in the .edu.

How do we go about determining the core ideas and terms for active inference?

This will be the format of the question slides, Carl, so feel free to jump in.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

I guess it will be structured around the key ideas and essential ingredients that underwrite the free energy principle and how that translates into active influence.

So without thinking about it too deeply,

my mind just goes to what are the things, what are the basic ingredients you need to explain to somebody what active inference is and why it works.

And it normally starts off with the notion of a generative model.

And then from that,

you spin off all the appropriate mathematical ideas and constructs and descriptions that would attend that.

I mean, it may be best to reflect the question back to you.

So this idea of having an ontology.

And it's certainly my experience that people are entertained by sometimes the poetic use of phrases and descriptions such as epistemic affordance when trying to grapple with what are the fundamental ideas behind active inference.

Some of them are fundamental and some of them are not.

So it certainly is an interesting idea to try and tie down the ontology.

But let me ask you,

This ontology just means what it says in the sense that you're trying to define the essential concepts and how they relate to each other.

Is that the basic idea?


SPEAKER_05:
Yep.

Going back to this slide here, we want to have a continuum from a list of terms potentially that could be developed into coherent and again, principled course material and competencies, but also develop a logic.

And we're developing within the SUMO ontology development framework, which defines not just relational edges, but actually a actual logic

And so we hope to be able to ask, like, is this a complete active inference model?

Have we really checked off all the boxes and used those kinds of logical tools that are accessible to the well-developed ontological frameworks?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Well, that's very compelling and very clear.

It strikes me then that it would be useful to link that operational ontology to the underlying maths.

So much of the...

much of the conceptual steps, both in understanding and implementing active inference, usually in terms of simulating interesting behaviour or using it as an observation model to explain some empirical data from a study, much of it

can be developed in terms of a series of moods that usually, or in fact almost universally, are framed in terms of

either information theory or linear algebra or differential equations and you can just build the story from that so if you're looking for that degree of formal and useful detail then it would be

one principle you might refer to is basically where does one equality assertion or description or variable or object, where does it come from in terms of inheriting from the more basic formalism?

So what I'm thinking of here is where does active inference start and how do you get to

the calculus and the Bayesian mechanics that you would associate with active inference.

And my guess is, given the structure or the way that you have approached the ontology, you've probably actually done that already or are in the process of doing that.

Are you going to go through some examples that would sort of highlight the strategy and the problems, which are usually more illuminating than the solutions that you've encountered so far?


SPEAKER_05:
Sure, I'll switch here to this screenshot of the current state of what it looks like.

And we're starting just in tabular form by compiling up to five references and citable definitions.

First, just looking for exact cases where a term is used.

and then we'll go from how the term has been used towards synthetic definitions that capture different senses of the term and then along with the concise narrative of the field and also ontology experts who are here with us we're going to then be working to

make the actual logical underpinnings elucidated in terms of specifiable code rather than just concise English definitions.

And then from that sort of generator of the formal relationships, we'll be able to descend into mathematical formalisms or other natural human languages.

We'll keep you posted on this project though.

For sure.

Let's go to this next question and imagine that we had that set of terms in development.

It's going to be a work in progress our whole lives.

How would we go from core terms and ideas to an interactive and enlivening education that speaks to people from many different backgrounds?


SPEAKER_01:
So I'm going to answer this question from the point of view of my experience as a supervisor, which is probably a little bit of a narrow remit from your more general ambition.

And I imagine that this is related to this notion of research debt.

I can't remember now, but this notion that you don't want to put too much

pressure on people when becoming acquainted with the utility and application of either the code or the ideas.

So in my experience in an academic setting,

just having toy simulations is usually the best way to give people a feel for what this approach does and how it can be used.

So it's enormously potent in terms of demystifying and also illustrating the functionality at hand or that can be accessed.

It also...

having a sort of, you know, a working, or at least a toy model, sort of provides a proof of principle that can strip away the magic as well.

And I think your ambition to try and make this accessible to people who are not necessarily fluent in the underlying

information theory or dynamical systems is very laudable and perfectly feasible.

So again in my experience some of the most creative applications of active inference can be by people who don't really necessarily wonder too much what's underneath the hood.

It all comes back again to the design of the generative model.

So if you get the generative model right

and it's apt to describe the thing that you want to understand or to simulate, then usually everything else follows suit.

And I mean that in the sense that you can just take off the shelf software, which I presume that your ultimate ambition is to make available.

and make it work in the service of sort of saying well what would this agent or this synthetic creature or person do in exchange with her environment if this was the generative model and this was the generative process.

So a lot of this

A lot of this really, I imagine in terms of answering your question, how do we go from core terms to interactive and enlivening education, is just establishing a language, a lexicon that allows you to talk through somebody in constructing their own simulations that speak to the issues that engage them.

either academically or beyond academia.

So clearly then the core terms play the role of literally a language in terms of communication, which brings us back again to the importance of the ontology.

and having the terms linked in a formal way to the mathematical expressions and also procedures and processes.

So I guess that

a precondition to use the core terms in an interactive and enlivening educative sense will rest upon getting that ontology right.

In my experience, the best way to get the ontology right in the sense of it being

enabling is just to talk about the terms until everybody, until there's some consensus and everybody understands them in terms of either their teleology, well, sorry, no, both in terms of their teleology, but also in terms of where they come from, from the point of view of the code and ultimately the maths that underwrites all this.

Is that the sort of answer you're looking for here or thinking along, are you thinking along the same lines?


SPEAKER_05:
It sounds great.

There's so many dimensions there.

Just to provide a summary or just jump in at one place, what is Active Inference and what does Active Inference do?


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

So that's perfect because I was just thinking it would be really useful just to go down the terms that you had in the

in the previous but one slide highlighted in green, because I think all the heavy lifting here is really just shouting about what are the core aspects and claims or the core things that you're trying to communicate with any one of those terms.

So for me, active inference would

be a description of a process that can be seen as something that arises from the free energy principle.

So you can either

and tell that story from the point of view of a physicist and say the active inference is a teleological description of processes that systems that self-organize must possess.

Or you could tell the story or define active inference from the point of view of neurobiology and ethology.

from the point of view of, say, predictive processing, and describes what it entails.

And I've used the word basing mechanics before, because from the point of view of the physics definition, it would be a teleological description of a basing mechanics that necessarily arises with certain assumptions from any self-organizing system.

key thing about active inference which um i think would be important to put in the definition in the ontology i'm not sure it's it's already there but you know if you're in charge of sculpting that ontology um then you're in the position to make sure it's there um is it it's about it's beyond predictive um processing it's beyond sentience and it emphasizes um

or reflects the pragmatic term at the beginning of this century, really, sort of epitomized by the sort of the four E's, you know, embodied, embedded, extended and the like.

to make it clear that sentience is active and that you are talking about the circular causality of engagement of any particle person or plant with whatever is out there.

So that would be certainly one thing to emphasize in terms of what active inference means.

The inference is interesting in the sense that it does imply a process and a process with purpose, which is to infer, which is why I keep using the word, you know, a theological description of something that's actually underneath the hood from the point of view of physics.

One final point here is

There's an easy confusion, I think, between, first of all, active inference and passive inference.

So that's certainly something which probably needs resolving, certainly in the philosophical literature.

So I often come across the philosophers who say, well, there's passive inference or perceptual inference, which is just basically inferring states of affairs in the world.

on the basis of some sensory evidence.

And then there's the extra bit, which is the active bit, which is now you're in charge of gathering that sensory evidence upon which you are now going to prosecute your perceptual inference.

That's an interesting dichotomy, which I'm not sure is, you know,

is a correct dichotomy.

If it's not right, I'm not sure that it is not right in the sense that it is a useful distinction, but certainly is not what active inference was originally termed to mean.

By conjoining active and inference, there were a number of motivations.

First, it was a generalization of David McKay's active learning.

But probably more importantly, it was a nod to the notion of active sensing and active perception, that perception is in and of itself an active process, a constructive process that you have to put

policies, plans and action into the game.

So that, I think, would be one important aspect of active inference to define.

And I don't know that it has been defined so far.

So, you know, perhaps it's your job to define that.

The other thing which is...

important I think in terms of emphasizing what active inference entails actually comes from that inactive perspective which is inference about the consequences of action and that has an important but really simple concomitant that the consequences of action are in the future

And that means you now have to think, if you're thinking about active inference in terms of teleology or as a normative theory of behaviour, of sentient behaviour, you have to now think about

I'm sorry, and I should say qualify.

When I say normative, I mean it can be operationally defined in terms of as an optimization process that in turn requires you to define the objective function or functional

And that's important practically, because if you're now thinking about sentient behaviour, active inference, and it's inference about things that haven't yet happened because you haven't yet acted, then you're necessarily talking about objective functions or functionals.

that are about states of affairs in the future.

And that is an important move and something that active inference embraces, which goes beyond predictive coding.

So much of the literature in the 20th, in the 1990s and subsequent, much of the literature

inspired that sort of inactive perception or active sensing take situated cognition take on on sentience originated in you know in things like predictive coding but predictive coding is not what is meant by active inference you can do predictive coding just by if you're a statistician just minimizing variational free energy that that that's only

half the game, once you move into the world of active inference, from a teleological perspective, you have to do that, you have to form beliefs about hidden states of affairs in the world, using the perceptual side of perceptual inference, but that is only in the service of rolling out into the future.

and deciding what the best thing is to do next.

And that running out into the future and deciding clearly calls for an objective function.

So in active inference, that would be the expected free energy, which may or may not be unfortunately named, but that's what it is.

and therefore active inference sort of implies that you are committed to optimizing an expected free energy and implicitly it's all about choosing the next thing to do

So for me, those would be two would be two sort of cardinal things that should be embraced by definition of active inference that transcend other normative approaches.

So, for example, reinforcement learning in behavioral psychology would be all about what the good things are to do.

And you commit to a loss of functionality.

a value function of states um you know if that was the your um the kind of behavior that you're trying to describe if on the other hand you were all about the psychophysics of perception or just building base or digital terrorist recognition systems where you weren't in charge of gathering those data then your objective functions will be would be very very different um but what active infant says well you can't you can't

carve up the two problem domains because they're just both sides of the same coin and thereby you're now facing the problem of defining an objective function that is fit for purpose, that does both

the belief updating about latent states or hidden states generating the data and also the best way to solicit or cause those data or outcomes under some prior preferences or some goal-directed constraints.

Is that a good long-winded answer?


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you for the comprehensive answer.

It leads directly to our next questions, which are what is the free energy principle and especially what is the relationship between active inference and the free energy principle?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, that's I think a slightly easier question to answer.

I mean, the free energy principle is just a variational principle of least action.

Why is it special or not formally identical to all the other variational principles that we use?

If you look under the hood, right from quantum through statistical and stochastic to classical mechanics.

Well, the only thing that differentiates really

variational principle of least action that is the free energy principle is that you're paying careful attention to the separation of states to which you apply that principle the separation of states into the states of an agent or a particle or a person and the outside states so technically

If you were in statistical thermodynamics, for example, you'd normally assume that separation in terms of some idealized gas that was contained within the container or heat reservoir or a heat bath without really worrying about where the heat bath or the heat reservoir came from.

But the free energy principle says, well, no, you can't really do that.

You've really got to attend very carefully to that.

to what licenses a separation of different kinds of states that you can assign to the inside of something and the outside of something, and the states that mediate the exchange between the inside and the outside, and then you get into the Markov blanket and Markov boundary literature.

So just to summarize, the free energy principle is just a principle of least action.

by which I mean that there is a description of dynamics in terms of the most likely paths any system will take, that is the special provenance of a partitioning or a separation of the states of some universe into the states that are owned by an agent or a particle and those that are not, and the states that mediate the exchange between them.

So that would be the free energy principle.

Active inference, as I say, is a sort of teleological spinoff from the free energy principle in the sense that in the same sense that you have now at hand

a principle of least action that allows you to identify, simulate, define the paths or trajectories or the narratives that a system, the most likely paths, trajectories or narratives that a system will pursue under certain conditions, and those conditions are just that there is an attracting set of states

to which that system will converge to or will look as if it's attracted to.

So what I was working towards was the notion of an attracting set as a metaphor for equipping that

physics with a teleology, and that teleology is nicely illustrated by the notion of attraction.

So, you know, when mathematicians talk about attractors in the particular case in the free energy principle, these are sort of pullback attractors or the kind of attractors that you get in random dynamical systems.

There's a proper and natural tendency to think that these particular states of the attracting set literally attract in the sense of gravitational attraction or any other kind of attraction.

They pull states towards them.

So that, to me, would be a theological interpretation, which I think is much closer to active inference, that you're saying that inference is a process that has a purpose and the underlying free energy principle looks, allows you to say, the way it looks as if self-organizing systems

uh show these certain properties they're attracted to certain states they show um you know they're attracted to certain paths and we can describe those uh in terms of the theological ontology and that would be active inference and one practical difference between active inference and the free energy principle is that the free energy principle is just a principle it's neither right nor wrong it's just like um

Barrow-Millage has noted it's like sort of Noether's theorem or Hamilton's principle of least action.

But as soon as you start to say, well, I think that this principle applies to this population or person or particle,

that suddenly commits you or requires you to define the attracting set of states, a pullback attractor, in another jargon, the equivalent would be a generative model.

And as soon as you commit to a generative model to explain the teenology of this system or this agent or this person,

then you've moved into the world of non-falsifiable principles into falsifiable hypotheses because you could have chosen the wrong generative model.

And thereby there will be evidence for choosing this generative model or that generative model.

So the relationship between active inference and the free energy principle is operationally quite simple.

Active inference is the application of the free energy principle to a particular system.

But in that application, you're bringing a lot of teleology to the table.

And more specifically, you're having to commit to a particular generative model.

And as soon as you do that, that becomes your theory or your hypothesis about what is an apt description for this system.

So a number of, I think, sort of interesting distinctions in terms of the relationship between active inference and free energy principle that I imagine your ontology has already addressed or is certainly addressing.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, we'll get there.

Thank you for that excellent answer.

For the next question, Lorena, please read it out.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, hi.

So still in the spirit of broad questions and broad terms, and that, I think, comes in line with what came before.

So how and where does the idea of information play a role in the pre-energy principle, and how does it relate

or is active inference in the sense, what is something to keep in mind when thinking about information dynamics in active inference?


SPEAKER_01:
Right, well, these are great questions.

I'm getting the hang of this now.

You just want me to talk.

You'll present a question to me, not if I'm talking, which I'm very happy to do.

Are you sure you want me to do that?

Or should this be a conversation?

Perhaps this will turn into a conversation at some point.

Anyway, so information.

So it plays a dual role in the sense that information

Theoretic formulations underpin most of the derivations behind that principle of least action.

And it can be no other way in the sense that all mechanics from physics is really articulated in terms of probability densities of distributions.

And as soon as you

have a mechanics that is or a calculus or probability distributions, you're effectively in the world of information theory.

And you see that at many different levels.

So one nice example of this is the central quantity that we often use to score the likelihood of being in a particular state.

If you're a statistician, that would be the marginal likelihood.

If you were fluent with an FEP ontology, it would be surprise or almost simply surprise.

That is just basically the self-information.

If you're a physicist, you'd look at this as a potential.

It's a negative log probability.

So you start, really, when thinking about the physics, with this central concept of self-information, which for the IAP can be read as a potential function or a surprisal function, or surprise, and it is the thing that the variational free energy is a bound approximation to.

So at that level and then everything else, every other move you make mathematically in terms of the expected self-information being the entropy and why that is important as a characterization of various probability distributions in the setting of self-organization.

testify to the fact that information theory is absolutely central to all the maths that underlies the physics of the sentience that emerges from having a distinction between the states of the system and states that are not of the system namely the Markov blanket.

Having said that,

Information to most people's minds usually means more, certainly in the folk psychology context.

It's really information about something.

And the FEP active inference has, I think, something quite special to bring to the table here that goes beyond information theoretic treatments that you get in communication and signal processing and rate distortion theorems.

All of that kind of information is just your extensions of information theory that inherit from self-information or the implausibility of a particular event or message.

Or in more abstract domains such as sentience and consciousness, you would go to something like integrated information theory.

But that is all about this Shannon-esque kind of information.

The other kind of information is information about something.

So what I wanted to try and put on the table

is the very fact that you've got this Markov blanket or separation of states on the inside and states on the outside means that now you can equip the states on the inside with the role of encoding posterior conditional Bayesian beliefs about states on the outside.

And that introduces technically a different kind of information geometry, a different kind of information theory.

where crucially now you can read the internal dynamics as containing or having information about what's going on on the outside and this is a really important move equipping your neural dynamics or variational message passing or belief propagation in a computer

with an information geometry that now allows you to read off the state of the computer or the state of the neural activity in terms of what it is encoding or the information it contains about the outside.

And so that sort of dual aspect information geometry has been celebrated to a minor extent in the philosophy literature by Vanya Weiss.

asking the question is, you know, is this really the maths of sentience where you now have information about things?

And in a sense that, you know, that really is the heart of the free energy principle in the sense, or active inference anyway, in the sense that it equips that information geometry.

I mean, technically what you are saying is that any particular internal state of a computer or a person or a brain is

now can be read as encoding a Bayesian or a posterior belief about other states, namely hidden or latent causes outside the Markov blanket.

And that defines technically something called a statistical manifold.

And as soon as there is a statistical manifold, there's an information geometry.

And any movement on that manifold necessarily implies a change in your Bayesian beliefs, namely Bayesian belief updating, which means now there's an interpretation of neuronal dynamics, movements on a statistical manifold on the inside in terms of belief updating.

So the notion of active inference as the process of belief updating

really rests upon this fundamental notion that there's information about stuff going on, about stuff that is encoded or parameterised by the internal machinations and the mechanics and the dynamics of the inside.

So I think it might be quite important to

if you're trying to describe or educate people in terms of how they should understand information as playing a central role in sentience.

I think it'd be important to differentiate between the mathematical notions of Shannon information and self-information

and the calculus of probability and mutual information, for example, and say that this is not the kind of information that is implicit in information geometry and the sentience that is afforded by active inference, when now you're understanding neuronal dynamics or message passing in a computer on some sort of factor graph,

Because in this instance, each of those messages or those neural dynamics can now be read as belief updating, namely changing your mind about other things so that the stuff on the inside has information about stuff on the outside.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks for this important answer and we're going to pass over a few questions and go to 18 with Stephen reading the question to continue on this theme about the separation of the inside and the outside, so thank you Stephen and please read off 18.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

I was going to ask, how can the integrity of the active inference process theory be maintained when blanket states and generative models are being interpreted in novel ways?

So we were thinking about what do you think of discussions around Markov or Perl, Friston blankets, et cetera?


SPEAKER_01:
That's an excellent question.

I have quite a technical answer, so if it's getting too technical, tell me.

I'll try and get back to what you were really trying to unearth.

So this is not a fast moving field, but certainly been a delicate and important area of discussion over the past few years.

So in the original introduction of Markov blankets, there was

an explicit nod to Pearl's construction of Markov blankets and how Markov blankets are used practically in terms of simplifying message passing in computer science.

However,

that may have been something of an oversimplification.

Because from the point of view of the free energy principle, it is the kind of causality that the free energy principle deals with is not the kind of causality that people, particularly people like Pearl, but also people dealing with things like Granger causality,

deal with.

So we're not, from the point of view of the free energy principle, that starts with a stochastic differential equation or a random dynamical system written as a random dynamical equation, OU processes being simple examples.

In physics, these would be Langevin-like equations.

Common to all of these starting points is time and evolution and dynamics.

Now, there is nothing in Pearl's formulations, well, certainly there's nothing in Pearl's book on causality that deals with time.

And I know that because before the days of PDFs and being able to go and search particular words, I had to go through and find out there's one paragraph

that mentions dynamics.

So, you know, if you were in statistics, computer science, you know, this will be the world of dynamic Bayesian nets.

That is their take on something which is actually much more universal, which is basically the universe as a Markovian dynamical process.

So just stepping back, the challenge now is to articulate

independences that underwrite Markov blankets in the sense of Perl in terms of dynamics.

So you've now got to link two quite distinct fields, which is basically the fields of dynamics and long-term processes, things that have paths of least action.

to the world of statistics and Pearl-esque independences and causality cast as interventions that have observable consequences.

The problem in doing that linking is that you have to really abandon the notion of causality in the world of Granger causality and Pearl, because causality is baked into, is inherent in writing down any

differential equation, be it stochastic or random or deterministic, in the sense that states cause motion.

So the causality in this context would be a more control theoretic causality.

So that means that you can't then use the causality concept later on, but it does mean that you've now got to derive from

a dynamical Markovian calculus, the necessary conditions that would lead to the conditional independences that are necessary to define Markov boundaries.

Just to slip in here, the Markov blanket

is composed of minimal blankets, mainly boundaries in the sense of pearl.

And on most recent analyses, it looks as if the blanket is actually two Markov boundaries in the sense of pearl.

But to get to the sense of pearl,

you've got to think very carefully about what are the constraints that lead to the conditional independences, where those constraints are specified in terms of equations of motion and things like the amplitude of random fluctuations.

So once you've seen that that is the link that needs to be made,

That actually simplifies things in the sense there's no real attitude for interpretation.

So I'm going back to the part of your question, you know, blankets and generative models are being interpreted in novel ways.

I don't think there's any latitude for any novel interpretation other than the

Sorry, if in novel ways you mean the best way or the correct way and we just haven't got there yet, then I would, you know, I'd concur entirely with that.

If you think that there is some latitude, there's some library of insightful reinterpretations and redefinitions, all of which have an equal veracity, then I would suggest that's not the case.

There's only one way, there's only one Markov blanket, or there's only one particular partition that will give you, that can be articulated in terms of Markov blankets.

And

the only novelness there is really in tying down very precisely and defensively how you get from a Langevin formulation to a Markov blanket.

At the moment, the novel way of doing that looks as if it's a

that the conditional independences arise from sparse dynamical coupling or causal coupling.

So if you read the causality as the influence that a state has on the motion of itself or any other state in this sort of minimal Langevin-like description of the universe, then it is the sparsity of influence or the sparsity of coupling

that leads to conditional independencies.

And if a system has a sufficiently rich sparsity of conditional independencies and implicitly coupling, then it will have a particular petition.

And if it has that particular petition, then the free energy principle holds.

So I think the discussions around Markov, Pearl, Friston and Blankets are

essential, they're fascinating.

The conclusions of those discussions that I think I'm going to probably have to refer back to the underlying maths and that maths is all about connecting Langevin formulations of physics to the kind of calculus that Pearl has established in a more statistical sense.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you for the educational answer.

This brings us almost to the end of the .edu section.

So I will pass to the final question to be read by Dean, who had several excellent points and questions.

So Dean, feel free to ask however you would like.


SPEAKER_02:
Good morning.

So the question is, what's the difference between a subject matter expert

and a prediction matter expert, and how does this relate to your mode of interaction?


SPEAKER_01:
You're going to have to unpack what subject and prediction matter experts means for me.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

For me, interesting, you become subject matter expert by gaining a certain amount of concentration in a particular field or area, and you become prediction matter expert when you are able to think more distributively, more dispersively.

And so I think what, when I read some of the things and listen to some of the stuff that I've heard you talk about, you've brought these two worlds together.

And so I'm kind of interested in hearing what you think in terms of introducing some of the ideas and principles that you brought into a world where traditionally we focused on concentrating, whether it's materializing something from an engineering perspective or deciding what's in and what's out.

You've brought in another aspect to look at, and I'm just curious what you think of that.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, that's a fascinating distinction.

I'm not sure it's terribly important when I think about it, because clearly you're the expert on this, but it certainly would be fascinating to consider the conditions under which you

were able to simulate the emergence of a subject matter versus a prediction matter expert in silica, for example.

This is a proof of principle that these are both effectively Bayes optimal ways of responding to a particular environment.

And my guess is that you would be able to do that relatively easily

by appealing to the ideas that you find in applying some of active inference notions to structure learning and development where the basic idea is if you've got a

very volatile environment by which I mean that there's lots of uncertainty in the contingencies or possibly there are lots of random fluctuations that are irreducible in terms of your ability to predict the outcome of the trajectory of latent states of the world in which you are becoming an expert.

then when you parameterize your uncertainty, usually formally in terms of the precision of various likelihood mappings or probability transition matrices in a sort of discrete state space generative models, when you parameterize your beliefs about that uncertainty, irreducible uncertainty and volatility, then

agents that believe or have inferred that they are in a very volatile, changeable, capricious world usually become better at the prediction side of things in the sense that they rely less upon deep past experience

and assign more precision or more potency to the more recent evidence.

So they have a different style of evidence accumulation that enables, and also they have the right level of uncertainty about what will happen next.

So it looks as if in their predictive engagement and epistemic foraging in that world,

it looks as if they are better at predicting changes because they're not committed to a particular explanation or understanding of how their world works.

On the other hand, if you create a world which is incredibly predictable and learnable, then over time, the natural pressure to minimize

free energy translates into a pressure to minimize complexity, namely a way of modeling your world and your exchange with it in the simplest way possible, in accordance with Occam's principle.

And what that then leads to is somebody, it sounds as if it's somebody who becomes a subject matter expert.

And so the subject matter is their lived world.

it has now become so predictable that they do not entertain all possible other outcomes because they have precise beliefs about the way that things will unfold and they can make very wise very parsimonious or using parsimonious

degrees of freedom, they can make moves and become very expert in the way that this particular non-volatile, predictable, i.e.

precise world works.

And the link with aging here is that

If you allow for the fact that we create our own environments, at many levels, active inference will permit or is a way of framing our eco-niche construction.

The story people tend to tell is that as you get older, you basically make your world more predictable and you become a subject matter expert in your own lived world.

So I like the example, I no longer go bungee jumping or go to discos.

because my world is very, very predictable.

You're very much an expert in it, because my world is basically my conservatory and my study and my bedroom.

So I'm a complete subject expert on that.

You take me out to a disco and I will not,

I will not be able to predict what's going to happen next because I'm old.

Whereas, you know, adolescents and children and certainly, you know, newborn infants or newborn artifacts discovering their world, which is full of uncertainty,

They are not yet subject experts and the epistemic pressures or motivation for them to learn about what happens if I do that and what can I control and what can't I control, that will make them very quickly into prediction experts until they become experts.

until they become sufficiently fluent that they can now engineer their world to make it non-volatile, and then they presumably will become subject matter experts.

So I'm sure that would be fairly simple to simulate using all the sort of toy active inference schemes that we currently use, and it would be really interesting if these two different kinds of

synthetic agents did develop some cognitive styles and confidence in what they were doing that looked exactly like the distinction you're talking about.

I'm not sure it would work, but if it does, that would be, you know, I think an illuminating proof of principle.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks for this answer and for this session from the lab and .edu.

That last answer really spoke to the importance also of intergenerational learning.

At this point, we will take a five-minute break and we will return for .coms.

So thanks again, and we'll see everybody in five minutes right here.

## X2GwqUVLlcs

SPEAKER_00:
Hello, welcome back.

This is the second session of the ACT-INF Lab Symposium on June 21st, 2021.

And we're here in the dot coms or communication organizational unit.

The goal of dotcoms is to organize the lab's internal projects and activities, as well as to carry out all forms of communication with external entities.

So it's like our connective tissue and our neuroectoderm in a way.

What has been done so far is that we've had about 75 live streams, variously on presentations and participatory discussions since July 28th, 2020.

And we're taking an active inference approach to communication and learning by doing.

Our very first live stream was on the paper narrative as active inference and shortly after a world unto itself, human communication as active inference.

So that's something that we like thinking about here and that we want to explore.

And also some of our lab members framed online communication and team collaboration in terms of active inference in the 2020 paper, Active Inference and Behavior Engineering for Teams.

Our aim here is to make active inference accessible, well-known, and well-understood.

So let's get right to the questions, Carl.

the first question is how can we show not tell the idea of active inference for example through embodied experience experiments or what other mechanisms how can we best communicate in a way that makes it resonate


SPEAKER_01:
Well, pursuing that very interesting notion of using the principles of active inference to optimize the role of the dot-coms team, then

At its simplest, active inference means that the imperatives for all behaviour, and it's likely that most behaviour is of an epistemic sort, is to resolve uncertainty.

So if you want to engage people and be a service to the people you want to engage, which may be internal members of your own team, then you've got to know

what they don't know because that will define the epistemic affordances that will get them engaged with you and you with them that will incur the best kind of belief updating so you know practically what that might mean is that it may well be that you one has to identify

didactic or informative illustrations that are tailored or specialised to the person or people that you're talking about.

I have never thought about using embodied experiences before, but that's a brilliant idea.

You're just illustrating to people who want to know

how my body and my mind works to illustrate to them the mechanics of it working using the language of active inference.

It can be very, very powerful.

So as I'm talking, one example of this would be using saccadic suppression

as an illustration of the potency of getting your beliefs about the predictability of sensory evidence right.

So if you're a physiologist, you would know this as sensory

working with transformers, this would be, I think, attentional selection.

Basically deploying the gain or switching on the right channels in order to select those data that are going to resolve the most uncertainty or maximize the information.

gain subsequent on this sort of covert action, often sold as sort of mental action in the philosophy literature.

So that mental action is really endemic and a vital part of our sensory engagement with the world and beautifully illustrated by saccadic suppression.

So this speaks to the notion of attenuating

the sensory consequences of your own action so that any evidence that you're not actually acting is precluded from your belief updating.

So a clinical example of this would be Parkinson's disease, for example.

If I'm sitting still and I wasn't able to ignore all the messages from my muscles that tell me at the moment I am sitting still, then I am never going to be able to realize an a priori intention

that I'm going to initiate a movement, because as soon as I initiate a movement, I put in place a plausible hypothesis that I'm going to stand up.

Immediately, all the evidence at hand suggests that I am not standing

So I'm going to revise my belief.

No, I'm not standing up.

I'm not in the process of standing up and it becomes impossible to move.

So that would be an example of what would happen if you didn't have this capacity to attend to or to select or apply the principles of optimal Bayesian design in terms of selecting those data

for your own belief updating.

But a really pragmatic and easy example of that is saccadic suppression, when we do the simplest of movements, epistemic foraging, which is moving our eyes, making saccadic eye movements.

Because when we do that, we actually induce masses of visual information on the photoreceptors in the retina, sometimes referred to as retinal slips.

So when I look from the left to the right, there's a flood of information

that I have caused.

And yet, it is not useful information because it doesn't tell me anything I didn't already know.

So what the brain does, it suppresses that information by transiently suspending the precision, or the Kalman gain, if you are taking a Kalman filter-like perspective on predictive coding as one kind of variational filtering.

And that's really easy to demonstrate to an audience.

Get them to either fixate on a central stimulus and then pay attention to something that's moving around, or the converse, they fixate on the thing that's moving around and then ask them questions about the central stimulus.

And with the right timing, it's a very potent illustration

of beyond just gathering information, but actively selecting and triaging that information in accord with the principles of optimal basic design.

So I hadn't thought about going beyond that, but I'm sure there are lots of lovely

examples of embodied experiences that really do illustrate the active inference in action, as it were.

I'm just reminded

Of course, active inference could be read as, if you like, a 21st century version of ideomotor theories, which were very popular in the 19th century.

And of course, that was...

demonstrated through embodied experiences in a very alluring way through hypnotism and the like.

So I can imagine somebody doing a sort of 21st century version of hypnotism and all those wonderful Victorian illusions about

the way you use your sense organs or deploy them actively, but now in the service of just illustrating some basic phenomena that underwrite active inference.

In terms of experiments, the classic ones that immediately come to mind that are really engaging are visual illusions.

So on one reading,

All visual illusions are just ways of getting at your perceptual priors in the context of Bayesian inference.

If you can conjure a particular pattern of sensory information that you know was caused in one way, and yet you think your subject or your audience has sufficiently precise prior beliefs that it could only be caused in another way, which is not the way you caused it, and then you let them experience that, and then you reveal,

how you actually generated those data, then that's a very powerful way of demonstrating the innate priors, the sort of formal priors in terms of the connectome or the sparse coupling on a factor graph.

and that again is part of the lived experience.

So I think visual illusions would be, and there are loads of beautiful illusions out there, and all that one would have to do is to harness their beauty and allure and use them as a vehicle to give people insight into their own, usually sub-personal prize about the way that the world is constructed.

And then I mean, in my world, what you generally try and do is to actually put this in silico by just creating little in silico creatures.

And because you've now got active inference with this information geometry, you now have the opportunity not just to simulate what these creatures do,

but what they perceive, because now you've got the quantitative estimates of their posterior beliefs.

So you can actually show a subject who's just experienced a visual illusion that this is perfectly Bayes optimal.

And indeed, when you write down this variational message passing scheme in this synthetic subject,

uh this synthetic person also experiences exactly the same illusions and this is and this is and this is based on for the for this kind kind of kind of work so you can leverage activities in that sense and deliberately referring back to the dot edu discussions you know what active inference brings to the table because it's got information about stuff out there

in the numerics.

You can go a lot further than you can if you were doing, say, deep learning or machine learning, because you've got this information geometry at hand.

The state of your variational autoencoder actually means something in relation to a belief about what generated those data, which you can create lovely little movies showing what this

simulation of you was actually experiencing.

So I'm interested, are there any other ways that you've thought about in terms of showing people?


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for the answer.

It's like, look left, look right.

Now you're an active inference agent.

And as far as potential avenues for embodiments, some of the work with Ryan Smith and others bringing people into the somatosensory dimensions and their own priors and expectations about their body and about motion could be very powerful as well as auditory modalities.

And indeed, active inference is a framework by which we can think about how our perceptions are related to our inference and our action.

So in various domains, I think there'll be excellent experiments.

And it brings us to our next question.

You actually addressed several areas in your answer.

You addressed machine learning, as well as neuroscience, as well as just everyday lived experience.

So how can active inference engage in better dialogue with adjacent areas?

For example, machine learning, systems engineering, psychiatry and neuroscience, as well as any other fields that you think are relevant to.


SPEAKER_01:
Then the obvious answer here is in either academic or commercial collaboration.

And what might you, what would license that?

I think, you know, the simplest answer is that, you know, the free energy principle and it's, if you like, teleological corollary active inference is not there and was never intended to replace extant theories.

It was there to prove, to endorse them and to reveal the interrelationships between them.

So anything that's worked and survived into the 21st century has some veracity and a proven utility and therefore it's just a question of

reformulating or changing the words so that people can see immediately how their particular formulation relates to somebody else's formulation where both formulations are special cases of the most generic and simplest explanation which would you know from my point of view would be the

the free energy principle and active influence in the case of sentience.

So I think as an integrative framework, you're very well positioned to say, look, can we understand the way that you think about this?

And can we now articulate this either using simulations or mathematical analysis?

Can we understand what you've been doing in this integrative framework?

And if we can,

And can we show how it relates to another discipline's formulation of this problem?

And sometimes you can get synergistic or added value from doing that.

So, you know, there must be loads of examples that you've written, machine learning, systems engineering, psychology, neuroscience here.

So machine learning, for example, how would active inference help machine learning?

So at the moment, there seems to be two answers floating around.

And we've already sort of discussed a couple of these issues in depth.

So machine learning commits to usually a normative approach to good behaviour that can be quantified by a loss or a value function.

But we've just said, well, if we now want these machines to learn to act, then we have to go beyond state action value functions and consider the belief-based calculus that is active inference, which is all about the reduction of uncertainty.

So now you are in a position to say, well, look, if you consider your objective functions as a part of a more generic objective function, think what you might be able to get from this.

And of course, what you might get from this is a deep learning scheme that actually can now go and solicit the right kind of data to optimize its own learning.

And, you know, people in Bayesian RL might argue, well, yeah, that's what we're doing, you know, with a series of bright ideas and heuristics to try and augment classical value functions.

But, you know, you can say, well, OK, you've clearly put a lot of work into that.

But there is actually a simple objective function already out there that is provably appropriate to describe systems that self-organise and maintain themselves.

That actually has what you want.

Why don't you try this, for example?

So that would be one example.

You have to tread carefully because, you know,

a lot of people have dedicated their lives to solving these problems and they're very reluctant to change their rhetoric or see their contributions as a special case but in many instances certainly from my perspective mathematically they are special cases and sometimes if you catch the entrepreneurs, the innovators, the creative academics at the right stage in their

career before they have committed to a particular church or ideology or calculus or group or company and you can you you can actually point them in the right direction and become extremely creative and i'm not so sure about systems engineering but certainly

I always celebrate the expected free energy as with just taking away various bits and pieces, various sources of uncertainty,

as reducing to KL control.

And then what I say is what KL control is what grownup engineers use in the control theoretic setting.

So that would be another example.

So, you know, you could also, I don't know this cause it's not my field, but certainly

in terms of introducing, say, a fault tolerance in control theoretic approaches in engineering, where the fault tolerance required uncertainty about the operation of some external part.

you could again motivate a more complete objective function that takes you beyond KL control and introduces the information gain into the mix.

Because to get from the complete objective function or to KL control, you have to ignore uncertainty

about the latent states that are in the mapping from latent states of the plant you're controlling to the sensors or the observables.

So you're moving from a partial observed Markov decision process, for example,

to an observable one, and then it becomes KL control or risk sensitive control in economics.

So you could say, well, look, why don't you just augment your KL control and then put this extra term in?

And now what you've got is a kind of anticipatory fault tolerance in the sense that if

If there's uncertainty about latent causes, that's automatically resolved in the way that you go and switch on various senses or switch off various senses.

And there's a principal way of doing that.

I think to have any influence, you need to be able to show or provide proof of principle that this more integrated, more universal approach to normative approach to problems can offer speed ups or increased efficiency or do what the people actually in that field wanted to do.

So, for example, you've got to be able to show that active inference can outperform sort of vanilla deep learning by an order of magnitude, which is easy to do because, of course, most benchmarks in machine learning are actually inference problems.

So if you just recast it, it's actually quite a trivial problem.

I think to do just by saying well actually what you've been dealing with is an inference problem which looks a lot like a one-shot learning from the point of view of somebody in machine learning but I think there will be some pressure to get people's attention to make yourself attractive in terms of you they will now have some first of all

find you interesting and also have the potential that they can place an epistemic trust in you.

You've got to give them a clue and a cue as to why they should engage with you.

Very often there's a two-way or two-road exchange.

So one simple example of that which I see emerging in the field is the use of deep learning to amortize certain mappings when they can be amortized in active inference schemes to evaluate

you know the expected free energy for example or doing very deep tree searches so that's that's the kind of innovation you're seeing coming out of 20 year olds at the moment who haven't yet decided whether they're going to do deep learning or active inference because they want to do both and do it very very effectively so that that's a nice example from my perspective of a sort of you know that integrative role that could be played or you could play


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

I really heard this yes and maxim from communication and improvisation.

It's like, yes, there's been a disciplinary way of approaching it and we're going to be working together to come back to first principles or to make it more efficient.

So that's really powerful.

How does active inference help us rethink the nature of online communication where so much of our communication nowadays does occur?


SPEAKER_01:
That's a big question, isn't it?

And certainly in the context of social media, politics, fake news and the like, you could take that question in lots and lots of different directions, which I won't do because that's not my field of expertise.

But just off the cuff in terms of first principles, what is communication?

It's the ability for me to infer what you meant.

It's the hermeneutics problem.

If it's the hermeneutics problem, that's most efficiently resolved in terms of dyadic or multi-system interactions when we come back to first principles, which is the generative model, when we share the same narrative or same generative model.

So in terms of helping, how does it, how does active influence,

help us rethink the nature of online communication.

And I think just from a first principles point of view, it would be the importance of establishing who is talking to who.

And if you want to optimize the efficiency of that exchange, literally, from the point of view of this principle of least action, the speed with which you can resolve uncertainty and minimize your uncertainty or surprisal, then it's ensuring that like-minded communicators are actually communicating because it's only them that will understand each other.

So everybody has to speak the same language.

They have to commit to a shared narrative and a shared generative model.

And then just by things like rate distortion theorem or rewriting that in terms of active inference, the joint free energy minimization between two interlocutors, that's the most efficient sort of shared path of least action.

How does that help engineer or intervene on things?

I'm not so sure.

So just in reference to communications with people like Maxwell and the like and other colleagues, there is this interesting notion that if communication, if the real problem of communication

is not really the messages that you send, but the inferring whether to send the messages to this person or not, that itself now becomes conditional upon inferring that's a member of my in-group or that's a creature or a person like me.

Then the question is, how does self-organisation say, in terms of social media exchange, how is that underwritten by

an inference about the kind of people who I am listening to or I am talking to.

And what are the basic principles of that?

And again, in accord with the minimization of complexity in our generative models, it may be a useful hypothesis to say that there's an inevitable coarse graining of the way that we conceive of the people that we generate information for, say, on social media.

and reciprocally the kinds of people that I will be able to solicit by listening to this Twitter feed or that Wikipedia page or this news channel.

So understanding how people carve up, whether they are like, to the degree of similarity to them, may be very useful in just getting an idea of the dynamics of message passing amongst communities that will be defined by, on average, how each member of that ensemble or individual coarse grains and has a generative model of the kinds of people in the communication grain.

And just to finish this, which is something I've heard and I found it

a really interesting notion that again would be great if one could simulate this and understand the maths behind it, is that the only evolutionary stable from the point of view of the free energy principle, the only one that will be selected by a process of Bayesian model selection,

the only partitioning into in-groups and out-groups is a 50-50 in-group, out-group, in the sense that anything that departs from that sort of dynamically unstable but evolutionarily stable partition means that the smaller group, the out-group, the odd man out, will necessarily ultimately be absorbed into the larger group.

So the only

stable partitioning is 50-50, which makes a lot of sense when you look at Trump versus Biden, when you look at Brexit versus not Brexit, that wherever you look,

All the important allegiances in terms of our political, ideological, possibly even theological communication seems to be split right down the middle.

And perhaps it can be no other way.

So it'd be very, very interesting to simulate that and see if that is a truism.

that inherits from all of these marginal likelihood or free energy minimizing processes implemented at multiple levels of hierarchical hierarchical levels which is you know communication is just message passing and message passing is just the way you articulate belief updating and belief updating just is the process of inference which just is the the paths of least action according to the FPP


SPEAKER_00:
The 50-50 politics, it's maximally confusing, something we all experience.

And a few key points there about the nature of online communication is that at the core, it is dyadic.

Even when you're broadcasting to many, it's actually about that connection and the hermeneutic relationship of unpacking meaning.

and then also you brought up the importance of context and identity and who's talking to who and our inferences about that which is essential to rhetoric and something that often gets left off when people take big data approaches to online discourse

The next question is, how does Active Inference help us think about science communication and participation specifically as we move into broader citizen science initiatives and as scientists are in the loop, something you've been recently involved in as well, with society and with decision-making?

So as science and the nature of science is changing, who is doing it and how they communicate it, how does Active Inference help us navigate that?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm sure you've thought about this much more deeply than I have, but just drawing upon my experience in terms of science communication during the coronavirus epidemic, I think you're absolutely right.

As with the previous questions, I think you can take the principles of active inference and just think about what does that mean for optimal communication and belief updating and shared belief updating and shared narratives or not.

and use that as a point of reference for the way that you articulate your own science.

And you've asked all your challenging and exactly right questions about how you communicate, how you engage other scientists or other partners within or beyond academia.

And I think the same principles apply exactly to the public.

And just to reinforce

I think beautiful observation that all communication is dyadic from the point of view of the person communicating.

So it's this kind of person as a unitary object I am talking to, or this population, or this mentality, or this discipline.

So it is, I think, fundamentally dyadic.

from the point of view of the person generating the messages that may or may not incur belief updating in the recipients.

And these kinds of principles, I'm sure, would be useful in terms of science communication.

So at that level, I don't know that there's much that I would have to what you already know and possibly already are implementing.

There is another level, though, which is using active inference not as a model for the way that we work and communicate and participate, but as a statistical observation model of data.

So in a sense, you can use the principles of active inference really to make the most of data pertinent to a particular domain.

So again, I'm thinking here of the dynamic causal modelling of the epidemiological and behavioural data that has been generated by the coronavirus epidemic.

So you can

You certainly use the perceptual inference side of it, if you like, the Bayesian filtering side of it, but also in principle, the data mining or the optimal Bayesian design to select which data are useful or not in a very practical way.

when assimilating big data in the service of understanding the system at hand.

So if the system at hand is how does a how does a

a spike propagate from one neuron to another neuron in the neural network?

Or how does a virus propagate from one person to another person in the neural population or population network?

And then you can certainly use the data to

You can apply active inference to build generative models of how you think that occurs.

And what immediately comes, you know, confronts you is you've got to put in all of the things that generate those data.

So you can't miss out any factors that are important, be they psychological, be they behavioral, be they viral.

be the transport related.

All of these things have to go into your generator model to best explain the data.

So when we do this in a practical way, we both use the instance rates from PCR testing

and Google mobility data and Department of Transport transportation data, anything that speaks to and reduces uncertainty about all the factors necessary that are entailed by your generative model.

In this instance, it's not a discrete space, it's written down.

In fact, this one is actually a discrete state space model.

And the active inference is not explicitly part of it in the sense that we're not trying to predict people's behaviour.

But it does serve an indirect guide through the principles of Bayesian optimum design.

And all that basically means is

do I invest computational resources and thereby incur computational and statistical complexity by including or attending to this kind of data or not?

And then you can actually evaluate the information gained by including that data or that data.

So, for example, do you need Google retail estimates or workplace activity or just one?

If you include both, that means that your complexity increases and you literally have to wait another half hour before you get the results for your dashboard.

Or do you not have a more parsimonious

have a more parsimonious model in the sense that you have now in the same sense of that saccadic suppression of retinal slip.

You've actually said, no, I don't need that.

I've got everything I need.

I've got the Mike kind of data just by focusing on these data.

And then once you've got that in mind, you can now go foraging for different kinds of data, different collaborators from different disciplines who've got different perspectives, but also crucially different data to try that will inform and shrink your uncertainty about the model parameters and also, very importantly, about the structural form of the model.

Do I need this node?

How many?

Is this interaction important or not?

Is this degree of nonlinearity justified by the data?

So all of these questions, effectively hypotheses about how this system is responding or would respond if you intervene on it.

All of those questions now become amenable to an evidence based analysis.

because you've got a generative model underneath the hood.

So that would be a more practical application of the principles that underwrite active inference, even though your computer program is not actually doing active inference, but it's certainly been deployed using the principles of active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

And we heard that integrative approach.

Yes, we're going to include multiple data sets, potentially of unconventional type, and we're going to have a principled way of deciding how to include that data.

And also, as you brought up at the end, who to include in the conversation.

And there was one piece you said in there about the dyadic nature of communication where a speaker is always, I think you said something like speaking to a person or to a group or to a community.

And it relates to our next question, which is how can we appropriately interact with shared and nested generative models potentially across scales, be it person, team, or community,

Do we think about these levels of analysis as active inference agents in their own right?

Or how do we, for example, speak to a community or speak to a level of analysis that's broader than the personal?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think that's a great and challenging question.

I mean, clearly there has been some provisional work in academia looking at sort of Markov blankets with Markov blankets, which is effectively, from a stats point of view, from a physics point of view at least, what we're talking about here.

As a physicist, you'd be tackling this with things like the apparatus of the renormalization group,

which tells you immediately something interesting that the existence of this nested structure, if underwritten by, or if it is a renormalization group, means that there are certain functional forms that are conserved.

So what that means is from a practical point of view,

that there will be certain kinds of behaviour that are actually conserved at different scales.

So what works in terms of talking to your children should also work as a president talking to your community or a governor talking to your state or a team leader talking to your assembled team, simply because

in order for there to be a hierarchical listing

that supports that hierarchical structure that has to be this conservation, usually mathematically written down as the functional form of the Lagrangian, or it could be the sort of marginal likelihood or the surprise that we're talking about that underwrites these sort of paths, most likely paths or paths of least action.

So that actually paradoxically slightly makes the problem slightly simpler.

well because what you're saying is what works at one level will work at all levels all you've got to do is um find the course grading operator operator that takes you from one level to the next um so what that would look like i think would be very very application domain specific so you know i think that there is a great challenge ahead

which is taking the single particle FEP approach now into a world where it matters, where the world is actually an ensemble of particles.

And we've already discussed the importance of thinking about worlds where all the particles are identical, whereas all the particles actually vote for, half the particles vote for Trump and the other half vote for Biden.

And this is interesting to reflect upon pre-21st century physics that was so powerful in articulating this kind of dynamics because it just dealt with the simplifying assumption that my idealized gas

was an ensemble of identical particles.

And then you can spin off from that equilibrium physics and everything that led from cycles and engines through to current technology.

So it's a powerful assumption if you just make some simplifying assumptions.

We've already said, well, perhaps that's not the best kind of assumption to make when you're dealing with political mechanics.

You're like one bipartisan in there.

So that would require a revisiting of that kind of physics from our point of view or your point of view, basically simulating active inference agents.

or ensembles of active inference agents, particles, but where now there is a heterogeneity in play, and then asking the questions, well, what are, at the next scale, the free energy minimising or surprise minimising or potential minimising solutions at the next scale up?

So we come back to our, you know, why is it the case that people are all split 50-50, which has an enormous impact on the interactions at the scale below.

So I think to tease, I think, or I'm just hand-waving here because I don't think there are any formal answers.

And I think those formal answers will probably have to

come out of agent-based and possibly stochastic agent-based modeling initiatives but with the twist you're making each agent itself an active inference agent so while each individual member of the ensemble is trying to minimize their free energy also the ensemble

through cooperation and a shared narrative is minimizing the joint free energy and what that means when you move from one scale to the next scale.

If you're in physics, I imagine that this is the problem of beyond non-equilibrium steady states because you're actually now dealing with the multi-scale aspect of non-equilibrium

So at best, we have good models of turbulent flow and laser physics that take us beyond equilibrium physics, where all the particles are the same into non-equilibrium physics.

But I don't know that there's an equivalent maths or metaphor in physics.

that would really speak to the hierarchical nesting.

So I think this is a really open and important research area that I can only recommend is dealt with by numerical analyses, basically predicated on underlying principles.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for the answer there.

And it made me wonder if agree to disagree is a narrative that can be shared even when there is a 50-50 split.

And I think it brings us nicely to the final question of .coms, which is how can we move people and teams into a co-transformative space or as some of your recent work discussed, an interactionist space?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm sure you know the answers to all these.

I suspect that I'm now realizing you already know the answers because you're knowing smiles when I say something that you recognize.

So actually answering that on the basis of what you just said.

So I think that's another really useful insight that agreeing to disagree is a surprise minimizing factor

base optimal explanation for the exchange with others.

But it does rest upon committing to the hypothesis that you are not like me, you are not like-minded, and that's okay.

So I've now classified you as somebody who's not like-minded,

And I've resolved the ambiguity among the hypotheses that you are either like-minded or you're not like-minded.

Normally, we resolve those within a few first impressions, within a few seconds, based upon all these epistemic cues we offer each other to define the kind of person that we are.

So we make that job as easy as possible for us, signaling to make this so we know our place.

And I use that phrase because, of course, there was a paper called Knowing Your Place that

exploited a shared generative model that allowed you to be in a particular position in some space, even if you and I shared the same understanding of political ideology,

but I know my place because I'm right wing and you know your place because you're left wing or vice versa and then we can quite happily exchange but disagree agreeing to disagree so I think that that's that's a wonderful you know perspective to have and to endorse it and that is a base option

perspective from both sides of the disagreement.

That's resolving uncertainty in a bounded rational way.

So applying that notion to co-transformative space, it reminds me of the problem where

Certain patients in psychiatry have committed to a particular inference about whether they belong out there in that kind of environment or not.

And they have decided that they do not belong out there, and that those people are not like them, and they start to avoid.

So in a very simple, by the way, and if there are any psychiatrists out there,

and this example, but I think it's illustrative and useful in that respect.

So take depression or agoraphobia, which is a completely base optimal response.

If I have committed to the hypothesis that out there is full of people who are not like me and potentially will upset, confuse and render me uncertain and possibly even injure me in some way.

So withdrawal into that corner of your house or into that silo if you're working in teams is a perfectly base optimal response that says that you've got a precise belief that this is where you belong, these are the people that you speak to and not those people.

So, and that's usually perfectly functional.

In psychiatry, that would be a neurotic defense, but it can become pathological when you become housebound or you become, say, if you've got a pathological hypothesis, like your body got dysmorphophobia and you nearly die because of a failure to eat properly.

So when you say co-transformative, I imagine what you mean is you want to transform two teams into one team or at least enable them to work together.

If that's right and you're not impartially assuming that it is, you're facing the same challenge.

And there are psychiatrist faces in terms of enabling people to revise the precision of their precise beliefs about who they can interact with and who they should interact with.

That's not an easy thing, but it's certainly doable.

And it basically

usually reduces to presenting evidence to a group or a person that it can be another way so that you start to revise their prior beliefs or at least the precision of their prior beliefs

in a safe space where it's okay to explore other hypotheses, enabling them to think about other ways of interacting.

So this would normally be the objective of psychotherapy, basically, to, by illustration, very much in the same way you were talking about, illustrating or educating by embodied experience,

very much psychotherapy is thought to work like this.

You provide a psychologically embodied experience where you can try out different styles and different hypotheses.

And in so doing, you paradoxically introduce the right kind of uncertainty

about different styles of engagement and who you are and who you are talking to.

And by relaxing that precision, you enable, you give the patient or the naughty team that's become too siloed

the latitude to explore other ways of behaving.

So I would imagine that most of the tried and trusted procedures to get teams into a co-transformative space use one or more of those mechanisms.

What would active inference bring to the table?

It would just bring the narrative,

Everybody trying to get to talk to each other can come to share so they can see through the process of becoming more collaborative or exchanging ideas more fluently.

or working with the same lexicon or mechanics or code, it will enable them to, having the same narrative will actually shape their prior space and understand the mechanics of actually enlarging

the hypothesis space in terms of interaction styles.

So that was an incredibly hand-waving answer, but it was in part informed by almost, well, my understanding of the question from the point of view of a psychiatrist who wants to transform the way that a patient relates to her world.

And drugs can help.

I mean that literally in the

those drugs that are responsible neurobiologically for setting the precision, if you can temporarily suspend the precision in order to reveal other latent a priori hypotheses in terms of the way that I am or the way that I interact and the way that I behave or the way that I perceive,

that can actually have long-lasting effects on bringing those other hypotheses to the table in the moment in subsequent interactions.

So perhaps the most compelling example of this, which is trending at the moment, is the use of psilocybin-assisted therapy, particularly in terminal care.

So if you know you're going to die of cancer in the next six months, there are certain hypotheses that are brought to bear in terms of how I would expect to feel.

and how I engage with the world and how I engage with my loved ones as a dying person who is near death and the ultimate loss.

Those are not necessarily the best or most functional hypotheses and ways of being.

There are other ways of dying gracefully and gloriously.

But to get at them, sometimes having a managed challenge to your 5-HT2A receptors via things like psilocybin and other related drugs,

just allows you to suspend for a moment your very precise beliefs about the kind of thing I am and allows you to experience other ways of being and perceiving, which can be very useful when it comes to just trying out other hypotheses in your, in this instance, your cancer journey.

But, you know, one can also imagine similar scenarios when you get locked in to a particular way of interacting with

either within a team or between teams in a larger organization.

So that would mean you have to go on a retreat and take lots of magic mushrooms.


SPEAKER_00:
Never thought I would hear it from you, Professor Friston, but there we have it.

Drugs for Teams.

Thank you for this excellent interval with .com's unit.

We're going to take another five-minute break and we'll return for the final session for .tools.

Thanks again, everyone, and we'll see you in five minutes.

## hW9IiOujS1E

SPEAKER_00:
Welcome back, everyone.

This is our third session of the Applied Active Inference Symposium with Professor Carl Fristen, hosted by the Active Inference Lab, and it's June 21st, 2021.

We're here representing the DOT Tools Organizational Unit of the lab, the third organizational unit in the lab.

And the goals of DOT Tools is to enable

Effective tool and instrument use for all active inference lab processes.

So that's just using the digital tools affordances that we have better, as well as exploring and designing affordances for our niche, modifying our niche, resulting in effective action as well as innovations in tool development.

As with the other groups, we've been meeting weekly in Tools and having a lot of awesome insights related to where Active Inference might come into play, and that's what we're excited to talk to you about.

Some of the core insights from the work in this unit relates to learning by doing, the recognition that modern systems are cyber-physical, everything is really intercalated with the digital,

And also we found it really refreshing kind of like a two-stroke engine to be sidestepping or complimenting or augmenting some of these philosophical discussions with technical clarifications.

And two ways in which we've seen that play out on the left here is a quote from you during a 2019 Dropbox blog post.

when you wrote that technology is the natural extension of active inference beyond the single person, which of course brings technology far from being something artificial into the realm of extended and embedded cognition in our niche.

And then on the right side is a slide from a very recent talk by Bert de Vrij on Beyond Deep Learning, Natural AI Systems, speaking to several applications in hardware and software of active inference, for example, gesture recognition, robotic navigation, and also audiometry for hearing aids.

And one effort that we're starting up now is a NetHack challenge.

It's kind of a video game played in text characters, and we're assembling a team with already multiple interested participants to get an active inference agent on the playing field, so to speak, and have people

maybe update their generative model when they see that it doesn't have to be a 3 billion parameter neural network trained for six months on the GPU, but what if it's enough to just be curious and to want to succeed?

Those are the kinds of things that motivate us in .tools.

So we can start right off the bat with asking, how can we use Active Inference to structure the process of innovation and tool development?

And how can Active Inference concepts help us design for complex agents that are interacting in complex niches?

For example, thinking about niche modification, extension of affordances, reduction of uncertainty or structuring of communications.


SPEAKER_02:
Again, great questions.

So the use of active inference to structure the process of innovation and tool development, that is in itself an entertaining notion.

in the sense that you are a realization of active inference.

I'm mindful that your nice use of the combination of, well, the emphasis on curiosity as the imperative that drives most of our behavior is exactly the imperative that as a scientist drives me and most of the people I know.

And in a sense, I would imagine, also drives your initiative and your laboratory.

So all the questions you are asking are really, how do I make the next move in order to resolve uncertainty about your particular project?

model of how, say, artificial intelligence or human communication is going to evolve.

So in that light, I think there are two levels to the answer.

The first one is just to celebrate and acknowledge that you are engaging in the scientific process as formulated by active inference, that you are on a journey of trying to satisfy curiosity that will be never ending.

And that speaks to one of your themes in the previous slide about learning is doing.

The only way you're going to resolve or sate that curiosity is to go out there and see what happens.

And that is exactly the right thing to do.

A more practical level answer, though, I think speaks to the tool development.

Because one of the, one of the fundaments of active inference is the appreciation that if you just want to maximize the likelihood that this, your kind of inference

world model or generative model that entails the way that you exchange with and interrogate and ping a world is the right world that is articulated out there in the sense of extended cognition for example

in terms of the software tools or the educational tools that you're making available, then all of this is still subject to the imperative to minimise complexity.

So in maximising the likelihood that these tools will be out there,

And in a sense, you're saying this model, this way of narrating the way that the world works provides an accurate description that is as simple as possible.

So you cannot escape the complexity.

I'm speaking like Jürgen Schmidhuber now, which is a good thing in this instance.

So that means you've got to find the simplest tools.

And it's interesting that you highlighted Bert DeVries' contribution because, you know, again, just practically thinking, what's the game here?

The game here is to write down

the or find the best hypothesis, the best explanation for my lived world and my me could be active inference labs and the lived world is everything that you have to engage with in terms of educational or commercial or academic partners.

So you've got to write down, you've got to explore the model space in terms to find the right model, generative model of the way that you're

your system or your organization works.

The first steps in writing down the generative model are basically to define its structure in terms of the sort of hidden factors and latent factors and their interactions and all that good stuff.

But it has to be done in the simplest way possible.

So what's the simplest way of writing down a generative model?

Well, it's to write down a Bayesian graphical model.

What does that mean for the actual coding practically?

and the software schemes and implementation that you would either offer to people or pre-package in terms of user interfaces, that it's going to be message passing on those graphs.

And I'm trying to get back to Burt De Vries' Factor Lab, Forney Lab formulation.

So to my mind, that's the simplest

most generic bit of computer science that you would come across in the service of finding the right software tools to build absolutely everything, because absolutely everything can be written down as a generative model.

If there's a generative model there, there's a Bayesian dependency graph.

If there's a Bayesian dependent graph, you know there's a factor graph.

If there's a factor graph, then you know there's a message passing scheme.

What is that message passing scheme?

It's just a free energy, variational free energy minimizing message passing scheme.

I would imagine that as tool development increases that there will be a move towards a common language that will look very much like BERT's phony style message passing and within that

You know, you've got very limited choices, which is a good thing because that again speaks to this minimization of complexity and just coarse-graining the world and your world at its coarsest level that will sustain an accurate account or a precise account of what you want to achieve.

So I'm thinking here, the tools just have to come in two flavors.

They have to deal with continuous state-space generative models

uh to interface with you know of the kind you need for robotics um but also uh the other flavor would be discrete state space your latent states um discrete late states uh models uh that you need to do say computational linguistics or you know modeling um the climate in in various states um

and we know that the um we know all the message passing schemes that would be entailed by a commitment to one of those two kinds of models um in the sense of sort of generalized bayesian filtering for the continuous state space um and by generalized you know is you know i include uh generalized courts of motion uh which generalize things like calvin filtering

And on the discrete state space side, you're talking about either belief propagation or variational message passing.

So when you just think about it, what you have to do in providing tools of a software kind or simulation kind, happily, there aren't many choices you have to worry about.

So, you know,

You know, in that sense, all you need to do is to make sure that your tools accommodate both generalized Bayesian filtering and bleep propagation and or variational message passing.

And then you're using off the shelf technology, which brings us back to, well, what's the real problem then?

Well, the real problem is writing down the generative model.

what sort of problems, how would you unpack those problems in terms of innovation and tool development?

Well, it's solving the model selection problem.

So sometimes I think when describing the space of problems that are faced, say, with generalized AI or AGI, you can unpack them at different spatial temporal scales into the inference problem.

into the learning problem and into the selection problem by which I mean using Bayesian model selection to get the right structure you know do I use six or twelve layers in my deep neural network do I use a convolutional model or do you use a transformer you know these are basically problems of

that are solved if you have a mechanics that can score the structure, enable you to select the right form.

So that I think is going to be a focus of innovation in the, it already is, but certainly in the near future in terms of development

And in the sense that I think the inference and learning problems, they're solved problems that you can just go to BERT and get your favorite message passing scheme, or you can keep at the level of educational or academic message passing and use the MATLAB schemes that we generate here in London for toy problems.

And what is not, I think, a solved problem and will require an innovative solution is the structural learning problem or the selection problem.

exploring not the right hypothesis, but in the principled way, exploring the space of generative models you might want to bring to the table.

And that has many, many different issues and things that come to mind, of course, that you could do it in

in a bottom up way by trying out new hypotheses.

Where do you get those from?

You get them from experts in the field because effectively they are bootstrapping themselves on the basis of our prior beliefs or our knowledge about how something works.

You can do it in a top down approach by

having over-parameterized, over-expressive models, but with very weak, imprecise parameterizations, and then use Bayesian model reduction to solve the selection problem.

These are ways that people are thinking at the moment.

this thinking is innovative because I don't think there are any clear answers.

So how would you use active inference to solve the structure learning problem when in a sense it's already being used in the sense of Bayesian model selection as natural selection but you really want to speed that up and make it work within your commercial academic lifetimes but I would imagine the exact same principles would be brought to bear there.

And, you know, that almost answers the next one.

How can active inference concepts help design complex agents interacting in complex niches?

You just have to build these things as proof of principle and hypothesis testing.

And the nice thing is, you know, all the

the machinery and the tools that would be requisite in building these things right from the variational message passing using, say, Forney Lab through to now you've got the right fitness function when it comes to using, say, a genetic algorithm to explore a structure space.

And what is that fitness function?

It's the evidence lower bound or the variational free energy.

So you've got all the maths in place.

This is a question that I think of simulating these things and providing proof of principle.

How you would translate that into the real world, I don't know at this stage, I'm afraid.

I think a challenging first step would be to actually use robotics in silico or hardware.

or possibly a lot of excitement at the moment of using soft robotics.

And actually, you design your niche and see what happens and then turn your attention to niche construction, where you now acknowledge that the niche itself is also succumbing to the principles, not of active inference in and of itself,

in the sense that niches don't plan.

But certainly in the FEP sort of vanilla free energy minimizing approach.

So yeah, I haven't actually thought about that before, but that's an interesting asymmetry when it comes to simulating multi-agent interactions in the context of niche construction, where often it is the case that the niche is just the other agents in an ensemble.

But if you now actually include the environment as part of the niche that is playing host to all the denizens that are the ensemble of active inference agents,

There is this distinction between the ability to plan the consequences of action that would entail optimization of the expected free energy versus simply reflexively minimizing surprisal by minimizing free energy as an evidence bound.

And put that more simply, more intuitively, you're either with generative models that support planning or not.

So there's nothing fundamentally different between these approaches.

It's just if you've got a generative model, that is a model of the paths into the future, consequent upon how you act upon the world.

That's a much richer, deeper generative model than the kinds of generative models that would be applicable to a thermostat or an environment.

And it's likely that the environment,

I have in mind here, which is a warehouse that you've got a sentient robot going around trying to get the right things.

So the robot can plan, but the environment, the niche can't.

It'll still conform to the principles, the free energy principle.

There will still be particles and things that are conserved and they will still fall and behave in a predictable way.

There may even be a thermostat controlling the temperature.

None of these things are planning.

So there's an interesting asymmetry that gets into the game when you're talking about complex agents interacting in complex niches.

Part of that complexity has to be a specification of whether the complexity entails planning or not.

And it just creates different problem spaces, certainly in the context of multi-agent simulations.

So that's how I would

sort of carve up the problem spaces in terms of implicitly problem spaces that will only be explored by doing.

And by doing, I just mean actually realizing physically these processes in the kind of situations that you think are going to be useful for the future.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for the answer.

And it's really fascinating about using simulation

that selection can happen within the generation of for example a startup rather than between generations because of course we can let organisms or startups proliferate and then let pruning occur at the generational scale or there could be ways to design so that that selection occurs within a generation more like learning and development rather than intergenerational selection so awesome points there

This could be a broad question, but we're curious what areas of applied active inference you think just might be exciting, promising, or important?


SPEAKER_02:
So my personal usual response to this comes in two flavors.

The first is from the point of view of a

theoretical biologist and a psychiatrist so if you know if you can understand how a normal sentient artifact or person behaves then that creates a space in which you can think about

false inference and false learning, or certainly suboptimal from the point of view of minimizing surprise or free energy.

So that's a fancy way of saying understanding the computational basis of psychopathology.

So there's a whole literature

on using active inference as a, if you like, a normative framework within which to provide an ontology of false inference or failures or aberrant active inference.

And why would you want to do that?

Well, if it can all be reduced just to the good belief updating and the good message passing,

we actually have quite a comprehensive understanding of neuronal message passing and all its physiology and all the roles of various neurotransmitters and microcircuits and neuroanatomy that underwrite that kind of neuronal message passing.

And implicitly, we also then have a fairly

a fairly fine-grained understanding of the role of neurotransmitters and the consequences of pharmacological interventions in the context of experience-dependent learning and inference of the kind we've been talking about.

So from a translational perspective,

literally translating the formalism on offer from active inference into the clinical domain, that would be one motivation for developing this theoretical framework.

The other one is more in the line of technology and artificial general intelligence.

So then the question is, well, if I now want to build sentient artefacts

not only build them but build brothers and sisters so they are complex and interact and learn to love each other in a complex environment that could include me.

Then you've got a clear offer from Active Inference as to the design principles you might want to use to actually build these artefacts.

And then there are interesting questions about

what kind of artefact do you want to build?

And we've already discussed the difference between a thermostat and a sentient robot going around collecting your next sort of home delivery.

There are different kinds of generative models.

So now you ask the question, OK, what are the exciting and promising

kinds of artifacts as defined by their generative models that one might expect to see in the future.

And then we get into the world of generative models that support planning.

So we're talking about deep generative models where they have a temporal depth.

What are the next stages that you might be looking at?

Well, there's also a sort of hierarchical depth.

that would at some point, first of all, include the capacity to deploy precision.

And why is that important?

Well, as soon as you have the deploying the precision,

as a process of inference, you have now a normative theory for this kind of mental action or covert action.

So one example of this would be, I don't know the technology, but I can be assured that I know

I know what it's trying to do, but thinking about transformer networks and the way that attentional selection operates in this context, what you're saying is you can actually optimize the attentional selection as an inference process using active inference or an evidence lower bound.

where you're now predicting what things to attend to and what particular ways to switch on and which ways to switch off.

And at that point, you can understand that as mental action.

So when the transformers or variational autoencoders start to now

optimize their estimates of the posterior precision at lower layers say in an autoencoder it's now acquired the capacity for mental action and it now will pay attention to various representations and possibly even various data sources that's not magical we do that every day in the sort of mdp active inference

and use it to explain a lot of the attentional mechanisms implemented in the brain.

If you can migrate that technology into deep learning, you would have taken one baby step towards true sentience, which is mental action.

The next step would be, OK, so how can I now minimize the complexity

of my generative model, where my generative model now actually includes this meta-inference in the sense I'm now providing predictions about my inference because I'm controlling the precision of hierarchically subordinate message passing.

And at that point you start to think, well, perhaps one simplifying, one way of simplifying the computational complexity or the complexity part of the inference would be to carve up different states of intentional deployment in exactly the same way we're talking about carving up people into Biden versus Trump voters.

you know, a simple, stable, complexity-minimizing carving up, which suddenly suggests to you that you can now equip an artifact with states of mind, so that they can be in four states of mind.

They can be happy, they can be sad, they can be confident, they can be unsure, and they will have to infer, given all the evidence at hand, including the message passing through in the hierarchy, what state of mind it is in.

And if you now include in terms of the sensory evidence, you know, the voltage on their batteries or some measurement of their interception, you now have something that's getting very, very close to, say, Ryan's notion of emotions.

So now you've got a part of the generative model is now inferring

what state of mind am I in as the best explanation for all these interceptive embodied sensations, not just the proprioceptive state of my actuators, but also are they getting a bit sticky?

Is there some wear and tear?

Are my batteries charged?

All of these things come together as part evidence in conjunction with all the usual visual, the radar, auditory, sort of acoustic inputs to actually supply evidence for a post-trip leave.

I'm in this state of mind.

I'm anxious.

My battery's running out.

This immediately creates different prior preferences, cost functions, if you like, that would be applied to your policies because you've got a deep change in model that plans into the future.

So now you've got an artifact that not only has the capacity for mental action, it's now got the capacity to be in different emotional states.

The next step is to say, hang on, so there are these different states.

Can I now equip it with a minimum selfhood?

Can the hypothesis that I am actually an artifact

provide empirical priors that reduce the complexity of my message passing at subordinate levels, that is generating, that is inferring the state of mind that I am in, that in turn optimizes the postures of the precisions of various likelihood mappings or preferences over policies.

So at this point, you're starting to get to artifacts that could have minimal self-awareness.

The next stage would be that's only going to be ever, that's only going to be, I think, useful when you consider dialect interactions again, because the only rationale for having self-awareness is to disambiguate self from other, which means that there must be some confusion or some uncertainty

at hand in order to justify the resolution and certainly justify that complexity of the model, which means that you have to be interacting with or exchanging with things that are sufficiently like you to license the inclusion

in your generative moral of a self versus other or that you are like me or not like me so we actually come now back full circle to what we're talking about before in terms of inferring who I am I talking to so this I think there's you know structurally something quite fundamental about this influence problem

are you a creature like me or not or are you like one of those are you a pet are you a plant you know just being able to carve up this world in a way that is self-referential

necessarily entails a minimal selfhood in the inferences of these that speaks to the importance of getting the necessary evidence from the environment that would be, if you like, license that degree of complexity and the only kinds of environments that can supply that degree, that license that degree of complexity

are when that environment, that eco-niche, actually comprises other agents like me that make it, if you like, worthwhile me inferring, oh, it's me, not you doing that.

So I would imagine then

most promising applications of active inference in constructing sentient artifacts pets and you know carers or people things that you can converse with and would be to grow them certainly with themselves but more importantly with you there so they can learn by their doing with you there so they

they want to they're curious about you and you're curious about them at that point one could argue that's the only scenario which you're going to have any empathetic interaction with these artifacts so I'm sure there are other applications in terms of climate change or commerce or whatever but in terms of imagining what you could produce you could sell

I would imagine that a mindful robot that actually is curious, genuinely curious about you, because that will teach it something about itself.


SPEAKER_00:
thanks for that answer um the idea of tools for attention and of design and engineering for regimes of attention to use an active inference term is really essential and what you were talking about there with the phone first off before the internet when there weren't other devices of similar kind there was no need to communicate out and what we've seen is that as there's more and more devices of similar or interoperable kinds new levels of organization have to emerge

And then I thought about the anxiety that a person might feel when their phone is running low on battery.

Right now, that sensor reading is getting emotionally offloaded to the human.

So we could have that anxiety on device.

So let's have a more relaxing relationship with our phone.

And then as you pointed out, it would be the incipient steps of selfhood, or perhaps what they could even call a self phone, if I'm allowed one pun per symposium.

The next question is, what kinds of tools have been most helpful in your work in research, which includes many areas such as SPM and DCM that a lot of people who are just learning about active inference might not be very familiar with?

And what kinds of tools don't exist yet, but might be helpful for active inference work?


SPEAKER_02:
So the mathematical tools, and I'm often asked this question of students, do I need to be able to do maths to contribute to this field?

And if so, what kind of maths?

I won't tell you what my answer is, but what I have found useful is certainly mathematics, but not necessarily very high end.

This is always Wikipedia level mathematics, and in particular,

Dynamical systems theory, information theory and linear algebra are probably all you need to do everything really.

And indeed, you could read most of quantum electrodynamics as basically linear algebra with a bit of probability theory underneath it.

So that has been the mainstay, that is, you know,

if there is one tool, that it would be the tool and the language of maths and relatively simple maths.

And the second thing is to, the learning is doing, you know, see one, do one, teach one ethos, I think applies very pragmatically in this context.

which means it's actually very useful if you can get students to actually build their own little simulated artefacts and even more useful when they can actually code it up themselves, which means you need access to a high level, at least third generation programming language that a student can get fluent with should they want to.

uh not only to use the existing tools but you know try and write it down themselves without having to spend years training as a computer scientist so i found MATLAB very useful in that respect not because it's terribly efficient although i have to say actually some of the

matrix operators and under the hood tensor operators are actually much more efficient than people give them credit for because it actually came from X-ray crystallography.

However, what's really useful about it is it uses the same syntax that you would find in a book on linear algebra.

which didactically or educationally is really quite important when it comes to writing and reading the code.

So we have deliberately stuck with MATLAB, not because it's computationally efficient or that it's open source, it should be, I don't think it is, but simply because it's configured in a way that people reading standard texts, 101 texts in the new algebra and the like,

would be able to see how it transcribes into a computer language so that's been a really useful a really useful tool and looking ahead I imagine that you know one's going to need open access and possibly more it's I don't know it could go either way I'm just thinking about first of all people like Burt and Forney Lab in terms of very generic

very high end specifications of message passing in computer science.

It may be that that's the level you want people to actually compose their generative models and their artifacts, and they don't even need to know about linear algebra and even less information theory.

What they need to know is the language of relational, the object relations and how to specify just different classes of

exponential probability distributions and, you know, is it categorical?

Is it continuous?

Is it always positive or can it be positive and negative?

And that may be quite sufficient to write down a factor graph or a generative model and then everything else is just off the shelf and it can write itself.

So that would certainly be possibly helpful in the future.

Sorry, I'm moving on to what kinds of tools don't exist at the moment.

So I'm thinking of a

I never used it, but what I imagine would be BERT's phony lab facilities offered as an application or a user interface that allowed you to compose generative models and then just hit, compose a generative model, compose a generative process, the actual world that's going to be modeled, and then just click run and see what happens.

That would be really useful, I think.

Having said that, the other side to future scoping here is, I repeat, leveraging more specialised or other fields, amortising certain parts of inference, learning to infer, or indeed inferring to learn, or learning to plan, or learning to infer how you plan.

so or starting to sort of see what parts of the inference process are so conserved that they could actually be amortized and learned and certainly that looks as how as though that's what the brain has done for example there are people who think that the cerebellum

has basically learned how the motor cortex does its online KL control of Kalman filtering and therefore lends a fluency and a computational efficiency to the message passing

which in its absence doesn't mean you can't do something.

It just means you can't do it as fluently and as gracefully and as quickly as you could with a cerebellum.

Indeed, when you have a cerebellar lesion, all that really happens is you become a bit clumsy and slow.

Those kinds of tools, a quick and cheerful integration or importing various amortization and deep learning technology into a Forney-style message-passing scheme that could support any kind of generative model, I think would be really, really useful.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thank you.

Approaching this nexus from another angle, what kinds of tools and platforms could inform transdisciplinary, highly contextual, and engaged teams that are working with these approaches?

we hope to be working with others to be developing the active inference curriculum and body of knowledge more broadly.

But when teams are actually using these kinds of approaches, what kinds of platforms might exist to enable their work?


SPEAKER_02:
Again, I have a strong suspicion that you know the answer to this much better than I do.

So I'm trying to guess at the answer that you know is the right answer, and I'm not doing very well here.

So, you know,

I think that we've already talked and certainly implicitly in the way that you presented the ambitions and implicitly some of the questions and all the answers are there, whether that's trying to engage through education, whether it's trying to engage through insight using say embodied experience, illustrations of the basic principles, whether it's supplying

games or user interfaces, graphical user interfaces to facilitate the designing and enacting and playing with genitive models and active inference.

I think these are all obvious and laudable ways of leveraging

what Active Influence has to offer.

Participatory.

I mean, the learning is doing thing and the see one, teach one, do one keeps coming back to mind.

And the course completely licenses the participatory aspect.

What kind of participation did you have in mind?

Are you talking about hackathons?

Are you talking about playing games with active inference computers that start to hate you or love you?


SPEAKER_00:
What level of participation were you... Yes, Stephen, do you want to give a quick thought on a few kinds of participation or what does that mean to you?


SPEAKER_01:
yeah one area is quite interesting is in psychodrama they use action methods like action sociometry or spatial activities to look at how people relate to their experience in a dynamic way so physically

So we've been looking at ways that spatial participatory approaches can unpack people's relationships to different niches or different workplaces or different types of embodied experience.

And then that could be visible to be put into active inference type geometries.


SPEAKER_02:
I see.

Okay, right.

There's a great example.

So two things that I've come across before are the architectural design and the importance of

not just sort of pragmatic affordances, you know, can I walk up there, can I sit there, but also the epistemic affordances, you know, if I look over there, what would I learn about the space around me if I go around that corner?

So there is, you know, embryonic interest in my world from the architectural sciences and architecture

in and of itself that could in principle be motivated.

It's an odd discipline because it's half like art and half like science, but some of their ideas are very much aligned with certainly Gibsonian notions of affordance and also the affordances, the dual aspect affordances brought by expected free energy under active influence.

So it's not just, you know,

Am I the kind of creature that can sit on this particular chair?

But also, what will I learn if I so do?

And so things become epistemically attractive to engage with.

The other domain is in entertainment and in music and in particular,

the joy of synchronization and mutual predictability or minimizing free energy through mutual prediction when singing or dancing together or indeed interacting with a slightly greater asymmetry in terms of being a member of an audience watching a band for example so you know

one of the key things that comes out of that kind of research in ways of measuring the implicit generalized synchrony that you get from having this information geometry that I was talking about before

that rests upon there being um a synchronization manifold between the inside and the outside but if the outside is another inside from another person's point of view what you now have is something called a synchronization manifold so there's a mathematical image or space um to actually talk about mutual inference and mutual active inference and engagement and communication

singing together, for example, or diachronically exchanging messages that does actually translate mathematically into movement and belief updating on a synchronization manifold.

And that has real-world correlates.

You can measure that using kinematic measurements.

You're putting LEDs on people who are dancing together, for example,

measuring heart rate variability or galvanic skin responses or doing eye tracking or indeed EEG and start to so there's quite a lot of work in in things like hyperscanning and in in it you know sort of ethology and dance disciplines where in the arts in the life sciences

where they do use a lot of these techniques to quantify the degree of generalized synchrony, what it would be nice to do is actually try and model that synchrony or understand that synchrony in terms of movement on the synchronization manifold, which is sort of the mutual belief updating.

And one thing which comes out of that just in discussion, if no further, is the reciprocal, the circular causality that is necessary

to maintain that generalized synchrony.

The particular synchronization manifold we're talking about from the point of view of active infants, of course, is mediated across the Markov blanket, so the active and sensory states.

But in general,

you need to have reciprocal coupling in order to get synchronisation, so directed coupling doesn't work.

And if that's true, what that means is that engaging as an audience, for example, or participating as a spectator,

will only really work in terms of establishing that generalized synchrony that you are chasing.

And why you're chasing it?

Well, as soon as you have a generalized synchrony, you've got predictability for free for all.

And that's a good thing because that minimizes free energy.

The more predictable you can make the world, the better it is from the point of view of free energy.

But you can only do that if, as a member of the audience or a witness to something, you can actually actively intervene on it.

So that brings to mind, how could you get, for example, discussing this with friends of Maxwell, if you wanted to promote virtual concerts online, for example, during the pandemic?

What you don't have online, which is what glues things together, things like mosh pits in sort of carnivals and festivals, is you don't have the audience participation, the applaud, the roars, the lighter waving or the light waving.

So how would you get that back into a virtual experience?

Because that would be absolutely essential.

you know i think to actually engage people otherwise you know you you'll be you'll be looking at a pop concert on television so you know more than just if you like um revealing the underlying correlates of that generalized synchrony in terms of the eeg traces of the the dancers or um doing some sensory mapping from um

their motion to auditory input, just making the sensory evidence that supports the mutual inference more precise and more available just by having it displayed, say, by putting motion in sound or sound in motion.

or EEG, electroencephalographic measures of performance or the audience visualizing that.

And that has been done by people like Paul Boucher in Barcelona.

More than that, to actually enable the audience to change what the performers are doing.

You have to make, you know, or perhaps what other members of the audience are doing.

So you have to empower them to close that that circular causality to get that dynamical coupling place.

So you get you get the right kind of generalized synchrony so that, you know,

That sort of dynamical systems perspective on synchronization and free energy minimization certainly speaks to a particular kind of participation and engagement that does indeed rest upon action-oriented approaches.

But crucially, it's the action of the audience on the performers, not the performer's action on the audience that is usually what you need to pay more attention to.

Was that the kind of thing you were thinking about?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's really a useful answer, actually.

Yeah, we were thinking about that and some participatory immersive theatre type events and other participation in collective meaning making.

So that's the type of thing that we're looking at.


SPEAKER_00:
And it reminds me of the livestream affordance, which is relatively novel, but allows people to be asking questions and it enables not just efficient production of material in a one-shot approach, but it allows the feedback.

And I can't help but add that it's that affordance for participation, for example, Speak Now or Forever Hold Your Peace,

that expands the wedding into the community because there is the opportunity for feedback.

It's not just a breakaway click.

It's actually something that remains integrated through the affordance for participation.

So I'll turn to the last question for this section.

How might future modeling involve large scale patterns in social data sets and working backwards to infer their hidden causes?

For example, in the case of pandemic modeling, governance, economic, other situations.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, this is a very practical and very pressing question because, of course, a lot of people are asking themselves that now, specifically with respect to pandemic models, but also the people who are exercised and have the interventional clout when it comes to COVID are generally also the people who are invested in climate change problems as well.

So there's a lot of noise out there at the moment about

how we can harness the data simulation and modeling advances made during COVID-19 and keep the momentum up to tackle climate change.

Not just climate, but the economic structures and financial structures

and informational structures that are deeply interwoven in terms of climate change.

My answer is going to be somewhat deflationary.

And I've had this kind of conversation before, again, with Maxwell and John Klippinger and related friends.

And I'm due actually to have another conversation with them on certainly the open world

in the near future.

There's a temptation to take all the high church of the free energy principle and active inference and epistemic foraging and all of that good stuff we were just talking about and say, oh, well, now let's make it work in terms of understanding, say, the pandemic.

and you don't need to do that all you need to do is to apply the good scientific principles that things like active inference appeal to to the problem at hand and it all comes back to the generative model so you know all you're saying here is how might future modeling involve large-scale patterns and social data um to infer that the um hidden causes is just a statement of we need

the right generative models to make proper sense of the big data at hand.

And in saying the right generative models, we need the equipment both to invert those models in the sense of inferring

the parameters, the interactions, using the simple tools that we've just talked about.

They will just be lifting it from the laboratory or continuing to use MATLAB.

But the bigger problem is one we talked about, which is the selection of the structure learning problem.

So this goes beyond just

How many layers do I have in my deep network?

Much more important, I think, is the factorization.

It's knowing how many conditionally independent factors do I need to minimize the complexity to get the right granularity, the right way of carving up.

the latent causes behind all the data that is available to me.

So I think the pandemic modeling is a beautiful example of this because the factors that determine whether I infect you

It can certainly be written down in terms of virology and the ACE receptors, ACE2 receptors, and basically production numbers and transmission strengths and transmission risks and the spike proteins.

But that's only half the story.

The other half of the story is how likely are you to be at work or at home when I'm at work?

Are you likely to be wearing a face mask?

Are you going to, are we going to be one or two meters apart?

So all these behavioral aspects start to become really important factors.

And even beyond that, when it comes to making sense of the model, the likelihood part of the model that actually generates the data can become extremely difficult to optimize when you start to think about

what kind of data is at hand.

For example, just notification rates of new cases per day of coronavirus.

Now, you might think, oh, that's really great data.

It's really difficult data to handle because the different kinds of tests not only have differential false positive and false negative rates, but there are different ways in which they are deployed.

really confounds that in terms of the selection bias.

So are you testing people who are symptomatic?

What's the probability of being infected if you're symptomatic?

Are you not?

Are you doing survey testing?

Are you doing the same amount of testing this week as you were doing last week?

All of these, what would be, if you like, from an epidemiological or a behavioural science perspective, really uninteresting factors, suddenly now become the most important

factors in making sense of those data.

But you only know that when you start to do the model comparison and the structure learning, when you actually commit to writing down the congenital models.

And that's certainly what I've learned over the past year, now a year and a half.

The future of modeling is, first of all, it's obvious what the future is.

It's basically writing down the right kind of dynamical state space models that account for data.

But the future is really dealing with the problems of structural learning and model selection for any data, but in particular for the big data.

at hand in terms of pandemics or trafficking on the web, you know, or climate change.

So it's a really exciting opportunity.

Why do people want to do it?

Well, once you've got the most evidence, i.e.

the minimum free energy model at hand, and you've got posteriors over all the model parameters and all the right interactions,

Then you can do all sorts of stuff in terms of reducing people's uncertainty about the future because you've quantified the uncertainty and explained to them things that were once uncertain about and what isn't uncertain about.

That has enormous implications for mental health and well-being.

and possibly even feeding back into finance because you always hear, well, the biggest determinant in terms of the markets is the market confidence.

It's all about the uncertainty.

So if you can do uncertainty quantification in a principled way using this kind of modeling, you've done a big thing already.

But then you come to monitoring putative interventions.

You've now got a direct handle posterior estimate on the latent states you actually want to make decisions on.

So it's not the notification rates or the number of new cases in California today.

It's a number of new people that have become infected today.

And that's a very difficult thing to

infer given all of these complicated aspects of the generative model.

And then, of course, once you've established the validity of this model in terms of its construct and predictive validity, then you could intervene on it.

Then you can say, well, what would happen if I changed this?

What would happen if I changed that?

um and what would happen now what would happen in the future so that you know you're suddenly in a world of quantitative modeling um um where you can start to um ask some very powerful questions and also um share with everybody who matters and the products of your inference so you can now start to think about having supplementing the weather forecast with the

an epidemic forecast you know the virus in your area and tomorrow we expect you know you can also do that to the markets and these kinds of things I think are going to be more important when people or when the current generation

get to your generation, I guess, and start to wrestle more with climate change because they're going to want to not just know whether it's going to rain tomorrow.

They're going to want to know at the level, not just the weather, but the climate.

What are the indicators?

Because those indicators really contextualize and

inform their generative models about their place in the world at that global scale.

But to provide that kind of weather forecasting, that meteorology beyond the weather, you're going to need to have these state space models properly optimised in a first principle way in relation to the marginal likelihood or the

their evidence bounds.

I've just read governance here because governance is just policy decision-making based upon counter-patron outcomes.

So that is always underwritten by these Bayesian beliefs, but you can't get the Bayesian beliefs unless you've got a generative model that has the consequences of action in the future.

There would be also interventions either politically or financially or otherwise.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you so much again for joining this symposium.

It was really a special moment for the lab and we look forward to continued interaction.

So much appreciated and we will see you all soon.

Thanks for everyone who's watching and we hope that you participate in ACT-INF Lab.

So thanks everyone.

Bye.