## TZNXs5jP9hE

Hello and welcome. This is Active Inference Model Stream number 10.1 on April 4th, 2024,
4-4-24. And we're really excited today to be with Bart Van Earp and Albert Potosenko
talking about building a drone with RxInfer. We have an ongoing RxInfer learning group at
the Institute and a lot of participants have been excited to use even early versions of this
package and connect it to all the exciting math and developments. So thank you both for joining,
looking forward to this very pragmatic presentation. Awesome. Thanks, Daniel. Thanks for the kind words,
the nice introduction. Also welcome everyone online. As Daniel mentioned, we're going to build
a drone today. So last week I didn't know anything about drones whatsoever, but in the meantime,
I was able to craft one with the help of my colleagues. And I want to kind of transfer
the learning experience that I obtained over this week to all of you, such that you can leverage
the power of our toolbox RxInfer in the end to make your own very cool applications, your own drone,
your own autonomous vehicle, whatever you want. And we will then be there also to support you in this
journey. But for now, let's get started. How are we going to build a drone with RxInfer? So first of all,
let me briefly introduce myself. My name is Bart Van Earp. I'm a PhD student and teaching assistant in
BIOS App, which is the research group here at Eindhoven University of Technology. And together with Albert,
we will be also live and we'll also be monitoring the chat in case there are any questions pop up
along the way. We will be your host today together with Daniel. This talk will be supported by Reactive
Base. So Reactive Base is the overcoupling GitHub organization of RxInfer and all the packages on
which it's built. At the moment, we're looking for contributors. So if you're interested after this
talk, please reach out and then definitely we can get you acquainted with the toolbox and with our
environment there. So we're from BiosLab, the Eindhoven University of Technology. We are located
here in Eindhoven, also called City of Light. And from here, we're doing very interesting research
on building agents, probabilistic graphical models and using these to craft all kinds of engineering
applications, trying to solve real world problems with our engine.
Our engine, RxInfer, you might have already heard about this, but our engine is a Julia engine,
which allows us to perform automatic Bayesian inference, specifically through reactive message
passing. The engine that we have built is completely reactive, which means that it doesn't do anything
unless there is something to do for it. So it's relatively energy efficient because it doesn't
consume energy during all the other moments. And we perform message passing, but I'll give a more
detailed discussion on this. More explanation will follow later in this talk. And we're going to use
this toolbox in order to craft a drone, a drone that can actually fly using some simplified drone
mechanics, go from position A to position B. And I'm very eager to show you how this journey, how this
development journey looks like. So let's get started.
So what I'm going to talk about are three parts, basically, in this talk. I'm going to first start off with
the model specification. So in the Bayesian inference methodology, the first part is always that we need
to craft a model. And this model will include some drone physics. So I'll be taking you back to high school,
where you learned all these concepts, refresh a couple of them. And based on that, I'm going to construct a
generative model of how a simplified drone would look like. Furthermore, I'll then continue upon
the probabilistic inference. So if we have crafted this model, and we want this model actually to do
something, inference allows us to compute posteriors in this model. And the inference on this model is
actually the underlying control algorithm that we will be crafting. And this will be automated using our
toolbox, RxInfer. Then finally, we'll wrap up with some experiments. And then there will be plenty of
time to answer any questions that you might have. Let's get going. For the model specification, we're
going to start off with some simplified drones physics. It will be very easy for some, a refresher for others.
But hopefully, throughout this, throughout these following couple of minutes, you'll have a basic
understanding of how a drone works. We have greatly simplified it. Because of course, going into the
details of three, three dimensional drones, with wind, all that kind of stuff, would be a bit too much for
just a single live stream. But we hope to offer you the tools and maybe the machinery to create these more
complicated models yourself. So we have this very nice drone here. And what we're interested in is what
forces act on this drone. So we're going to simplify this a bit. And we're saying that each of the rotors,
so the left and the right rotor, produce some kind of upward force, pulling this drone from the
from the ground. Of course, we also walk around on Earth, and we know that there is actually a force that
opposes this, namely gravity, which tries to pull us to the ground. Well, combining these two forces
allows us to either increase or decrease the altitude of this drone, and make it fly. That's the entire goal.
In the end, the goal will be to come up with these forces, these FL and FR, such that our drone flies from
location A to location B. If we do the computations a bit and see what are the kind of the net force
forces acting on this drone, is in this case, we see that we have a vertical component, Fy, which is the
sum of the individual forces created by the motor, minus the force of gravity that's acting upon the drone.
And in the horizontal direction, because everything is nicely aligned,
we have a net force of zero. If there would be wind, for example, there would be a contribution there.
But in the simplified model, I assume that, well, there is no horizontal component as of yet.
But if we tilt the drone a bit with a certain angle theta, we actually see that this theta
not only affects, of course, the horizontal or the vertical net force, but also the horizontal one.
So based on this, we can obtain equations for this horizontal and vertical force acting upon the drone.
The motors, we assume that they are at a distance r, a radius r from the center of mass. So we
very simplistically assumed that the center of mass of the drone is at the radius r from its rotor. So the force,
you can think of it as acting upon an arm, creating a specific moment.
So the torque that gets generated by these rotors with respect to the center of mass of the drone,
the difference between the distance r is the difference between these two forces multiplied with the radius r.
With these three equations, so the net force is acting upon the drone, and this net torque that we can compute
based on the rotation that the drone wants to go to, we can already construct a big part of the model of this drone.
So these are kind of the forces that act upon the drone, horizontal, vertical direction, the rotation as given by this torque.
And we want to convert these forces into motion, because in the end we want to move the drone,
and we want to figure out what forces are required to move from a position A to a position B.
So let's see, using Newton's law, we can already know that our force is equal to our mass multiplied with our acceleration.
In other words, our acceleration is our force divided by our mass. So based on the net forces that we just
computed, we can also extract equations for the accelerations in the vertical and horizontal direction.
These accelerations accumulate, so if we integrate over them, we get actually a velocity.
So an incremental change in our velocity you can think of is actually this acceleration times this incremental change in time,
which gives us kind of a relationship. So if we increase the acceleration over a period of time,
then we also know that that will lead to an increase in our velocities in both the horizontal and vertical direction.
If we take this even a step further, then we can also start to model the actual position of the drone.
So integrating over this velocity will give us our position in both the X and Y direction.
Basically every small change in X will be a result of the particular velocity over a small period of time.
And with this set of equations, it actually becomes possible to extract the movements from these net forces of the drone.
So that's basically the movement. So how it moves from left to right, up and down.
So we see this is the acceleration in the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of the direction of
used for actually angular acceleration.
Similarly, we can also compute the angular velocity,
so omega, because a small increment in this angular velocity
will be our angular acceleration
times a small fraction of time.
So integrating over the angular acceleration
will give us the angular velocity.
And you might have already guessed this,
based on this, we can also compute a new angle.
So the angle is this velocity integrated over time.
Very similarly, as we derived the equations
for the actual movement of the drone.
And together, these net forces,
these equations for the movement of the drone,
and these simplified equations for the rotation,
they constitute the drone dynamics.
So it might have seemed like a recap from high school,
but for the simplified example,
this is all that we actually need
in order to craft this drone.
And that's what I'm gonna show you right now.
Because these equations of motion,
I'm gonna write down in a function,
specifically a Julia function,
because that's the language that RxInfer also uses
under the hood.
So we're gonna create this function F,
and I'm gonna walk you right through it.
There are just 15 lines of code,
so I think this should be manageable.
So we have a function F,
which accepts the state.
So you can think of this state as the positions,
velocities, angle, and angular velocities of the drone.
The actions, to which we refer to the forces
on the left and right rotor.
The particular drone,
like what are the characteristics of that drone,
and the environment.
So are we on Mars?
Are we on Earth?
All those attributes that are environment related.
So in the first three lines,
what we're gonna do is we're gonna extract some information.
So we're gonna extract the forces from our actions.
We're gonna extract the mass,
the moment of inertia,
and the radius of the drone,
because these are properties that correspond
to the particular drone that we're using,
and the gravity we're gonna just grab from our environment.
Because if we would be on Mars,
we would have very different dynamics, of course.
Then from the state,
what we extract are X and Y,
which are horizontal and vertical positions,
VX and VY,
which are velocities in the horizontal and vertical direction,
data, which was our angle,
and omega, which was our angular velocity.
With all these properties, characteristics,
and states extracted,
we can actually start implementing the equations
that we have on the left.
So FG, which is the force generated by the gravity,
is simply equal to the mass times the gravitational constant.
So FY and FX,
I merely copied from the equations on the left.
So it's the sum of the forces,
multiplied with cosine or sine of the angle,
and for the Y force,
the net Y force,
we also subtract the gravity,
because there it has an influence.
And for the net torque, we do the similar.
So we extract the difference between the force
generated by the left and right rotor,
and multiply that with the radius,
in order to get us a torque.
Then next up is we can, based on these forces,
we can compute the accelerations in the X and Y direction.
So F of X divided by M will give us these accelerations,
or F of Y divided by M for the vertical acceleration.
We're gonna take a very crude Euler approximation.
So we're gonna do a linearization
in order to actually create a new velocity.
So V X new, which will be the velocity after enforcing the actions,
will be our previous velocity,
plus our acceleration,
times this increment in time,
is DT.
And this DT we said beforehand.
But this is a simplified assumption,
which of course there are more complicated
assumptions to be made.
We could choose
Euler-Maiwanger,
and all those other fourth order approximations.
But for now, let's keep it simple,
and let's stick to this very simple order approximation.
Then based on the velocities and accelerations,
we can also do a similar trick for the new positions.
So how does our X and Y coordinate change based on their previous coordinates,
the velocities that we had at the previous moment,
and the accelerations that we computed?
Here we have this quadratic term over the accelerations,
which are merely a matter of fact of the approximation,
because over DT we also want to kind of integrate over the accelerations.
So that's odds, the second term basically,
odds for this effect and makes it a bit more realistic.
With that out of the way,
we can do similar things for the rotation.
So the acceleration, the rotational acceleration,
is our torque divided by our moment of inertia that we got from the drone.
We again can update the angular velocity based on this previous angular velocity.
The acceleration that we just computed and the time interval.
And based on that, we can also update our angle.
So what this function does,
it accepts the state actions and some characteristics of the drone and the environment
and some discretization over time.
And it computes and returns a new state.
So if we would have applied a specific action,
force FL and FR,
corresponding to the two rotor engines,
what would be the new state or approximately the new state that we end up with.
It's very simplified, but this you can think of as a state transition function.
With that out of the way, now it's actually time to start with the easy work.
Because we have now this function F,
and this function F specifies how we think this internal state of the drone evolves over time.
Something I forgot to mention, but Julia also supports Unicode.
So the people who are paying attention might have already seen it.
I still think it's a great feature,
but you can actually use Greek symbols,
which makes this translation going from physics to code way more easy,
and also allows you to retain this physical interpretation to it.
But that being said, let's continue with the proper model.
So just remember now that we have F, which encodes our state transition.
For our drone, we're going to construct a generative model.
And here I have drawn it as a so-called Forney-style vector graph.
But I'm going to talk you right through it.
So what we have is these boxes.
And these boxes correspond to factors or functions on how variables relate to each other.
Which one relates to another one?
And how are they interconnected through which functions and through which nodes, let's say.
And the edges, so the arrows here in this case, correspond to the individual variables in our model.
The variables S in this example correspond to the state of the agent.
So that contains the position of the agent in both x, y.
And the velocities also in the x, y direction.
Furthermore, this state also contains the angle and this angular velocity to make life a bit simpler.
U in this case corresponds to the actions.
So the actions that we want in the end to also infer.
Based on this figure, we can for example see around this function f,
which was our state transition.
That we put in the previous state.
And the actions.
And we get something out.
To that we add a bit of Gaussian noise to accommodate for any uncertainties that are maybe in the parameters.
In the environment because we use simplified drone physics.
Maybe we want to add a bit of process noise there.
Just to accommodate for the fact that these dynamics are not perfect.
And that there will always be internal, external fluctuations that drive this drone.
And that's the case.
So we can do that.
And we can do that.
If we write this down in a probabilistic manner, we can construct this particular vector graph.
Where we have these time slices which repeat over time.
And mathematically we can write that in the equation that's on the slide.
So we have a prior on the initial state.
Which we refer to as P of S0.
Which encodes our starting position, starting velocities, starting angles.
And all the way at the end of the model, we have our goal prior.
So P of ST.
Where capital T promotes the length of our model.
Also known as our horizon.
This P of ST describes, okay, where do we actually want the agent to go?
What do we want its velocity to be at the end?
What do we want its angle to be at the end?
All these kind of things.
So together, P of S0 and P of ST, these two priors,
de-encodes the starting and end position of our drone respectively.
Whereas this middle part with the F function, the transition function that we just described.
And the control U of which we can put a Gaussian prior because we want to infer it.
Together these encodes the dynamics of the drone, the generative model.
How does this look like?
I'm just going to port it directly into RxInfer.
So over the past couple of months, our colleagues have spent significant amounts of time
actually improving our modeling language.
Which makes it now even easier to craft your own probabilistic models in RxInfer.
And with these effectively four lines, five lines of code, we can construct the model, the graph that we have on the left.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to talk you through it.
And I think at the end, I think, hope all questions or I don't think there will be a lot of questions surrounding this particular model any longer.
Because it's merely a replication of what's on the left.
We're going to define this variable S1.
And S1 in this case actually refers to the first state.
But Julia indexes with one.
So that's why it's not S0, but S1 instead.
And S1, which encodes our starting position, we're going to encode that with a multivariate normal distribution.
Whose mean is given by some initial state that we provide to the function.
And whose covariance matrix we assume to be very narrow.
Because we assume that we know the position of the drone at the initial time step.
Then inside this for loop, we're going to basically unroll this middle segment of the drone.
Of the generative model.
We're going to create a prior on the control.
So on this U of T.
And we're going to put there also a multivariate normal because that's nice to work with.
Whose mean is the mass times the gravitational constant divided by two.
And then as a vector of two.
The reason for this is because our prior assumption of this drone is that it exerts a force.
Because we think it's flying.
So it would make sense that we assume the force of the engines will be just enough maybe to balance the drone in the air.
So this mg divided by two, which is actually the force of the left and right rotor respectively.
They compensate for the force of gravity.
If the engine or the drone were to be upright.
So here we provide some additional information that allow us to improve convergence and improve also estimation.
Because we know that the drone is probably not going to drop out of air.
We want it actually to kind of stabilize and stay at its position.
So we do that here by putting this prior on the control.
Then following that is our state transition.
So how do we think our state evolves over time?
And this is where the dynamics of the simplified run that we talked about on the previous slide actually come into play.
So the mean of the next state will be given by this function f over the previous state and the corresponding actions.
And the drone, the environment and the discretization over time.
Together with some noise because of the unknown dynamics.
Maybe we've got some internal external fluctuations, uncertainties, stochastic behavior.
So that's all something that we also encode in this multivariate normal distribution.
So that incorporates this for loop.
And that this for loop basically unrolls this segment that's on the left containing this p of u, this f, and this norm.
Then finally we finish up our model by putting this goal prior at the end.
So at the horizon plus one because of the indexing, we're going to put the multivariate normal,
which mean is located at the goal containing our goal position, goal, the velocities that we wish to attain at the goal, the angle at the goal, etc., etc.
And together these couple lines of code, effectively there are just five, they create the generative model that's on the left.
So that's great.
We have crafted the model of how we think the drone evolves over time.
We have derived some simplified equations to model its states dynamics.
And now we want to do inference.
So we are interested in computing the marginal distributions over both actions and states.
Basically, we want to ask our model, okay, it's nice that you have encoded this starting and end position in the model.
But in order to obtain that, how can we actually reach that?
How can we actually do that?
So we're interested in figuring out what is actually the marginal distribution over the actions.
So this q of u.
And what is the marginal distribution over the states?
So what forces do we need to apply to go from position a to position b?
And how will this trajectory going from a to b look like?
In the general case, if we were to just try to solve this equation and compute these marginal distributions,
then we would have to integrate over all other parameters.
But that's very computationally heavy, because there are a lot of parameters in our model.
So doing this in a naive way would not be efficient at all.
But there is luckily a way to make it efficient, namely through message passing.
So let's dive a bit deeper into how that actually looks like.
So for this purpose, I've created this simplified factorized model to make sure everyone can kind of follow along.
So we have the different factors, fa, fb, fc, and fd.
Each linked to some of the variables from x1 ranging to x6.
And each factor is only connected to the variables to which it also relates.
It's a simple case, right?
Suppose now that we wish to compute the marginal here over the variable x4.
Doing this naively would require us to integrate out this factorized model over all variables x except for x4.
However, that's computationally heavy, as I mentioned earlier, because we have five variables to integrate over.
And that might be a challenge because we're in this very high dimensional space then.
Luckily, what we can do is we can make use of that these factors are not connected to everything.
So the factor nodes that are on the left are not connected to each of the variables.
And this turns out to be very beneficial from an efficiency standpoint.
So we can effectively split up this large integration over the entire model fx into a set of smaller integrals.
Simply by making use of this distributive property of integration where we can kind of separate them out, put some parts into brackets.
And by doing so, this large integration problem actually reduces into a couple smaller integration problems, which are more efficient to solve.
So we can also give an interpretation to this.
For example, this fa of x1, x2 integrated over the variable x1.
You can also think of this as closing the box, as we demonstrate on the left, over that factor fa.
And this is the result of this we call a message.
So this message you can think of as a summary of a particular part of that particular graph, of a part of the graph.
And we can iterate this a couple of times.
So this message mu of x2, if we propagate that into the next node, this fb, and we solve the corresponding integration with this double integration over now x2 and x3,
we get a new message mu of x4.
And we can do this on all the edges and over all the factor nodes here in our model.
We can integrate over the single node fd, over the node fc, where we have an incoming message mu of x5.
And what we end up with, and that's the interesting part, is that all these messages are relatively easy to compute.
They're relatively small because they do not require this huge integration.
The funny thing here is, is that this marginal, the one that we're interested in, this q of x4, is now simply the product of mu of x4 times the other mu.
So the messages that are actually colliding on that edge, and then of course renormalized.
But that marginal distribution can simply be computed on a very local level by multiplying the messages that are flowing over these edges.
Hence making it very efficient to solve this integration problem.
And this is also how we actually solve inference in our toolbox.
So in the probabilistic generative model that we created for the drone, we can use message passing to solve this marginalization in a very efficient manner.
To give you an example, these are some benchmarking results that we obtained with RxInfer.
So this is the final step of the model that we've done.
On the left you can see how long it takes for a simple stage-based model, which is similar to the model that I've shown before.
But you can think more of this like in a common filter setting for people who have a bit of familiarity with control systems.
And we can see that the filtering and the smoothing both scale very well.
They scale very nicely in the number of observation, or in the length of the model.
So just linearly basically.
On the right we also do a comparison between RxInfer, so R toolbox, and Turing.
Turing is another toolbox in Julia, which doesn't use message passing to solve the actual marginalization problem.
But instead it reverts to sampling.
So instead of computing everything kind of analytically or mostly analytically or with approximations, it draws a lot of samples and tries to extract statistics from this.
But as you can see, the left axis is on the log scale.
So we obtain significant performance improvements in comparison to the sampling-based methods.
And that's also why we are pushing for RxInfer, because it's just way more efficient to perform these competitions with message passing in comparison to sampling-based methods.
There is one thing in our model.
So if you recall these drone dynamics, then our state transition was quite nonlinear.
So it was very challenging, or it is very challenging, to do exact message passing with this nonlinear node.
Because if we go from the previous state to the next state, then the distribution of this next state will no longer be nice in Gaussian.
But it might be a distribution which is outside of the distribution or outside of the family of exponential distributions, let's say.
So it requires some approximations in order to actually do inference around it.
So in the experiments, I have used unscented, which we can just specify with the little code block on the right.
And what this does, it draws a very small but very informative set of samples around the incoming Gaussian distributions,
which capture the first and second moment of that distribution.
So the mean and variances of these sigma points, these samples, these are still the same as the statistics of the incoming normal distribution.
What we then do is we use these very carefully selected samples to propagate through the nonlinearity.
And based on the transformed sigma points, we then reconstruct what the Gaussian at the output could have looked like.
So this unscented allows us to make approximations through this nonlinearity.
With that in place, we can actually perform inference.
So the code block on the left bottom is all you need in order to get the drone running.
So inside the in var function, we specify a model, which was the drone model that we specified in one of the previous slides.
We specify its data.
Although it's not observing something directly and it's more doing a planning task,
we can still supply it with the initial state and the goal state.
Where do we want the agent to move to?
And this meta object corresponds to the approximations that we wish to take.
And that's all.
That's all that's necessary in order to actually get this drone up and running.
And in order to demonstrate this, we have a very nice experiment created by Dimitri, one of our colleagues,
where we have this drone moving around.
But it will be, it's more complicated than, or I would say the plotting is more complicated than what I've shown on the previous slide.
Because actually getting this plotting to work requires way more code than actually getting our inference to work.
But what it allows us to do is not only to do this planning, but also to do this really in an online manner.
So here in this particular example, we have created this video where on the fly we are changing parameters.
So we're increasing the mass of the drone, making it heavier.
We're increasing the size of the drone, so it's radius.
It's engine power, like what are the limits of this drone, what can it obtain?
Gravity, perhaps you want to move to another planet and test your simulation there.
But we're changing these characteristics on the fly.
And with RX and Ferb, we are still able to process kind of this, do this planning task.
That being said, all the code and the examples that I showed you today,
they are publicly available on the reactive base organization.
So in the RX-infer-examples.gl repository, you can find the code required to run actually the drone experiment.
It will be a simplified experiment, so not the one on the previous slide,
because that would be way too intense to, that would be just too overwhelming to have a look at.
But the main characteristics of this particular drone demo are available here.
And if you have any questions, want to try it out, please let me know after,
or contact me if you have issues.
But the code that we developed for this particular live stream is actually publicly available.
And with that, I would like to thank you, of course, for this very nice opportunity, for this nice audience.
If you want to have more information, feel free to reach out to any one of us.
Reactive base, file issue, whatever you've seen deemed pretty.
You can contact us, research group, BiasLab, our spin-off, LACE Dynamics, for industrial applications.
But most importantly, for reactive base, I want to say that we are also looking for collaborators.
So if you got motivated by this talk, got inspired to create your own cool applications,
please reach out to us and hopefully help us develop RX-infer into the toolbox of the future.
I think that's something that I would like to strive for.
So if you're inspired, reach out and we'll make sure that there are amazing opportunities lying ahead.
And that's all. Thanks a lot for the attention.
And I hope it was an inspiring talk that got you engaged with RX-infer, got you excited.
So if you have any questions, please let me know.
Awesome. Thank you.
Very cool presentation.
Albert, do you want to give any first or overview remarks?
And then Chris and Kovac, we can discuss and ask some questions too.
Well, not really in a sense that, yeah, it was, although it was the first time I saw this presentation,
it was a great part.
I mean, I knew the underlying project behind that and how the drone works,
but the presentation, I think, was very nice.
It also connected how, well, the Bayesian inference is basically,
how is it connected to the goal-driven behavior.
I think it's really cool.
Yeah, I just wanted to add along the presentation that Bart was speaking about this noise component
when he drew, when he has drawn the graph.
So this noise component also could be seen as basically the compensation
for our poor approximation of the dynamics, right?
Because we use this first order linear approximation.
And, well, that's arguably not the best way of approximating the underlying physics,
although it worked for this simplified demo.
And there, well, I think I can just maybe add on how this demo can be extended
or this model can be extended.
Well, the first thing to do is, well, just to use a different approximation, right?
That's one thing that comes to my mind.
And another thing would be, and I think from the active inference perspective,
would be to omit some of the parameters in the transition function,
deem them unknown, and to let the agent figure out it
through the interaction with the environment.
So you could achieve that also with RxInfer
by putting some priors on the metrics
or putting some prior on the components of this metrics.
And you can see how fast the agent actually learns the physics of the environment.
Yeah.
Awesome.
I'll ask some quick questions from the live chat,
and then Chris and Kobus, if you want to ask, feel free.
Okay.
So Carlos asks,
is the reactive part based on events to trigger the pipeline or based on signals?
Yeah.
Yeah, go ahead, Bart.
Yeah.
So what we, or what Dimitri did when he built it,
when he started building this RxInfer toolbox,
is he used a very different computing paradigm.
So normally you execute code from the top to the bottom.
But what he did is he used this reactive paradigm.
So based on events,
a particular computation is being executed.
And these events can be various.
It can change, of course.
It depends very much on the context what an event is.
But often the event corresponds to making actual observations.
So especially for active inference agents,
if we make a new observation,
only then re-computations are being executed.
So basically the entire algorithm does nothing
unless there is something to compute.
And I hope that kind of answers the question,
but I'm not entirely sure.
So if I was a bit unclear,
maybe Albert, you can add to it if you have a better.
Yeah, I'm just not sure which kind of reactive part was meant in the question.
Because yeah, there is the reactive part of the inference,
but also the demo itself was reactive, right?
Like when you are triggering this.
But basically speaking about how it works,
indeed it triggers on the event, basically.
So in the event is that, yeah,
there are a few things that could be changed, right?
It's either environmental change,
something changed in the environment,
and then we sense this from our sensors,
and then the inference follows, right?
So there is, just to add upon what Bart said about this reactive part,
so message passing is a well-known algorithm.
I mean, it's been around since Perl,
or I believe propagation, perhaps later, earlier.
But then the reactive is a particular implementation of this message passing,
which is more kind of driven by how the system should work in the field.
Awesome.
Yeah, with Magnus Kudal, we explored a lot of the message passing,
talked a little bit about how all the messages could be passed at once,
or the reactive paradigm where you could uncouple the rates of updating.
Okay, I'll ask one more question from the live chat,
and then Chris or Kobus.
Fraser asks,
Fantastic stuff!
Double exclamation point!
Uh-oh.
If somebody wanted to help develop RxInfer with your organization,
what are the ideal characteristics and backgrounds to have?
I think we are very open.
So also within our lab,
we have a huge variety of backgrounds,
ranging from computer science to physics,
electrical engineering for myself, for example.
So there is a wide variety of backgrounds possible.
Of course, we assume that,
or we would like coding to be something that you're good at or willing to learn,
because I think that's one of the most important things,
of course, to develop a software engine.
And all the rest,
I think we can provide you with excellent materials to get crossed,
or to get familiar with the methods that we use,
or get acquainted with the models that we have developed in the past.
So,
personally,
when I started in this group,
and when I started working on this project,
I also didn't have any background.
So I used to be an air electrical engineer.
I never heard about,
well,
I was taught probability theory,
and then quickly forgot about it.
So my background was very different.
And it's maybe a bit difficult to get started,
started directly with all this probability message passing,
and all this entire paradigm.
But it's definitely a very nice ride to learn.
So,
I would say,
if you're willing to learn,
willing to make a nice contribution,
then that's always welcome.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well,
we are mostly writing stuff in Julia,
right?
So Julia is sort of,
I mean,
I mean,
it's learnable language,
right?
It's not like,
if you don't know Julia,
you can't help us.
No,
that's not,
absolutely not true.
So we welcome people from different programming backgrounds.
And besides,
there are different branches on how you can help within this Rx-Inferrin,
basically,
the whole reactive base ecosystem,
because it consists not only of the inference engine,
which I must say,
it's the most difficult part for contributing,
because there are many intricacies involved within this inference language.
But there is also GraphPPL,
right?
There's also Rocket.
There are other packages which basically constitute the whole ecosystem.
And yeah,
well,
you don't have to be an expert in Bayesian inference to contribute to Rocket,
or you don't have to be,
again,
an expert in particular approximations to contribute to a model builder.
So,
and of course,
the documentation is something which always needs an update,
right?
So we don't dismiss people for contributing to the documentation.
That's extremely important for the community and for ourselves,
because we can see,
okay,
so where are the parts which we could explain better or actually improve our
ecosystem?
Awesome.
Kopus?
Very interesting talk.
Thank you very much.
I have a question about categorical examples,
where the control space consists of values from a categorical distribution.
So,
does RxInfer have any such examples available?
We do.
We do.
So,
we do not only support continuous variables in this case,
but we also support a variety of categorical,
yeah,
Renouli distributions,

The categorical distributions themselves.
We do have a lot of examples.
So,
if you visit the website,
rxinfer.ml,
there is this huge list of examples,
use cases,
some of which feature categorical distributions as well,
modeling as,
yeah,
all the rate,
ranging from modeling as simple coin tools,
to more advanced examples.
But we do offer functionality in both the discrete domain,
as in the continuous domain.
Yeah.
Okay.
Thank you.
Yes.
Yeah,
go ahead.
Go ahead.
Now,
I just wanted to add,
there is,
well,
the most,
kind of,
famous example on,
or,
hello world examples,
into the categorical world within,
I think,
is,
is hidden market model.
And I think we have an example on that.
I'm not sure that we have incorporated the control within that example.
That's probably learning the transition matrices for observations and,
and,
well,
the hidden state.
But there is,
I think,
nothing stopping you from introducing the control for,
for a certain,
discrete type of Markov model.
Thank you.
And then I use VS code.
And I do have problems with Greek symbols.
When they contain multiple characters in a superscript or subscript,
for example.
So do you guys use VS code at all?
And if so,
do you have a best practice to,
to solve my problem?
We do use VS code.
I think our entire lab uses VS code because it does turn out to be a very,
very nice tool.
So it's good that you mentioned this.
Regarding the subscripts and the superscripts that you mentioned is,
personally,
I try to avoid them because oftentimes I completely agree that it looks nice to
have this dot over variable,
for example,
to denote the derivative or to draw kind of the index with a superscript.
But personally,
to me,
that clutters it a bit and also makes it more challenging to edit.
So I just try to refrain from using sub and superscripts in VS code with this
auto tab,
although it looks very cool and might be nice for like demo purposes or actually
experimentation or development.
I always try to avoid them.
So not a solution,
but this is my kind of my take on it.
Okay.
Yeah,
I can understand.
Yeah,
because,
and another possible problem with super and subscripts is they can appear very
small and I often find myself having to zoom in a bit to,
you know,
discriminate between symbols.
And then my final question,
to what extent can you guys parallelize within RX infer?
Are there obvious low hanging fruit choices to,
to apply parallelization?
In RX infer?
Yes.
So,
um,
it's good that you mentioned this because at the moment we have actually a
master's student who is kind of working on this particular,
or trying to work on this project,
uh,
where we try to parallelize the message passing and the computation,
for example,
of the marginals.
So there are opportunities there to do some sort of parallelization.
Um,
in general,
at the current moment,
our message passing is all linear,
unfortunately.
However,
there have been papers where they also parallelize that,
although it seems that it's impossible to do.
Apparently it's still this,
uh,
but that's something perhaps for a future project.
So at the moment we do not provide a lot of parallelization around RX infer,
but in the future,
this is definitely on top of our agenda to make also improvements,
uh,
in terms of performance and in computational speed.
Um,
uh,
just one quick question,
um,

another one,

um,
have you guys thought of approaching,

big players like Amazon web services,
for example,
to,

you know,
and present this to them and try and get them to incorporate it into their,
into their tools.
Um,
we have been,
um,
so with Lace dynamics,
kind of the spin off company,
which also uses RX infer to develop real applications,
let's say for customers,
we have considered this,
this option.
Um,
but at the moment we have not been in contact to any of these,
these companies or clients.
Uh,
sorry.
No,
I just wanted that to,
we,
we haven't talked to none of,
uh,
Fang.

so that's,
that's,

yeah,
we haven't done yet.

we are,

we are in talks.
There are a few interested parties in the pipeline,
but,


uh,
no,
we haven't approached Amazon.
No,
not yet.
Excellent.
Thank you.
Kobus.
I'll ask another question in the chat and then Chris,
if you have anything,
Fraser asks,
what are the largest current challenges to the reactive message passing paradigm
for doing this kind of approximate Bayesian inference?
It's a very good question.
I think it also depends a lot on who you ask this question to,
to me personally,
um,
the message passing,
I think is a great method in itself.
And it's also overcomes already a lot of challenges.
What I think would be the most fruitful next step is to really start working on the actual modeling,
the modeling aspects.
So can we create maybe universal models,
uh,
hierarchical models?
How can we do this such that these hierarchical models or similar actually solve more complicated tasks than a simple stage-based model can do.
Um,
so for me personally,
I think that's where we can achieve the biggest gains in this modeling part.
I'm not sure about what Albert thinks are the most big,
what is the,
yeah,
what the biggest outstanding challenge is,
but there are,
I think,
I think from,
from,
yeah,
totally agree.
from the,
from the research perspective,
the structural adaptation of,
of the model,
that's the most,
I would say,

the hardest and the most interesting,
uh,

uh,
from my opinion,

problem.
That's like hand crafting this model,
like for,
for this type of drones,

It's nice.
It can be easy.
Sometimes not.
Well,
if you go to the three dimensional,
that's significantly,
uh,
more,

complex.
indeed like having,
um,
a machinery.
Well,
the thing,
the interesting thing that we,
we do have a machinery to,
to do a structural adaptation,
uh,
because,
uh,
Rix and Ferb,

does provide the,
uh,
an opportunity to extend your model,
to patch it.
Uh,
although how to do that in principle,
how do you indeed,
uh,
grow or,
or,
uh,
shrink your model.
And so in time while observing and being,
being in the field,
uh,
I think this is the most challenging part indeed.
And as for,
well,
there are certainly,
uh,
problems with,
uh,
approximations and,
uh,
uh,
well,

universal rules.
Uh,
that's something we also,
I think,
uh,
outline in a few demos that,
well,
there could be a situation where the rule for computing the message,
which,
uh,
Bart was showing is not,
is not available.
Uh,
so there is always this,
uh,

right?
to,
uh,
well,
to commit to a simpler approximation to do it faster.
You want to commit to,
uh,
uh,
more accurate approximation,
but it will take more,
uh,
resources,
uh,
computational resources and how to balance between these two.
That's,
that's another interesting,
uh,
question.
How to,
how to automatically decide.
Uh,
I think,
I think this is,
uh,
what I would call,
um,
I would also add from our kind of educational and research side that one of the big challenges,
thankfully one being approached is to develop the documentation and the examples.
The examples help us learn, but also a lot of us are having good success bringing in code examples into code and language models and using the working examples to template new examples.
So as the library of open source published models grows, that will become more possible.
And then also there's a lifelong, fascinating journey of talking about how do you go from seeing a drone in the sky to getting those physics equations down and that kind of like approach to modeling.
And how do we get to a graph, assuming that that's where the software package can pick up and render it kind of no problem.
But there's still this very human, very collaborative process, which also could receive a lot of documentation and examples about getting to that kind of a model.
Chris?
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, yeah. Chris, do you want to ask anything?
No, I just wanted to say thank you guys very much. I really enjoyed the presentation.
I liked, I really enjoyed how you broke down a lot of the top of my head right now is like the integration example.
It was very intuitive. It made a lot of sense and it really highlighted a lot of the benefits and true power in what you guys have developed.
So thank you guys. And I really, really appreciate your time and explain this to us.
Thank you for the kind words.
If I could also add one comment, just as we've been working on it week by week, a real like arising insight that got us both excited and not daunted,
but just realizing the scope of the package and the work was in comparing the Rx and FUR active inference examples
with other active inference simulations like from PyMDP or built kind of custom outside of a package like the In4ANCE examples.
And we realized that a lot of alternative approaches, people try to go as fast as possible to developing an active inference agent
and then talk about like the variational free energy or the expected free energy of the agent.
And so the package serves as a helpful accelerator to get to an agent, but that's not like the general agent.
And then even making small changes to that scheme can be buried and scattered across different packages.
And then there's all these other kinds of limitations that one quickly finds themselves encountering like in the education application settings.
Whereas in Rx and FUR, it's such an engineering driven approach.
So a lot of the engineers on our team were immediately more comfortable.
And then a lot of people who had been playing with active inference from a computer science or from a philosophical and mathematical side
were a little bit surprised because we were getting very low level with the node engineering.
And then after wiring that up and understanding it, it's just like press play.
So a lot of the focus on developing an agent was actually that focus was moved to better understanding the graph
that represents the ecosystem of shared intelligence.
And there was less upfront focus on merely making it like an agent-based model
because you could make an agent-based model like the drone,
or you could develop other kinds of graphs that don't necessarily have an agentic basis.
So that helped us realize that this is a much broader toolkit than doing active inference or agent-based modeling of any kind,
but that those are use cases that are benefited greatly by it.
Definitely.
I think you are...
Actually, the main point of our package.
So RX-Refur allows us to enable or enables us to create these agents very quickly, very adapt, very efficiently.
So if we compare this, for example, to...
And you mentioned this already also from your engineers.
If you would go through a traditional design cycle for an engineering firm, you would create a single model kind of thingy,
a single algorithm, let's say 50 pages of code or something.
And that's nice, these 50 pages of code, but it's unmaintainable.
You need a lot of engineers to actually make improvements upon it.
Yeah, if something changes, you don't know what's going to happen, right?
Whereas with RX-Refur, we just have to specify this little piece of code which specifies the model.
And then inference is automated, as you mentioned, you just press play.
It isn't that easy, of course, from the actual engine perspective.
But we try to make the user experience as good as possible to make it as easy on the user to build agents, active inference agents,
or any other applications where you might need such machinery to actually complete a specific task.
And hopefully by doing so, by making this user friendliness, one of our priorities is we can also enable active inference
getting adopted across industries and across research groups.
Yeah.
After today, if we have a quick question, is there an email that we could send those questions to?
I think from the Active Inference Institute, there is a communication channel.
But Daniel, please correct me if I'm wrong, directly to BiasLab.
But if you have questions, feel free to start a discussion on GitHub because we actively maintain it.
We keep also a close watch on what's happening.
And there might also have been people with similar questions before you.
So my first hunch would be to create a discussion on GitHub.
And we will definitely then get involved with one of our colleagues in order to help you out.
Okay.
Thanks.
Well, if you have questions regarding Easy Dynamics venture, then you could use our info at lacedynamics.com as well.
And also just to dump any other questions you want.
Yep.
Cool.
Well, thank you all again.
It's really awesome.
I was thinking about how the packages are kind of factorized and modular and separable, almost like that's a theme that helps ecosystems work.
So overall, thank you very much for the work and for presenting.
We've really appreciated the chance to work with a package in our learning groups.
And we'll look forward to seeing more examples and sharing more also from the projects that people are working on in the Institute.
Thank you, Daniel.
Thank you very much.
It was a pleasure.
Thank you for having us.
Yeah.
Okay.
Great.
So see you all next time.
Bye.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.

## ygmAhA18mkQ

all right hello it is May 16th 2024
we're in the RX and fur JL project with
some guests from bias lab and
participants and vzer will be sharing
with us about the RX environments. JL
package so thanks all for joining
looking forward to this presentation and
discussion go for
it all right thank you Daniel uh so my
name is V I am a second year PhD student
in bias lab uh you may know Bas laab
because we are the uh main authors of
the RX infer package a package for
reactive Beijing
inference and last year when I was
working with RX and fur um and doing
well reactive beijan inference I found
that there was a a lacking support for
environments in the same reactive
Paradigm uh and we were relying on
reinforcement learning uh packages such
as gymnasium or or reinforcement
learning
and I didn't really like it so I wrote
RX environments. JL a package for
reactive um environments which aims to
uh complement RX and fur in the
reactive um agent
development um ecosystem so if we look
at RX environments it's a very
lightweight boiler plate package it
contains a boiler plate code to make
something that I call a reactive
environment a reactive environment is
a an environment that consists of
entities where an entity can be an agent
but it can also be a component of an
environment or the entire environment
itself and what we have to describe is
how entities communicate with each other
so every entity has its own Mark of
blanket with with which it can
communicate with other entities in the
environment so in that sense it's very
um related to active inference because
well
we have a very specific notion of the
interior of an entity and the exterior
of the entity and it's Mark of blanket
and I try to replicate that in ARX
environments so um to give a short demo
we can dive right into the code I have
prepared um the mountain car example in
the uh documentation of ARX environments
but just to Showcase to you that this
gives you um more
um flexibility to work with so we have
on the left hand side I have my code
because I'm going to manipulate this
environment uh in real time and on the
right hand side I have the environment
so I have my landscape I hope you guys
can see my cursor by the way uh I have
the landscape and in the middle I have
one agent one car a DOT representing a
car um what's nice about RX environments
is that I can send um actions to the
environment so my landscape the
environment is one entity the agent the
car is a different entity and I can send
a command that contains Engine Force on
a scale from minus one to one so I can
send uh minus one to The Entity and
you'll see that the car starts driving
up the hill it doesn't have a lot of
Engine Force and I can live send
different commands and you'll
see that the car responds accordingly
now what's nice about arcs environments
is that as I said uh you'll get native
uh multi-agent environments out of the
box so if I just add a different agent
Mountain car agent with some hyper
parameters to the
environment you'll see that there is now
a second dot at the bottom of the valley
a second car and similar to how this
first car can be
controlled we can control the second car
too 01 was
maybe uh this uh I should have maybe
given this car a bit less engine power
because it's clearly flying off the
screen um but you get the gist um that
we
can um well control both cars
simultaneously um and RX environments
handles all this uh this communication
natively reactively under the hood so my
idea is or my next steps for this
project are going to be to uh
incorporate better into the ARX and fur
ecosystem because I think that building
agents uh with ARs environments in this
way U that both the active inference
Community as well as the arcs Ander
Community can can can benefit from this
so this is a very short overview of the
things that ARX environments can do it
can do a whole lot more um but I think
that this is a very short demo that
gives you the best idea of why it's nice
that we're going to go reactive because
you get stuff like this we can control
in real time we can control multi-agent
environments um and it's very um active
inference e in that sense so on that
note um I'll stop sharing my
screen let's see and um yeah if you guys
have any questions about this which I uh
which I heard you have then I'll be very
happy to take
it awesome
thanks very informative and hilarious
Mountain car example yeah this this you
you you can play with this Engine Force
of this mountain car and I probably
should have prepared that it doesn't fly
off the screen but you I mean it gets
the point for us right
it's yeah okay um I'll share screen and
just type and so everyone else in the
group just go for asking any of the
questions we'd already identified or any
new questions arising so go for
it um interested Rel
between I I I don't understand you very
well maybe there's do you understand c
as well okay
relationship
between you're you're very very
faint uh yeah okay
well with stuff I I actually had a
question do not on this particular page
that um Daniel's sharing right now I
tried my hand at let's say plugging in
the mountain car the existing Mountain
car agent in the RX and thir
documentation into your Mountain car
environment I wasn't quite able to do
that but it appears that you you have
done that uh in that example just then
and then maybe I was missing something
because in the in the documentation the
RX environments documentation from
mounting car I didn't see that there was
a an agent that had you know
instantiated the generative model uh
much in the same way that the ARX infer
documentation had and I thought oh okay
this this is a wrapper or you know a
nice API for me to specify an
environment I I now have to go away and
then specify my agent also but it seems
is that what you did for that example
just then or or did you just no no I
just for this example just now I just
used my um you
know custom commands that I just uh sent
myself um so this is something that I'm
actively working on on uh combining the
two um the mountain active inference
Mountain car example on the ARX and fur
website I believe is a bit
um cheating in a sense because we give
it all Environ Dynamics all functions of
the environment Dynamics and then we uh
do some uh some approximation to the
posterior of what we have to do but in a
sense it doesn't really discover that it
has to do anything because it knows all
the environment Dynamics so that's why I
haven't really spent time on um
incorporating this specific example
because I feel that if we're going to
demo this package plus an agent that it
should be an agent that actually has
capabilities of exploring the
environment instead of knowing all the
environment Dynamics and just while
basically doing model predictive
control right okay that makes it a bit
clearer okay I I have a follow up maybe
let somebody else um something just for
now thank you very
much so to give a very short answer to
your question we can we can sit together
if we uh on if want to Define an agent a
generative model I know how to hoop the
two up I just don't have a working
example
yet right okay I have I don't want to
use this I don't want to use this agent
from from the arxs and F documentation
because indeed I feel that it's a bit
cheating but it's my personal opinion
right yeah yeah okay that that actually
clears a lot of things off for me
because I was kind of unclear like oh do
I do I kind of plug that one in is that
is that what I do yeah okay but that's
not that functionality exactly CLE yeah
we can um however there is a a subtlety
there and that is something that I find
very interesting in my research is if
you open up this space or you open up
your environment to be reactive then you
want your environment to be able to um
receive an action at any point in time
so what we see in reinforcement learning
is that you have a specific transition
function the environment Waits until you
send an action it will move the
environment forward a pre-specified
amount of time and it will emit to you
an observation and a reward however if
you make this entire thing reactive then
well our agent would be able to emit at
any point in time and also it would be
able to get an observation at any point
in time now that is a very
interesting um setting to work with
because now our agents should kind of be
robust to getting an observation at any
point in time specifically what if uh
our agent that lives on some embedded
device on some drone whatsoever it has
less compute to do to do inference
however well at some point we're going
to have to send an observ or an agent an
action back to the environment we're
going to have to do something so this
reactivity opens
up uh a research Avenue for well right
now for me because I find find this very
interesting on how reactive truly
reactive agents would look like if you
see what I mean yeah yeah I do that's
that's exceptionally exciting stuff it's
it's awesome um okay but but okay just
just to wrap up my my yes question there
is no at the moment you kind of manually
you know yes you put in the force limit
and you say okay I'm going to kind of
manually you know play around with
letters and I have I have working
examples with like ban therat or very
very easy um which I probably I don't
know if I have them on my machine right
now or if they live somewhere like it
works but the the thing that I got to
work is model predictive control and not
active inference yet so that's
why awesome all right thank
you you're welcome
um is my yeah can you hear me a bit
better now yes okay but um I'm uh
interested in the relationship between
orx environments and orex in fur um for
example to put it simply is it possible
to use only orx environments or is it
supposed to be always be used in
collaboration with RX and
fur
us yes the relation is that uh I wrote
ARX environment
specifically um as a complimentary
package to ARX and fur so if you just
want to do basian inference you use ARX
and fur but I think if you want to build
agents that you're better off using the
the two together so RX environments
is um a package that uses the same
reactive backend as RX and fur so it's
made to be compatible with ARX and fur
however if you write um agents just with
an algorithm you can use ARX
environments by itself it's not
mandatory to use ARX and fur they are
separate packages there's not a
dependency on ARX Ander however since um
they share the same reactive back endend
so the same package for reactivity under
the hood which is also from bias laab
which is rocket um if you want to build
agents I would advise to to use RX INF
fur so there they're disjoined but
they're designed with each other in mind
or ARX environments is designed with ARX
Ander in
mind so um if we um use this high level
of a
of abstraction given to us by ARX Vons
uh do we lose
anything uh or can we at any time dive
into the lower levels by means of orex
INF fur
itself
so um I would say yes because the
inference process that happens in ARX
and fur is disjointed from what's going
on in ARX environment similarly to well
what happens in in in real life so you
can you can see ARX environments as a
package in which you can make
um like a digital twin of the
environment but then whatever happens in
the inference process in your agents
well that's still RX andur like all RX
andur um diagnostic tools or debuging
tools should be available
there um and a more practical question I
know from based on the large papers um
and uh Professor def as well they like
to divide the um what's going on into
these six methods the ACT future execute
observe compute and slide so do you see
that as kind of Superfluous in the orx
orx environment setting
or um is it is it fine to use that
apprach
let me Google the definition for
Superfluous uh ah um that is a I'm going
to spread very carefully in answering
that questions uh I don't think it is
Superfluous um because in a sense that
it's if you want to design your agent
such that it goes through those steps um
then you're more than welcome to uh my
personal opinion is that I'm I will I'm
going to try and see if I can make an
active inference agent that does
inference in one step instead of having
to act
observe uh plan slide uh and so forth
however for AR environment so for your
environment it doesn't really matter how
you will get to your uh to your action
as long as well or not right you can you
can send an action at any point in time
and if you don't send an action the
world will just continue that and arcs
environments will just continue running
there's no real constraints on that so
that the design is to be as less
constraining on on users as possible
while opening up this reactivity uh
um the reactivity aspect and also for
um if you start with the package you
could make what I call discreet
environments they're they're a bit
feeding I would say because they're
basically just the arc environment's
equivalent of a of a classical
reinforcement learning environment where
you have a prespecify time step every
time but I wanted to make that to make
the transition easier because if you go
full reactive right off the bat I would
say it's a very ambitious thing to
do so I don't think I don't think it's a
Superfluous
algorithm
um but I I also don't think it's a
um
well our environment doesn't constrain
you to use it so I would
say nice now let's say uh one has a need
to write one's own node in the
factory um put ARX environments support
that kind of thing or is it kind of an
irrelevant
question it's it's in that sense I would
say irrelevant because uh the um a
custom node is something that lives in
ARX and fur um and ARX environments
really uh is concerned with everything
that goes on outside of your inference
process um then another quick question
while playing with the um I think it was
a thermostat problem in oric
environments I wanted to see the time
behavior of some variables like
observations States controls um free
energy and things like that but it
wasn't straightforward to me how to plot
those um in the arment settings uh is
there uh an example that you can point
as to or a fragment of code that shows
us how to do
that um I can make it because I I know
how I can access so free energy is uh
something that lives inside your agent
so it's part of the inference process
it's the you know it's the uh cost
function if you will of of of the
inference process so for free energy you
would have to look at your uh would have
to look into ARX and fur however
everything that goes on in our
environments we can extract it and we
can plot it so both uh environment
States as well as emitted controls uh or
observations uh we can extract all those
things um I can show a code
fragment that does this because it's
well one line um however I also
understand that that is not something
that
uh well you probably remember after this
meeting so I'll I'll make sure that uh
we can design a
uh uh an example that showcases this but
in uh in a nutshell we can uh create a
keep actor so this is a well uh an
entity that will keep all everything
that it gets
uh we'll keep it inside memory and then
we subscribe to the observations of the
agent so we say well subscribe to
observations and with this Ops keep
actor uh we do
this and if I then call OBS
values this will contain all kinds of
well ARS environment
observations which is basically a
wrapper struct for uh let
me call data on this entire
array and you'll get your individual
observation so we can basically tap
anywhere in this process uh anywhere in
this communication we can we can tap
whatever is being emitted so if I run
this again now it will contain 400
elements because well this environment
is reactively running while we speak so
the the the agent is getting more and
more observations so you see this thing
reactively growing every time I call
uh or extract its uh its contents so
there is definitely functionality in
which you can sort of inspect this
process um but yeah I I I have to stress
that it's really distinct from the
inference process so if you make an
agent in ARX infer and you hook it up to
ARX envir ments then you have to set up
a similar procedure to extract free
energy and stuff like that um from ARX
and fur um and because I'm not the
author of ARX and fur I I don't know how
easy that is um but for AR environments
I yeah this is one of the first things
that I wanted to do see what my agent
was sending see what my agent was
observing so I made sure to build
it yeah I'm not sure if what you just
showed was uh recorded by us so if you
could uh just make sure that that is
included in your examples as well that
would yes that that's my idea that we
can uh or I I just wanted to Showcase uh
for now such that you can so that you
know that it exists but it wasn't meant
to be well a big tutorial or anything I
can just put it in the examples and uh
uh yeah then then we can plot it that's
that's not a problem
okay thanks a
lot you're
welcome okay anyone else can go for a
question or we have some other written
ones or I can ask a
question um I have a quick question I
would just wonder once I don't know if
you guys can hear me I hope so yes um
fantastic um a lot of the examples that
uh you have there and kind of the way
I'm I'm probably naive in how I'm
thinking about this um the ARX
environment is modeling something in the
real world um or at least that's the
example that we're thinking of right now
um is the is arc's environments capable
of essentially
modeling um more metaphysical spaces so
if you think
of your question in a way that you have
a Time series or a space that you're
trying to
occupy but it's not a physical space
it's a more theoretical space uh you
know dimensionality that you're trying
to have an agent
navigate um is that something that this
that you see that this
is you know usable for or is this
something that we need to kind of gear
back towards the arent for um package
itself to kind of build the more
metaphysical concept of the environment
that you're putting together does that
make sense so yeah if I understand your
question
correctly um yeah I my answer to that
would be that there's no a physics
simulator or whatever in arcs
environments it's purely the boiler
plate to make whatever you write act
reactively uh and expose reactive
streams that you can then use in arcs
and
so um for example one of our colleagues
has made a an
environment that Returns the um the
result of a stochastic differential
equation so an agent could query with an
action I want the realization at time T
and the environment would respond with
the actual value um and with this
interplay of query in a stochastic
differential equation and uh and getting
a result you can cast solving a
differential stochastic differential
equation sort of a uh aasan stat based
model uh I'm not an expert on this topic
I just know that one of our colleagues
uh did this so if I understand your
question correctly that would be the
sort of environments you were after or
you were you were questioning about um
so I would say yes you can so there's no
there's no physics simulator or anything
in there because that's a whole
different uh a whole different topic um
my main thing was just to make whatever
code you guys write to make it
reactive fantastic thank you now that
makes a lot of sense I just wanted to
clarify that since no it's
perfect not thinking so much in robotics
or querying like physical environments
and thinking more along the lines of
data environment so that's why I was
trying
to understand how we could utilize
this yes yeah you can yeah and uh you
can push it further right you can make a
uh a combination of the two you can make
a uh an environment that flies a drone
uh your agent has to control the Drone
but it can also query the environment
for hey what is going to be my position
in 5 seconds so kind of this this well
abstract action that's basically
querying the environment well since we
have this uh this mechanism that we can
depending on what action you send
correspond or match this with an
observation now you can do stuff like
that there's nobody stopping you doing
it whether or not it's useful for your
agent well that's up to you I I was just
yeah I'm I'm trying to make your
environments as expressive as can or
your the framework as expressive as I
can and yeah you you can you can go wild
with it right you can go
crazy that's perfect because the agent
that I'm kind of that I'm wanting to put
together would need to actually walk
through time in a certain way um and
optimize its activities in a Time series
um yeah and I was I was already
expecting you that's why I brought up
this this uh that's very cool I be very
excited to see uh well whether or not
you uh you can build your environment
and ARS environment would be yeah very
cool
Absolutely I'll keep you updated then
nice
thanks the observable and actor roles in
orx
environments can any entity take on
either of these roles or are there
certain constraints for example
let's say the agent must always have the
actor role or
something no they're completely
unconstrained um there is no real
distinction under the hood
between uh entities or between something
that represents an environment as
something that represents an agent uh
they are both entities in arcs
environments um the only thing is that
you can make uh something which I call
an active or a passive entity by the way
all this terminology it's all up for
discussion I've thought about this and
most of the terms that I come up with
they they don't really fit what I what
I'm trying to say um but an active
entity is something that whenever it
gets an observation or whenever it
receives an action it emits or it at
least considers emitting to uh
subscribers for example the mountain car
uh environment itself would be an active
entity whenever the the agent sends an
action to move the car it will
correspond or it will match this uh this
this action with well moving the car um
whereas the agent whenever it gets an
observation from the environment well it
doesn't really have to do anything we
have to in the later stage attach an
inance process but that is something
that's not ARX environments that is ARX
and first so we we make this entity um
passive in a sense that it it's it's an
observer uh that can also send actions
but those are not triggered by an actual
algorithm that we write ourselves uh in
arxs environments but it's a result of
some inference process it's the triggers
are external to the the reactive
ecosystem that we've built in ARX
environments
itself so that's the only distinction
that I make but you can yeah something
that represents an environment or
something that represents an an agent
they're they're under the hood
completely the same things they are just
uh entities that that that can
communicate with with with external
entities do you think you could um in
addition add a a discrete control space
example for us as well because Mountain
car and the evasion thermostat are both
um continuous
examples even if it's just a simple uh
discrete control space or categorical in
particular categorical control
space maybe a simple maze example or a
grid example you know like the windy
grid that's often used in reinforcement
learning even if it's just a simple
windy
grid windy grid yeah okay I'll I'll
Google
that just uh even if it's just a simple
categorical control space because that's
what our problems currently uh center
around not so much continuous control
spaces but uh categorical control
spaces okay that's uh yeah I can do that
okay I
windy G world yeah okay I I can do
that be
excellent I ask sort of a very quick
broad question about the whole
ontology my when I first learned about
this my own Na and and just sort of
looking through the docs I thought oh
okay this is this is a rapper around RX
and thir for standardizing the creation
of an Environ enironment that you will
then use for for whatever purposes but
it sounds to me it's it's not at all
that it's it's really this is this is
not even really a way of talking about
an environment per se this is no it's
more of a it's a communication protocol
for active inference agents I would say
yeah yeah it's like well you this this
is a way to sort of standardize the the
dietic interaction between you know two
abstract entities U and that could be
between environment and an agent you
know or it could be something else
entirely okay that's much much broader
than what I was conceptualizing ex so I
I when I when I started this indeed I I
started as okay I want to standardize
environment Creation in in our ecosystem
in our fer and I had discussion with
Magnus kudal who's also uh in in this
Discord I saw and well we had some very
interesting talks and he said well
actually an environment and and an agent
they're not so different right they
just they just hand or they just receive
data from each other and and handle them
accordingly so yeah there is a certain
uh symmetry there and then I thought
well if there's a symmetry there then I
can make an
overarching uh programming concept and
just kind of implement it that way and
that's what I did and then it turns from
just a way in which you can make an
agent and an environment communicate to
a in which you can communicate this
whole network
of uh of subscriptions and
Communications um because there's yeah
there's no constraints anymore so for
example we run an environment in in uh
in our lab with MCO actually that um has
well a
non-trivial uh entity interaction where
we have a hearing aid that uh gets data
from both the external world because it
can well it has a microphone and it
should register the external world but
it can also get data from the user of
the hearing aid saying hey I'm happy
with the hearing aid settings yes or no
so now we have a three entity
environment we have the user we have the
hearing aid and we have the uh the
external world that just emits noise
then we have a fourth entity which is
our agent that should learn the
preferences of the user that should get
data from the hearing aid and should uh
tweak the parameters inside of the
hearing a so now we have four entities
that are communicating in this
non-trivial way and well we built this
in arcs environments and it all holds up
like it all just yeah it runs just
because whenever we get data the hearing
aid knows ah I get new data I get new
noise I have to transform this noise and
send it to the user and I have to do a
f8 transform and send it to the agent
for analysis uh and just because it does
this reactively it's all tractable and
all works nicely so yeah uh it it it
turned out to be a bit of a uh a
bigger well scope than I would have
imagined but I'm yeah I I'm I'm not
making any claims on on how large it
actually is that's uh yeah
cool this this is also very cool I'm
very very thankful that you're you're
working on this because I I I had the
thought like oh what what what then is
you know sort of predicated of the
environment it's kind of like what we
have the environment and the Asian
they're kind of both being equally
treated
you it's a very interesting question
right so so what the what is the actual
actual
difference um some people say well an
agent has some sort of inferential
process uh on how it comes up with an
action but in a sense well we are all
all just with our eyes and ears and
muscles we have an interface to to the
environment um but yeah in in in that
sense we we are just all Mark of
blankets with internal states that that
that navigate this world uh and this
well communication that we have with our
outside world I yeah I try to replicate
fastic
thanks anyone else want to ask any
questions yeah Kristoff or yeah yeah I
have a question um I I didn't quite get
what you um what you said about the
difference between the typical
reinforcement learning setting and the
RX environments Could you um could you
could you explain that again please that
was very interesting sure sure if if you
want or if you make an environment in JY
in gymnasium we can we can look at
the um at their documentation right so
let's see
gymnasium
package so I go to gymnasium and I want
to make my own custom
environment I saw it here make your own
custom environment i' I've visited this
page before so we can make our
environment blah blah blah and then you
have this function step the step method
usually contains most of the logic for
your environment it accepts an action
computes the state of the environment
after applying that action and returns a
five Tuple observation reward terminated
truncated
info so we write a function step that
takes only an action so this is the main
design Paradigm of JY and most
reinforcement
learning packages actually where I emit
an
action this action is incorporated into
the world um but the time that uh the
environment is uh simulated forward is
constant so there's no notion of
different time intervals whereas if I'm
I'm a very big uh football effici out
for the Americans that's soccer um but
it's actually football but if I kick a
ball I kick the ball the ball starts
rolling
well whether or not I do something the
ball will just continue rolling like
this this environment around me it
doesn't wait for me to emit additional
actions or I'm not consciously saying
okay for the next second I do nothing
and then the ball rolls okay for the
next second I do nothing again and the
ball rolls further no there is a in the
real world there is a difference right
we do something and then the world just
continues
so we can do something at any point in
time and the world around us will just
well the world keeps on turn um and
that's what I was trying to do with with
ARX environments is to um alleviate
ourselves of
this um communication protocol because
this specifies I get one
observation I can do one action per
observation and that's it and in between
uh different observations I have no
power to do anything whatsoever also if
I have an environment that instead of
modeling one second forward I now do
half a second well everything breaks
down because now I have to emit actions
at twice a speed or my observations
don't correspond anymore with my
internal model or there's all kinds of
stuff that if you do it like this it
turns kind of awkward and that's what I
was trying to
alleviate
uh with with ARX environments is that
I'm trying to make this communication
between agent and environment as free as
possible so if you have a hearing aid
environment yeah that you can yeah
that's that that's it if if I'm not yeah
I'm rambling sorry good interrup that's
a good that's a good explanation and U I
think you also mentioned something about
um some difficulty there because uh the
the question then becomes like if you
have multiple agents in with the
environment then what exactly is the
state of the world
right um what exactly is the state of
the world is not uh because you can just
uh sort
of you can have like a god entity that
takes care of of of this stuff that that
that kind of resolves all conflicts in
that sense um the main question for me
would be
well we just took away your one moment
to conduct an action in reinforcement
learning you have one moment you can do
an action and you'll get one observation
we just took away this one moment and
gave you the opportunity to act at any
point in time well when are you going to
do it right so you know the reason I'm
asking about this is that it it
immediately got me thinking about um
stepen wolfram's work on Observer Theory
so he's trying to formalize uh the
notion of an observer right and um there
is this um whole field that he basically
invented uh for the physics project
related to uh which calls multi multi
computation I'm not really deep into um
that yet but it seems some it seems
somehow relevant you know as an agents
interacting with the environment we
effectively sample it precisely because
it keeps rolling as we um do the
internal computation required to um
update our um our generative model in
order to to act so I I think you
stumbled onto something quite quite
profound there um and the question the
question is about this this God God mode
view right like that's a that's an old
question in physics whether there exists
the absolute reference frame or whether
everything is
relative um and yeah just won't say that
you know foot for fault there's there's
some there's some interesting problems
there maybe we can we can talk about it
some sometime I would love to hear your
thoughts about this yeah sure like I'm
I'm very interested in this stuff so as
a as a software developer like I would
advise you in your environments if
you're not dealing with you know
existential stuff that just make a god
state that takes care of this but uh you
make a very good point right so if we
really want to make an accurate
representation of of the world do we
need this God state or because we now
allow our environments
to to alleviate this right we can have
multiple entities that together compose
the environment and that there is some
internal communication between them so
um it does it does open up this like it
doesn't slam it wide open but at least
you know there's a in Dutch you would
say open key yeah so
so I I think there is a there's a that
that's that's a potential um incursion
into effectively resolving some of the
most interesting problems in the
fundamental theories of physics that
understanding precisely which one is the
case whether is this um absolute
reference frame or whether you can just
simply explain everything through these
relative reference frames and agent
sampling the environments and if if you
can effectively recover something that
looks like physics from um this
interaction which is what wall from is
essentially working on that would be
that would be a complete computation of
fundamental Theory of physics and it's a
bit big undertaking but it's worth uh
worth considering not just merely from
you know um software engineering
perspective but from from that angle if
if you're interested in that kind of
stuff I mean yeah it it's very
interesting it's something that I you
you know it's a very big deviation from
what my supervisor wants me to work on
so it's probably not something that I'm
going to undertake but yeah if if anyone
wants to pick it up right who am I to
stop
them thanks it's great work
cool yeah anyone else want to ask any
questions
how would you deal with the setting of
multiple ant nestmates moving around and
modifying the pheromones on the ground
so in these kinds of simulations it's
common enough to have the pherone
phermone state on the ground and then
Nest mates that are reading and writing
how do you deal with the spatial
proximity and the collisions and
interactions
so that is something very very very
difficult I'm working on a project right
now where once again we're modeling
football uh which is why I brought up
this example just now um and like
resoling collisions is something
extremely difficult it's something that
I don't have a standardized uh advised
way of doing an arcs environments just
because game studios uh they they spend
God knows how many developer hours on
resolving collisions efficiently so
that's not something that I think well
we we can figure out in an afternoon
right
um it's it's it's something that would
be in the internal dynamics of your
environment but not something that is
part of your communication protocol per
se just influences the the the type of
observations that your agent would get
um so it's not something that I can give
that I feel qualified to give advice
on but it is like making this
environment with ants running around
the floor that is something that's just
a multi-agent environment that's fully
covered the problem is these these uh
the collisions that is a difficult thing
it's not uh difficult in an arcs
environment uh perspective it's
difficult in a computational geometry
perspective that you want to resolve
collisions that's yeah like in in tripa
a games you can still clip into walls
somewhere
that's that's a great and funny response
yeah I would just highlight the the real
structural difference when you pointed
to the step function in the
gymnasium that yes is why in so often
for these control problems there's like
a null action or like a weight action so
you kind of get this um bodal action
Vector policy Vector where there's like
a do nothing option and then all the
options because out of requirement
something must be emitted at every click
of the simulation and all of a sudden
it's like we mve from walking on a
staircase to like ice skating or flying
with RX and fur because it has totally
opened up a dimension of the control
question when to act not just which with
according to a metronome and that's
that's an entirely different approach
that um the communication protocols
enable and then those communication
protocols can have all these other
functionalities like they can have a
subontology or they can have compliance
features as well so it's super powerful
and we're very excited to learn
it that's yeah that's the main point uh
the yeah it's a two sides of the same
coin like it it opens up this
communication protocol but then yeah you
have to question
when when it's something something that
I'm going to spend time on in my next
project like can we make an iterative
procedure maybe with iterations and ARs
and third we can send intermediate
posteriors and we have we always have
like a an action that we Supply I I
don't know yet I have no idea or I have
ideas but I don't have anything working
yet I think to me the underlying
principle of the RX in first Suite
versus
traditional yes this um
um instead of having synchronized
Communications we now have asynchronized
communications between everything
between everything
yes I'm I'm glad I got that point across
that's that's the point I wanted to
make great well um if anyone else has a
question otherwise we will continue
learning and watching the GitHub updates
and just building out examples CU in the
coming months we know a lot of fun
things will
happen all right yeah um you guys can
always reach out to me on I don't know
GitHub Twitter I don't know how often
I'll check Discord I'll try you know
I'll try um but you can always reach out
to me on uh on LinkedIn Twitter whatever
that's that's all fine
excellent I I do have a a final question
if that's all right um sure just just
with respect to you know future
directions and that kind of thing what's
kind of biggest problem set of problems
what are you kind of looking to do I
know that's a massive thing but is there
anything relatively summited in that
direction that that we could have speak
to for just a second so I'm very
interested in this when to act uh
problem so this to me opens up the door
to a um an agent
that um because we okay so we can now
act at any point in time or at any point
in time um yeah we can send something to
the environment a logical consequence
for me is that at any point in time we
should have an action ready to send so
when the next observation comes in we
don't know when that's going to be we
should be able to act so we have a
certain computational budget between one
observation and the next we don't know
how much it's going to be but we do have
a budget to spend so I want to design
indeed an interative procedure that
comes up with an action and then refines
it and refines it and refines it until
well the next observation comes in so we
we have to send whatever we had and we
get the the next observation this gives
you if this all works right this gives
you a very nice robust agent that if you
give it a lot of computing power a lot
of computational budget then in between
observations well it's going to be able
to come up with a pretty good um pretty
good action and will solve the task
accordingly like ideally however if you
limit this uh uh this computational
budget you put it on like a Raspberry Pi
or on an edge device it will not have as
much iterations to refine its actions so
it will still solve the problem
hopefully but it will be less efficient
doing so it will be slightly Dum so this
is a very to me is a very interesting
problem to think about because then you
have a sort of a a procedure for control
that is robust to loss of computation or
whatever and it's still adaptive and
reactive and and and all those nice
things we get from from Asian
inference um so yeah that's something
that I that I would want to work on if I
you know at 48 hours in a
day it's very interesting so it sounds
to me like a number of iterations you
just refer to as um the iteration field
in the call of the infer function yes in
infer yes if I can do something like
that so I run an indefinite amount of
iterations and I just stop the inference
procedure whenever I have to do
something and then I extract the latest
posterior for the action and I I send
that to the environment yeah that's
something well that would be the first
thing I would
investigate yeah I I think it has the
potential to make the behavior in
general quite robust if you if you
consider that
approach it yeah it would be rob it
would always have something to do do
like it would always do something
whether or not sort of the the the free
energy would converge uh or yeah as as a
measure of whether or not this action is
good enough uh that is to be
investigated but it would allow us to
run the same models on edge devices as
well and get slightly worse performance
but
still yeah yeah it would still do the
job we and then you can investigate you
know how many iterations do I actually
need before I can solve the problem uh
it's of course problem dependent but
yeah it's a very yeah it's just
something that that really interest me I
really like this this way of thinking um
and it's in part why I why I wrote this
package because I I don't like this this
this synchronized communication protocol
from Jim I just I just don't like it
yeah that's why I wrote wrote ARS
environments I think the only
alternative is to not be able to respond
whenever it gets an ation other words to
postpone your
response it NES back into the um the the
synchronicity approach again so it
breaks away from the you know the
reactiveness of
the but then you you run into the
robustness issue I would say if you have
a self-driving car and it it's driving
into a wall because it's thinks it's a
green light because those things are not
that that smart nowadays uh and ah it
figures out it's a wall but it takes
some time to adjust or it takes some
time to come up with the idea okay now I
have fully converged on the action that
I have to steer away well by that time
we might have already crashed into the
wall um so this this queuing up of uh uh
of observations and waiting until uh my
computation is fully converged I think
it takes away the robustness like if you
if if you don't have enough
computational budget to
spend well yeah you you might do the
wrong thing it's the same as when you
and I are in a car right if we're in a
very
um a very busy situation so well I'm in
the Netherlands so we have cyclist right
so if we have cyclists we have other
cars and there's a an ambulance coming
what it's very busy you might feel
overwhelmed but you still kind of know
the basic things to do to to to steer
your car it's basically the same where
you have limited computational budget
there's all this stuff around you so to
come up with a really thought through
response or action uh it's too much to
ask because you don't have the
computational budget but your brain kind
of prioritizes and says well if we stay
on the road and we let the ambulance
pass and well we're fine for now we're
this is the best we can do um so this
feeling of being overwhelmed by what
what goes on on around you inspired this
idea of of robustness and uh uh of
interruptibility
basically yeah but then again how how
how I'm going to do it well no idea yet
or run run our iner iterations and see
if I can uh can send intermediate
posterior results or something or but
it's just something yeah I I find this
very very very
interesting think it's a good thing that
free energy in
general decays uh predictably in a sense
so I mean just fully using your budget
your computational budget for that time
that you're allow before the next
observation
arrives I think it's it's fairly safe to
just uh yes use the current value of the
posterior that's the best you can do the
circumstances yes that that that would
be the argument
indeed hopefully hopefully this this
this opens up the road to having actual
you know robots driving around instead
because
well there's no self-driving cars where
I live there's no robots or drones
flying around and I think one of the
reasons is because they're not robust or
interruptible
fly agreed
yeah all right thank you all we'll look
forward to staying updated
asynchronously even asynchronously
reactively see y all soon
bye thanks