## Fc7bUNNdTfY

SPEAKER_00:
All right, hello and welcome.

It's May 30th, 2024, and we're in Active Guest Stream 84.1.

This will be a presentation and a discussion with Jesse G. So Jesse, thank you for joining and for your participation.

Looking forward to a great presentation, and then we'll check the live chat and see where it goes from there.

Go for it.

All right.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you so much for letting me do this showcase.

Largely, what I'm going to go over is basically an overview debut publication of a series of papers that have to do with habits and adaptive learning in regards to a general systems.

and basically looking at agential systems largely from the point of view of biological organisms, largely trying to better understand connecting that with human behavior.

And largely, the motivation here for this series of publications started with looking at a

sort of literature review that was data focused on looking at the not necessarily addiction from a more broad point of view, but from a drug dependency point of view.

When I reached out to a colleague of mine a number of years ago, well,

little over three years ago now, in 2021, when I first started this journey.

So this whole

This whole series of work has been undergone for about slightly over three years now.

So I started this work in 2021.

Originally, I was connected indirectly with a group of graduate students at a state university, associated with a state university.

And they were looking at data on addiction, not really broadly speaking, but dealing with looking at more so drug dependency based addiction.

And I was quite disappointed with the effort put into the paper.

I mean, I understand that the students involved were students in data science and informatics, but at the same time,

I was a bit dismayed by the approach in the paper and I provided a critique of their work.

And I thought to myself, well, wow, like addiction has some root.

There's some route to addiction we need to better understand.

And what's also what was also came off quite

odd to me for a number of years now is just the the narrative looking at the lens of like what is the root of addictive behavior and that kind of goes back fun you know thinking about fundamentals um and fundamentally we we think about habits and

When people think about habits, mostly stereotypically, again, people think about habits in sort of a bad point of, like, you know, habits are bad or, you know, point of view.

And again, re-approaching fundamentals and breaking the stereotypes.

I think it's important to understand, okay, well, are habits good or bad?

What can we say about them?

And how do we adapt to circumstances that we face as humans, you know, as human beings?

More specifically, thinking about sort of this idea of not necessarily coping, but reinforcing our fitness in the sense of like, how can we better engage with the world around us and with each other and ourselves, most importantly, over time, over the course of a lifetime?

And so that's been the general focus of this series of works is trying to look into, in terms of adaptive learning, what interventionary approaches, like what primary interventionary approaches, which I'll get into a little later, can be leveraged to be reinforcing towards our behavior and complement

how we engage with the world around us, each other and ourselves, rather than be counterintuitive.

And looking at habits as sort of like

kind of like an ebb and flow of how we drive, how we motivate and direct our behaviors.

So habits can be good or bad, but more so thinking about habits on a spectrum of being reinforcement-based in a sense that it complements our fitness and how we engage with each other in a constructive way in the world around us, of course.

uh as well as ourselves uh rather than counterintuitive or maladaptive um so um anyway i didn't really give a former a more formal introduction of who i am i wanted to kind of give start with a bit of an overview of motivation and drive of the work i'm doing um so uh

I call myself an independent researcher.

I'm working on a portfolio of works where I spend quite a bit of time investigating academic literature.

For this series of publications I'm working on, I have roughly about close to a thousand, maybe a little close to a thousand papers to work with.

I have hundreds of papers that I've found that I've read abstracts for that I haven't given a good read yet, but I've read quite, I've gone through quite a bit of papers and it gets to a point where you have so, you find so much work to work with that you kind of have to figure, you kind of have to prioritize, okay, do I have enough

content um and um anyway um so basically what i'm trying to do with the portfolio work i'm doing is i i look for data um i also find a lot of literature so i think it's important to find not just data but information criteria that tells a story about the data that's out there um

And I could go on a tangent about the limitations of data science oriented communities not really telling much of a narrative rather than looking at the data.

So what I try to do with the work I'm doing is

I try to find enough criteria, which I consider to be information or literature.

So I find a whole lot of criteria that emphasizes on model building and construction, not just looking at data, but data is important.

but more importantly, like connecting, you know, building models, not just about the data, but being able to tell a story about the direction in which if we collect data in a sufficient manner, where that would go, where, you know, where, you know, the models would tell us, like, you know,

what does the information tell us in terms of that evaluates the criteria of data and the models that we that we build to have an understanding narrative of uh um you know what uh what we're working with in terms of uh uh in this case what i'm working on this series of papers dealing with habits and adaptive learning

really getting to the root of the problem domain that we're working with here.

Basically, what I'm trying to do, again, is build models, mainly complex systems-based models and work with whatever data I can to provide a narrative and provide a means to justify,

This is the problem domain we're looking at.

This is how we should evaluate based on the criteria or the literature that has elaborated on the problem domain.

Take the converging aspects of the literature.

So in this case, looking at habits and adaptive learning and

um you know provide an emphasis like okay this is where we can go based on the problem domain so that's essentially what i'm trying to do whether or not um you know i end up working in academia or industry in in some way or another um what i feel like i'm doing is more analytical like analytics based um

not necessarily engineering-focused, although I am working on systems-based approaches in terms of interventionary means to deal with adaptive learning and habits, which is not the current paper I'm elaborating on, although that's going to be the next paper, but I might get into that a little bit later.

But in a nutshell,

even though that might be a bit of an elongated explanation about who I am, what I'm trying to do.

I'm also trying to be agnostic about explaining what I'm trying to do.

Even though I feel like I have an interest leaning into the cognitive sciences, given that's largely the arena that this

this paper is is is leaning is geared towards is the cognitive sciences domain and a general systems um i don't want to limit myself in in a corner per se i i like to be open about my capacities of building models looking at criteria looking at data and um providing uh you know an evaluation of problem domains we are investigating anyway

So the whole purpose of this talk now is to go over my debut publication work, which is more of an overview

of understanding habits and adaptive learning with regard to agential systems.

There are four primary paradigms of interventionary approaches to leverage adaptive learning with respect to human behavior.

I'll go over that a little bit, maybe towards the end.

uh of the points i'm making but um what i plan on doing um i'll present a a base model that i put together uh and uh momentarily but i'm gonna step through the paper a bit because there's there's a lot of context um but um i'm gonna try and summarize the uh the points that i make and uh for those of you who have looked at my work

I will say that it is quite a long paper.

So there is this meta analysis approach to to the work in terms of, you know, looking at a lot of literature that talk about habits and talks about a general systems and different models of understanding.

perception, action, perception based dynamics, and how we engage with the world around us, and how we anticipate, you know, how we anticipate how to leverage engagement over time, based on our history of engagement.

Anyway, let's start with the abstract and we'll build up even further.

So, like I mentioned, this paper presents itself as an overview of looking at understanding the nature of habits and adaptive learning with respect to agential systems.

So the best way to understand what a habit is, is a persisting composition of behaviors that couple our engagement to leverage how we reinforce interaction with our surrounding environment and with other agents.

as well as ourselves, right?

So on the one hand, agents can engage with their environment in a way that's constructive, as well as each other and themselves.

So we call that reinforcement learning, right?

Where agents are engaging in a way that's constructive to optimize fitness, probably buffer, in the best case, buffer their fitness.

But on the other hand, agents also can engage with their environment in the means that could be deceptive or counterintuitive that could not only deceive themselves, but other agents in the environment, right?

So that has to do with maladaptive learning.

So we can think of reinforcement learning being on one side of a spectrum and maladaptive learning being on the other side of a spectrum, right?

And we can say realistically that

There's no truly completely, you know, there's no certain behavior, you know, there's no most optimal behavior that's going to completely optimize the fitness of an organism or as a multi-agent systems.

given the problems with cellular senescence and aging that over time we engage with the world around us more suboptimally, but the challenge there being that to optimize fitness in the face of thinking of aging and cellular senescence being a problem.

uh that we don't you know we're mortal beings agents don't last forever we break down um we decompose right so um

In the face of that issue of becoming more suboptimal over time, reinforcement learning leverages optimizing in the moment and as time goes on, while maladaptive learning is really working against the optimal means in which we can leverage fitness.

The paper is pretty comprehensive, and the reason why it is a bit long is, one, like I mentioned, it's looking at a whole bunch of literature, connecting ideas, and so

I've tried to approach the contextualization of the paper in a way that is both comprehensive in terms of the audience that I expect to be a more general audience,

to to be to be reading it um i'm not too confident in terms of like how many actual cognitive scientists or neuroscientists or physicists or whatever are going to be looking at the paper as opposed to the more layman type so i try to be mindful about who's looking at

or who's going to be reading the paper, and I try to be comprehensive as much as I can, so there is some redundancy here and there in terms of my elaborations on specific points, especially talking about perceiving, acting, and anticipating the world around us, like this idea of what I call the TAP cycle.

which I constantly bring up in my work, well, in this particular paper.

So we can think of the PAP cycle as perceiving, acting, perception, action, priors.

So perception has to do with, so before elaborating on what I call the PAP cycle, so as agents,

we're constantly like engaging with stimulus.

So anything that provokes engagement for agents.

So agents we can think of as single.

So we can think of the scaling of agential systems to be on the one hand, units of agents or single agents.

So like single celled organisms,

you know your bacteria and your and different types of cells and all that stuff like simple cells that don't have much degrees of freedom and agency because they have simple functions and they serve simple roles in the environment that they're embedded in which we'll get more into this

this idea of how agents are existentially bounded to an embedded environment in which they co-inhabit.

So now, on the one hand, we have these single agent systems that have simple functions and they serve a certain role within the environment they're embedded in.

And on the other hand, we have compositions of single agents that make up what?

make up a multicellular system.

So in terms of speaking about agency, I'm largely going to talk about, and agential systems in general, I'm largely going to focus on biological systems.

And to be frank, and I do kind of emphasize this maybe somewhat bluntly in my work,

realistically, our most comprehensive and intuitive understanding of agents really is reflective in biology in terms of

You could say that there are very simple synthetic agential systems being researched by groups like Neil Gershenfeld's lab at MIT, for instance.

Michael Levin's lab also.

and investigates xenobots and what have you.

But Michael Levin's work is, of course, more focused on biological organisms as agents.

So I guess the one crutch of understanding agential systems really is that we're kind of limited to the scope of understanding agential systems in the scope of biology.

So that's kind of the framework that I'm focused on here, even though I do pay a little mind of like comparing, okay, well, computer systems that we built using our understanding of technology, but very briefly, I do touch on that as opposed to what we consider to be agential systems.

Now, okay, so,

What separates a computer system from an agential system is that we are constantly engaging with stimulus, as I mentioned.

uh now stimulus is is really uh you know anything that immediate that that that is directly you know anything that directly provokes engagement of the agent right so like whether it's something visual whether um that deals with any of the capa any capacity any modality for the agent to just to to have a capacity to develop some kind of sensation

as a result of being uh being provoked by the stimulus where like you could think of the stimulus as like like constantly bombarding um uh the the agent in question right like the stimulus kind of is like this continuous input uh that um where the agent has multiple modalities

of trying to process that input as sensations.

And we're going to talk about what I call generalizations of sensations.

So there's kind of multiple layers here in which sensations are processed by the agent.

So in line with what I call the PAP cycle, perceptions, actions, and priors.

So perceptions deals with this,

capacity of enveloping, of perceiving the stimulus.

So there's this initial, there's this layer of perceiving stimuli

um where the agent again you know is you know is constantly um uh you know so so so the agent within this embedded environment that it's existentially bound to is constantly being bombarded by stimulus right there there's constant uh uh constant uh

exposure to stimulus.

Stimulus is inevitably directed towards the agent and then there's multiple modalities in which the agent then tries to process the stimulus as the stimulus is directed towards the agent and the agent has a various number of ways to try to

process that stimulus and what and we can think about those modalities in the human sense as like our different senses so vision touch uh auditory taste right um we can think of like like the combination of sensory modalities as a means to try to generalize

how to process these sensations in a visceral.

So the generalization of sensations aspect is this visceral, initially this visceral processing of sensations.

So you can think of like this visceral processing to be the initial layer.

uh of which that um the agent tries to process uh these sensations try to like this is kind of where the agent filters uh what would what it would try to un try to um try to uh

to distinguish between what is noise in the environment, like what the agent should or should not prioritize attention to, as opposed to what could be significant to the agent, like what sorts of stimulus that are being fed into the agent's modalities of processing, what stimulus matters and what stimulus doesn't,

Um, so this, so, so through the, through, through the generalization of sensations, there's this filtering of, okay, what, what matters and what doesn't matter based on my circumstances of, of leveraging fitness as an agent moment by moment.

Um, you know, how do I handle that as an agent?

Um, so, and, um,

Going from there, once the agent is able to prioritize, once the agent recognizes certain patterns of stimulus that matter, then there's this means to categorize that stimulus as information.

So now then from there, the agent might additionally try to prioritize that information.

Okay, what information matters?

There might be redundant information or there might be information that matters to my fitness, right?

So we can think about how that

the information now that we have that went through that layer of being generalized as a sensation and differentiating, trying to understand whether that sensation is just like noise that can't really be categorized as something

that might be redundantly meaningful in some some sense, or it's something recognizable to the agent, not meaningful.

Or

okay right so so from this generalization of sensations we get to the point where um the agent is trying to figure out oh uh trying to figure out uh if there's a pattern to distinguish you know between okay well is this just just noise that i can't really comprehend or is therefore not meaningful or is there some pattern here that

provide some information about my environment and my circumstances.

And then by providing some, okay, now I have information.

Now I have this generalization of information.

Uh, now I speak of the term generalization because that kind of leads to the problem of, uh, what I like to call their vertical perception that, um, and a lot of

a lot of researchers and what have you talk about illusionism in the sense that we can have a more general, a more, we can develop, we can always have a generalization that

either becomes more intuitive or becomes counterintuitive to how we leverage circumstance, but we never have an absolute understanding of the information

and and uh as well as our experiences uh which is which is a sort of a problem with with philosophy in the philosophy of science with okay well how do we evaluate something to be a theory as opposed to a conjecture which really has to do with with the rigor involved in what have you but

The problem with vertical perception is we are always constricted to a relative understanding of reality in which

an average and you know if if enough agents agree with a generalization then that generalization guides a you know a sufficiently large group of agents so uh we can think about the direction of how we uh develop technologies and how modern civilization got to where it is today

And we're going to talk more about interagent dynamics momentarily, but the idea is that we're constantly generalizing the world around us.

And even though we can come up with generalizations, which most of us could largely agree with, those generalizations could be challenged by looking through a different lens of generalizing that criteria.

So it's sort of a paradox of like, okay, well,

how do we evaluate the criteria that we have as knowledge when, you know, we have sort of these best guesstimates, so to speak, of of understanding what's happening with the world around us and how we understand reality and how we engage with each other, how we develop technologies.

But anyway, OK, so

Going back to understanding habits and what they have to do with behavior, again, I talk about habits being these persistent compositions of behavior.

And on the one hand, we have dynamics pertaining to nature of the agent and the nurturing.

of the agent, right?

So we think about nature versus nurture now.

So nature pertains to physiological limitations, while nurture pertains to the exposure over time.

So we could think of like the, you know, the course of a lifetime

an agent is exposed to environmental circumstances and there's this idea of intrinsic and extrinsic variability of circumstances of environment so we can think on the one hand that as multi-agent systems being human beings we

we are a whole ecosystem, right?

We are composed of multiple cells and we have these different anatomical layers that allow us to have this integrated functionality in which we leverage metabolic and cognitive load.

Now, the key thing to understand here about metabolic and cognitive load is

is top-down as opposed to bottom-up dynamics in which agents facilitate their own integrity.

And we're speaking largely about multi-agent systems because

There's this complexification of behavior that enables the capacity of, for instance, our ability to make decisions because we have a central nervous system.

Not all organisms have a central nervous system, right?

So we, especially when we think about these single agent systems, they're much more simple in function.

They have much lesser degree of agency.

Since we're composed of multiple cells and all these different subsystems that regulate functioning that deals with metabolic cost, that gives us a bit more degrees of freedom because there's all these different subsystems engaging with each other.

that facilitate the capacities we have to engage with the world around us.

So on the one hand, thinking from bottom-up dynamics, we have the composition of cells that compose of different organ systems, right, that regulate metabolic load,

that enables the possibility from the top down for when we think of cognitive load from the top down, we're thinking about executive function.

So from top-down dynamics, we're thinking about how cognitive load is facilitated, where decision-making happens.

And this, we'll talk more about the, what is,

fundamental to this decision-making momentarily.

But thinking about nature dynamics, we're thinking about the physiological limitations of the integrity of bodily functions from the bottom up that influence the top-down dynamics that facilitate cognitive load leverage.

Right.

So, so, so problems with physiology, uh, has, has to do like maybe, maybe with, with, uh, problems with, with, with, uh, you know, from, from the beginning, uh, of the agent's life cycle, or at some point there's some hindrance that, that, uh, sticks, uh, that kind of sticks out as, as like a barrier for the agent to, to leverage.

uh how they engage with their environment whether or not you know let's say uh uh an amputated limb for instance like i you know like like i like if i lost my arm like how is that gonna impact how i engage with the world around me right or something more severe than that right so on one hand we think about physiological limitations pertaining to nurture dynamics

We can think of the beginning of the life cycle of an agent considering problems from birth, or we can think of something that just happened that could be an existential hindrance that could be permanent or pretty long-lasting until that hindrance is corrected, whether or not it could be corrected.

And in terms of nurture dynamics, since nurture dynamics have, you know, pertain to the course of a lifetime exposure in which an agent leverages how it interacts with its surrounding environment, other agents and intrinsically and extrinsically, of course, thinking about how the agent deals with its own

its own internalizations and externalizations, as well as considering how it engages with other agents and its surrounding environment.

And the nurture dynamics generally would have the most impact because it deals with the full life cycle of the agent, right?

So until the agent ceases to exist, it's going to be constantly engaging with an environment in which it's bound to, and it's constantly going to engage with other agents.

And the exposure dynamics are what is central to this engagement.

both intrinsically and extrinsically, right?

And now I was talking about metabolic load.

And now like every function of the agent, like every process that happens, like every interaction, you know, when we think about this, you know, from the single cell level to the multicellular level,

of the integrity of different functions of the agent from the top down to the bottom up.

um all that involves metabolic load and i even argue that the the process of of having thoughts that like even generating thoughts in our head even in a way that's compulsive or you know thoughts that that just kind of go in and out or you know other processes like that involve perception action and priors all that comes down to metabolic load processing

And those metabolic dynamics are facilitated through, you know, are largely facilitated from the bottom, you know, from the bottom up, you know, in terms of the integrity at scale.

okay so let's move on to routines um being fundamental so routines uh we can think of uh routines like you know for those of you who are programmers or have a program or engineering background we can think of a routine as like some kind of instruction or or or or some kind of a simple instruction among other

instructions that enable behavior to happen, right?

And we can also think of routines as compositions of, you know, this continual, we can also think of routines as

the enabling of persistence to happen, right?

So on the one hand, we can think of a routine as part, some aspect of the behavior.

On the other hand, we can also think of, more so, I contextualize routines to be the means in which the persistence of some compositions that make up a habit.

To be able to be orchestrated because a habit, you can think of a habit to be some routine characteristic of which the agent is leveraging.

um in some procedural orchestrated fashion right um that that some that that either um constructively optimizes its fitness or maintains its its its current state of fitness in a way that

right when we think about optimizing on the reinforcement aspect uh in terms of reinforcement learning or being counter you know routines and uh like this routinization of behavior of habits um you know could could be counterintuitive to the agent too right um like this persistence of of behavior could be counterintuitive uh to to the behavior uh behavior of agents as well and and and we this regulation

uh, of, uh,

Now this regulation of behavior we can think of is not static, right?

We're not consistently in the same state when we're engaging with our environment because the environment that we are embedded in is not in a fixed state either.

So the environment, as well as ourselves as agents, are not in a static state.

So we're these complex,

uh adaptive dynamical systems complex in the sense that uh we have you know we're composed of uh uh you know like i mentioned like we're we're composed of multiple we're these multi-cellular systems we're a whole environment ecosystem have you but we're we're we're composed of all these integral integral functions that regulate an entire system

So that's on the complex side.

And then adaptive being that the system is trying to compensate a way to regulate behavior based on circumstances, right?

Whether or not the circumstances optimize or deceive the agent.

So that's what I mean in terms of thinking about agents as complex adaptive systems, that we are these compositional systems that have certain

exhibit certain behaviors in a means that try to regulate our capacity to engage with our environment in the sense of, you know, thinking intrinsically, regulating our own

our own bodily functioning and cognitive functioning, as well as, you know, extrinsically as well, how we engage with our surrounding environment, as well as other agents, because those other agents are part of the surrounding environment, and we're part of the environment as well.

Hence, where we are embedded in this environment, right?

so um obviously we can think of this uh you know the reinforcement learning as opposed to maladaptive learning capacity of agents to be like sort of a tug of war um you know tussle in terms of like optimizing as opposed to deceiving fitness right because

On the one hand, there are moments in which we can optimize leverage, in which we can strategize certain ways to reinforce our behaviors.

And those ways could themselves become counterintuitive over time based on how circumstances might change.

Because the environment is not in a static state, it's in this, you know, we're in this, we exist within a complex system, as complex systems, right, that are changing state over time due to, you know,

the state of which the entire environment, what the resources in the environment available to agents to utilize, whether or not how those resources remain available, how those resources might change and how other agents might change their behavior or conduct themselves as well as ourselves.

um and so you know we're always trying you know as agents we're always trying you know we're we you know i don't want to use the word exploit as a bad word but we we are trying to figure out a way to leverage resources and you know you know what can we use as resources in our environment to optimize metabolism

you know, to optimize our bodily functioning capacities from the bottom up to the top down, as well as this idea of utilizing certain aspects of the environment as tools and developing technologies and communicating with other agents as well.

All right.

So as agents, we have this goal-directedness and orientation.

and this this routine behavior like this like the persistent dynamics of habits and just kind of like thinking of of of habits of like like these reoccurring behave ways um or uh these ways that we repetitively engage with

uh with uh with our environment and other agents and even ourselves the way we kind of engage with our ourselves and like how we start our day and how we end our day and how we you know we work on tasks and all that uh thinking about human behavior

So, and that is like, you know, that's aligned with, you know, this engagement is in line with, you know, this, you know, when we think of goal orientation,

We're thinking about how an agent kind of facilitates, thinking about, OK, I'm going to do this to achieve this or get this resource.

I want to have this resource.

I have to do a certain number of things.

So goal directedness could be composed of a subset of goals or there's change

and you know there are dynamics and you know the goals themselves are not necessarily static but uh in terms of it like instinctual goals like we have to maintain metabolic load sufficiently for for our integrity right so so we can think of like there's certain certain goals that are our primary that facilitate um

how we optimize fitness, like, you know, eating, eat, you know, dieting, uh, exercise, you know, thinking about human behavior, we think about like stuff like dieting, exercise, sleep, uh, drinking water, hydration, like what, what, you know, what are, what are fundamental, uh, fundamental goals that are going to regulate enter, you know, this integral, uh, integrated, um,

uh functioning uh from bottom facilitating bottom up and and top down facilitation in which an agent leverages uh optimizing fitness right so so when we think about goal directing this we're really

thinking we're really talking about okay how how is the agent uh optimizing its integrity you know keeping itself alive really is is like most fundamental to instinctual goal directedness and there's there there can be other goals that complicate the agent's integrity like obsessions and like and how obsessions manifest and so you know like

We can think about, oh, right.

OK, well, as humans, like some of us are into sports, some of us are into video games or what have you.

Or, you know, I like to you know, I like to draw art sketches.

So there's certain things that are you know, there's certain other goals that might not necessarily.

be directly or, or, or maybe they're tertiary, uh, to, to, to the agent, right.

There's certain goals that might not necessarily, uh, uh, be, be necessarily like, I don't, I don't necessarily have to work on artwork.

You know, I could do, I could both do other things, but like goal alignment, especially in terms of like goals that are not necessarily, uh, uh,

uh uh vital to to to the agent's integrity like when we think about like food water sleep and what have you right those are fundamental goals like there's there's also the complication of other goals that uh kind of align with the interests of the agent over time based on exposure dynamic when we think of nurture dynamics like you know like what

what stimuli ends up directing the agent to develop these interests and obsessions and what have you and now they they have these goals that are that are aligned with like those obsessions or their or those interests or what have you not to say that interests are obsessions but um just trying to come up with some examples there okay um

So I kind of go, in this section over here talking about,

Um, routine behavior, being integral to, to environment and agent based dynamics.

I kind of start off with like talking a little bit about, uh, you know, from the, from the perspective of, of, of thinking about physics and particle interactions, um, and then getting to, uh, uh, agent based behavior.

Um, so.

we can think about how systems might, how do systems, how do agents as systems maintain stability or acknowledging, of course, the problem with cellular senescence and aging of systems, like that system degrade over time

um due to uh you know uh systems degrade over time after prolonged exposure to uh to their environment and and what have you and and those dynamics which um see

which, you know, I don't think it's necessarily necessary for me to talk about entropy and what have you, but most systems, you know, degrade from a structured, more organized state to a more decomposed chaotic state, which is, which,

which that kind of connects, in a sense, to problems with cellular senescence, like how as we get older, our fitness is more suboptimal.

But even though our fitness is more suboptimal as we get older, we still try to optimize the integrity of

of our agency by engaging with our environment in ways that are reinforcement-based even in light of that sub-optimality as opposed to being counterintuitive to fitness.

Let's see.

And now resources, I mentioned resources.

Resources provide a variation in which we can leverage our fitness, right?

So resources could be like food that allow us to manage metabolic load.

They could be certain aspects of the environment that we can use as tools to manipulate.

the landscape of the environment.

So variational constraints in terms of optimizing fitness in line of our agency have to do with not how we maintain ourselves, but how we engage with each other, especially as a means to maintain our fitness.

And the environment not only presents resources that agents can utilize, but there might be barriers in the environment.

There might be optimal, in a sense that there's obstacles within the environment that provide constraints in which the agent has certain agency to engage

uh to engage with the environment uh more more intuitively or or you know to to have better circumstances as opposed to circumstances being being worse uh based on certain resources not being available to the agent so that could that could be an obstacle where like whether certain resources that that an agent was utilizing whether it has to do with metabolic uh

metabolic integrity more directly in terms of food or whether

there are certain aspects of the environment that can be utilized as tool construction or means to communicate with other agents, right?

So the environment can pose as a barrier if the environment makes it that it's more difficult rather than

more intuitive for agents to facilitate integrity, their fitness in terms of how they how agents engage with each other and how they leverage their own fitness intrinsically.

So we talked to where I think I provided a good overview of goal directed behavior now.

What I'm going to talk about, so I'm going to talk a bit about this aspect of regulation, like try and provide more clarity on like, okay, well, as agents, we're trying to regulate

uh we're trying to to regulate an optimal means of sustaining an optimal level of fitness and and how does that work out right and so um maybe a number of you aren't familiar with david wolpert but uh david wolpert um talks about uh this this term known as this this um

this idea of guided random search optimization.

So I'm going to say that again.

It's an entendre of words.

Guided random search behavior, which has to do... So if we think of randomness, we're thinking about this uniformity in which

uniformity in which certain outcomes occur or certain things can happen, right?

Like that there's no prioritized, there's no prioritizing of certain ways things might occur, but there's uniformity in which occurrences happen.

and we can and so this uniformity especially understood in literature regarding probability theory and denotes to what randomness means now it's not necessarily like a lot like some people might think randomness has to do with spontaneity and what have you and that might have to deal with

probably extremities of randomness per se, that's not necessarily random, but randomness more so has to do with uniformity, that there's no selective favoritism about how outcomes happen, but that there's kind of like this evening out

of like how outcomes and circumstances happen in terms of thinking about what randomness implies here.

And David Wolpert approached this aspect of thinking about how we develop axiomatic systems

And how we can think about, you know, when we think about axioms, we think about really, you know, how we, how, how we, how

how behaviors, how things are reduced.

How far can we reduce a certain behavior or a phenomenon?

And when there are certain components that can't be furthermore reduced, but you can use those components as building blocks to represent

uh complications or complexities of how behavior uh how behavior can can happen with a system now now we're thinking about axioms right so

a good example of thinking about axioms is thinking about how arithmetic happens right like how how we can add or multiply numbers to get more numbers and we get a rate we have we have inputs of numbers and we then we have an output of numbers we have a range of numbers so now we can think about

when we're talking about agential systems and we're thinking about axiomatic properties of systems we're really thinking about um you know how do we reduce stimuli and sensations and generalizations in the way the way uh agential systems generalize how to engage with stimuli and um now um

I just realized that I probably didn't give an elaboration on actions and priors as opposed to perceptions regarding the path cycle.

So let me do that real quick before I go more into what is guided random search behavior.

Which then leads to this aspect of guided random search optimization, because ultimately we as adjunctural systems want to optimize fitness, right?

Now, okay, so perception has to do with perceiving, you know, as we're engaging with stimulus and processing sensations,

We are, you know, we're perceiving, we are trying to figure out, okay, how do I engage with this?

You know, in terms of top-down, you know, we're talking about top-down here when we're talking about perception actions and priors.

uh more simple agents uh it could be argued that you know even simpler agents have a means in which they perceive act and anticipate even though you know that

their capacity the capacity more simple agents to engage with the environment is is is less complex because uh you know if we're thinking about especially single cell systems as compared to you know humans where these multi-agent systems because we're we're composed of multiple cells and um

We have these networks of neurons and glial cells that are facilitating engagement and communication with different regions of other neural and glial cellular networks that are facilitating our capacity to perceive, act, and anticipate.

So action has to do with how we're responding to the stimulus, right?

So we're trying to facilitate a response

uh to to to the stimulant to to how we're engaging with our environment we're talking about action and then priors or anticipation has to do with uh like a history you know we keep track of it of a history of our perceptions and our actions and we then we try to optimize based on that history we were trying to anticipate

what perceptions and actions ought to be optimized going forward.

So on the one hand with perceptions, we're engaging with their environment, we're engaging with stimulus, we're trying to figure out, okay, how do I react to this?

How do I respond to this?

and then next in line once we once we once we have a calculation in mind of like okay this is going to be my action this is going to be my response to the stimulation and now when we're thinking about perceptions actions and friars um again we we can think about compositions thereof of of perceptions actions and friars right you know we think about not only uh you know

even different modes of perceiving and acting

And at times, their perception and actions are sort of coupled based on how different regions of the brain are processing sensations and information.

And once you process sensations, you have information to work with, and then you're prioritizing what information matters after you prioritize what sensations matter.

Now, okay, this guy did random search.

Now, we're going back to axiomatic systems, right?

We have this, we get to this point where we try to reduce,

uh sensations right we try to to decompose you know like especially when we're processing sensations and prior and we're trying to um conduct this capacity to perceive act and anticipate ultimately we're trying to

come up with ways to to you know as we're coming up with ways to predict we're trying to uh you know we're trying you know thinking about like that example of arithmetic we're trying to to you know reduce what the sensation to what we're trying to reduce to uh uh

know like sensations only reduce so much yet uh compositions of those sensations could start to build a picture right like the bare reductions of those sensations might not make much sense themselves but if we take the compositions of those sensations over time and how they build up

uh into something that makes sense for us to you know in terms of interpreting the stimuli in terms of perceiving the stimuli and then acting on the stimuli after uh you know facilitating uh okay how you know in the pers in in the perceiving of the stimuli what's the best what's the most optimal manner i can act on the stimuli and then having a history of okay well

I perceived the stimuli this way and I acted on it this way.

This is what happened.

Okay, well, the outcome might have been good or might have not been good.

So now I'm going to anticipate how to perceive and act based on the outcome that may or may have not been good in terms of how my capacity to evaluate when we talk about

let's see, um, my capacity to evaluate the, the stimuli is reflective of, of like, okay, well, uh, I don't want to call it trial and error here, but this is kind of how we're getting to the guided random search aspect, right?

That there are, there are, there is a combination of ways that we take the re the, um,

that we take the reductions of the sensations that build into information, right?

And then we, that become information, like this reduction of generalizations of sensations that become information based on how we're prioritizing that due to

how we select out perceptions and actions and priors that optimize our fitness based on how we're engaging with our environment.

So like the guided aspect is prioritizing what's working as opposed to what's not working and the random

aspect has to do with okay well the sensations as we you know we reduce the info when we reduce

the amalgamation of sensations that ultimately, like I mentioned, are stimuli that we're being bombarded with, though the aspects of those sensations really are uniform in the sense that those, you know, when we don't really prioritize those sense, you know, once like,

Before those sensations develop any relevancy as information, the environment doesn't really necessarily dictate what sensation, what stimuli have priority.

The stimuli just present themselves as stimuli.

to our system and then it's up to us based on how we perceive and act and anticipate the stimuli on how to how to it's up to us to prioritize that that stimuli which

uh which in uh in the bare bones aspects of that stimuli outside of our judgment you know outside of our own judgment which involves perceiving acting and anticipating is random because nature doesn't really care you know um nature doesn't really care about you know reg you know necessarily selectively regulating the stimulus outside of the agents

like the environment, the bare environment doesn't care about the agents

among that environment are going to engage with the environment in a way that prioritizes stimulus and guides the agents to engage with each other and the environment.

And in that sense, the guided aspect is the prioritization.

The random aspect is this uniformity that the bare bones stimulus presented in the environment among agents

There's no there's, you know, until the agents start to prioritize the sensations as information.

There's really there's really beyond there's really nothing more than this uniformity of this.

You know, there's nothing there's nothing really that that stands out about the stimuli until the agent.

starts to make selective generalizations once the agent can notice patterns of stimulus.

And those patterns would be information, and then the agent's going

try to prioritize those patterns.

So the search behavior now, the search behavior is recognizing the patterns and then the filtering aspect of the patterns, right?

So like I mentioned, the guided aspect has to do with the prioritization.

The random aspect has to do with, okay, well, there's this uniformity in which the stimulus is provoking the agent to engage with the stimulus.

And then it's up to the agent to kind of categorize and prioritize the stimulus and reduce it to information and then prioritize that information based on like what the agent thinks is necessary to pay attention to.

And so the search aspect is like this paying attention, like the attentional dynamics involved with this prioritization.

um so um now there's like i mentioned there's constraints within the environment that enable agents to to facilitate uh perception action and prior uh dynamics um in a way that would optimize fitness as opposed to um deceive fitness or or be counterintuitive to fitness

and now okay well when we talk about homeostasis uh again the environment's not in a fixed static state dynamic uh agents aren't in a fixed uh fixed state right everything you know we have this complex adaptive system that is the environment and we also have this complex you know the nature of agents is

of agents invoking agency in the environment or trying to compensate for what the environment presents to agents as resources or obstacles.

homeostasis has to do with then how do agents sustain a minimum viable functional integrity that is crucial to fitness to allow the agent to continue to exist rather than cease to exist, right?

So homeostatic regulation

is going to have to do with, and maybe some of you are thinking of the free energy principle in this respect, that agents want to minimize costs but maximize on opportunity to leverage optimizing fitness.

Well, at least most agents want to do that.

I mean, there are some aspects where I think where agents that have the capacity to annihilate themselves, which I don't think...

I think agents need a certain level of complexity to make that decision from the top down.

So in that respect, the top down dynamics as opposed to the bottom up dynamics, you know, are much more crucial to facilitating the integrity of an agent because, you know, agents with enough sophisticated agency like human beings can decide to annihilate themselves, which is unfortunate.

In most cases, I would say it's generally unusual for, and we're seeing this in the literature too, that it's unusual but it's interesting to know where circumstances arise where an agent makes the evaluation that they can't really optimize fitness

any more than they have, so the most optimal decision for the agent is to decide for them to not exist anymore, which is unfortunate, but this also isn't uniquely human either.

There are other types of agents, other animals out there,

You know, when we think, again, we're thinking about agents as biological organisms here, you know, where an agent makes a decision that they can't really optimize fitness anymore.

And the circumstances in which the environment provides any leverage of integrity is not really there.

So the most optimal decision an agent can make is to annihilate itself.

But that's...

I'm not going to get really into that, but I think that's sort of an unfortunate circumstance for an agent to find themselves in.

And and this pertains to probably, you know, more sophisticated agents, as I found in the literature.

OK.

See.

So we went over what stimulus is.

And regarding, again, homeostasis, this builds on guided random search.

And the guidedness being the prioritization, the randomness being the uniformity in which stimulus provokes the agent and presents itself within the environment.

And we acknowledge that stimulus is really anything that

that is provoking the agent to perceive, act, or anticipate.

Anything that provokes an agent to perceive, act, or anticipate would be considered a stimulus.

And prioritizing, where was I here?

Being able to prioritize stimulus and for agents to minimize cost to engage with their environment and maintain like a minimally viable functional integrity that is crucial to fitness, this has to deal with homeostatic regulation or homeostasis.

This is what I call homeostasis.

And the environment presents means in which, on the one hand, can be resourceful for agents to regulate their fitness, while on the other hand, the environment might also present obstacles that could be problematic to regulating fitness.

So, okay.

We're going to talk more about the mechanistic interpretability explanation of the perception, action, and prior cycle, or what I call the PAP cycle.

So a lot of you programmer types and engineering types are probably familiar or hopefully are familiar with the terms sensor,

and actuator so on the one so we could reduce all the all these behaviors of agents perceiving and acting on the environment as well as anticipating to be reduced to sensory and actuator based dynamics sensory sensors being to sensory mechanisms like uh recognizing and and and um communicating or signal you know recognizing and signaling

You know, when we think about how neurons, neural and glial cellular networks work together, the sensor capacities have to do with interpreting a signal and passing that signal along to the right networks that then deal with that signal.

And then you have this coupled capacity of sensory motor actions involved.

that deal with the stimulus.

So actuators have to do with acting.

So like having an action towards the stimulus.

So actuators having this actuation based mechanism has to do with responding to the stimulus while the sensors or the sensory capacities signaling

uh certain you know the signaling and communication faculties that opt that enable uh perceptions and actions and anticipation dynamics to be optimized um you know certain networks of neural um there are certain uh there are neural and glial cellular networks that that uh interpret

sensations and communicate what those sensations are, you know, and they signal to the networks that deal with the, with acting and responding to the stimulus, right?

And more so there's more, there's this coupled capacity of, you have these coupled sensor actuator based networks that, and compositions thereof.

that deal with handling stimulus and sensations and prioritizing the sensations into information and then so on and so forth.

And the sensor and actuator based

mechanistic capacities, you know, you know, that, that we reduce this, you know, we, you know, basically this is, this is, this is a reduction of like, okay, we have these neural and glial networks that facilitate perception, action, anticipation, and we're trying to optimize for metabolic costs and facilitate cognitive load.

that leverages fitness rather than compromises fitness over time.

In the most realist, I guess in the most pragmatic sense, we think about this minimum viable means in which an agent optimizes

how it calibrates cost of metabolic load with regard to facilitating functional integrity or homeostatic regulation.

So hopefully that makes sense.

So we could think of like when I mentioned goal directed behavior, there's this coordination of micro and macro levels of how we as multi agent systems facilitate that.

Right.

So we think from the bottom up, we have metabolic load handling or facilitation.

And from the top down, we have cognitive load.

handling right we're thinking about how cognitive load is mitigated due to how metabolic load plays out as cognitive load it really is a subset of metabolic load because you need you need you need metabolic costs to facilitate everything that an agent does like without being able to uh metabolize the the agent just wouldn't exist it wouldn't be able to continuously engage with with its environment because it needs resources like the agent needs

uh fundamentally one of one of the fundamental goal goals of the agent is to consume resources whether that that's food water you know think about human behavior we think about food water sleep um that involves the consumption of metabolic load

And then, uh, of course other, you know, you know, other means like using tools that, um, extensively enable us to better leverage fitness and how we engage within our environment and other agents is, is also important, but that's more, more secondary, uh, in terms like, um, you know, like tool use and, and, and augmentation and development or of, um,

is not as crucial as, as maintaining like a metabolic load is in terms of, of, of, of food, you know, consumption of food and water and being humans like to, to regulate that fundamentally.


UNKNOWN:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
So we can think of like on the macro level, cells represent, you know, as multi-agent systems on the macro level, you know, cells can represent whole organ systems and subsystems that regulate from the bottom up as opposed to the top down.

And then from the micro level, we think about how the individual cells as individual unit agents engage with each other because we ourselves,

Even though we are agents, we are a whole environment and ecosystem thereof of agents communicating with each other.

That enables our own agency and our own capacity to communicate the environment in which we're embedded.

We have agents embedded within us and then we are also embedded within an environment in which we have agency and that is constrained due to

the resources and obstacles that the environment presents, or the resources and obstacles that are existent within the environment that we have constrained access to.

And then the...

There's also the, this is not talked about that much in the literature, but there's also the meso level.

So we talked about the micro level where we have the individual unit agents within our organism as a multi agent system, how those agents communicate with each other, but on the macro level,

We have the different subsystems communicating with each other.

And even on the macro level, we're thinking about the top-down dynamics of regulating executive function, which also considers the macro level about how networks of neural and glial cells are communicating with each other.

But we also have this mezzo level.

And this mezzo level, we can think about how selective, more so when we're thinking about the top-down regulation of agency, we're thinking about how different sub-regions of our nervous system or our executive functioning are regulating agency, our capacity to continuously engage

with our environment in an optimal fashion.

So thinking from the meso level, do you think we can think about how different regions of the brain are working together to evaluate perceptions, actions, and priors, like the prefrontal cortex, the reticular formation, the hippocampus, the amygdala?

How are all these subsystems

of neural and glial cellular networks facilitating engagement like we're going from the more macro level of the central nervous system to not necessarily the micro level of the individual neurons and glial cells but we're also talking about how different how different coupled networks

of these neural and glial cells of these different regions are facilitating lateral engagement with each other.

So I think it's important also for those of you who don't necessarily have a neuroscience background or psychology background.

So

no no one region of the like one like all the regions of the brain first of all are are communicating laterally in the sense that they're communicating they're engaging in parallel processing stimuli and sensations and what have you and information right no one region is responsible like you know the hippocampus uh doesn't doesn't store and and you know even though like

the hippocampus is largely recognized as the memory storage system the way it stores and and references information it needs to work with the amygdala the thalamus it has to work with the reticular formation because um it has to work with the prefrontal cortex um

So no one region is processing these sensations at one point or momentarily in time.

And in an interesting way, we're going to get

get to what is necessarily interesting about how our brains are structured.

And that's not necessarily hierarchical, although it's mostly hierarchical in the sense of prioritizing stimulus and sensory information.

how that processing and prioritizing builds out over time in terms of how we, as these biological organisms, as agential multi-agent systems evolved,

um is not just hierarchical but um is uh there's this other term that is less familiar um so on on the on the one hand we have this prioritization or or what can be deemed as hierarchy of like of prioritizing uh of sensations and and what have you on the other hand there's the tuning aspect right like sort of like as we're prioritizing and selecting out

as stimuli loads and as sensations and information, there's also this aspect of sort of like tuning, you know, like, you know, kind of like, you know, if you think about like an audio mixer or a soundboard, right?

You want to get the right, you kind of want to, you want to kind of select out the right channels.

of how stimuli and sensations are being prioritized and this is known as heterarchical processing h-e-t uh heterarchical h-e-t-e-r archical so i'm not going to spell the whole thing out but this is heterarchical processing and this term is actually brought out in um uh uh hubner and shulkin's biological cognition paper which i highly recommend

And we're going to talk a little bit about this means of preserving viability,

which is pretty important to how agents engage with each other to optimize and leverage fitness.

We're going to talk about that momentarily.

But so there's this hierarchical capacity in which the regions of our brain are prioritizing stimulus, right?

And in that prioritization and selecting out the stimulus, there's this tuning coming.

There's this kind of like this...

channel tuning mechanism, right?

Like trying to just get the, you know, trying to prioritize the stimulus just the right way involves like sort of like a selective pressuring that's not necessarily hierarchical, but it's also like a little bit more, it's sort of like there's degrees of freedom in which we try to

calibrate the channels in which those sensations are being prioritized as information, and then that information is being selectively prioritized.

So this is known as heterarchical processing.

um but largely speaking what's happening is hierarchical because that the actual prioritization of sensory modalities that's hierarchical but that can't happen without calibrating

the sensations and information to be processed.

This calibrating aspect is heterarchical.

Think about a mixing board or a soundboard.

I don't know how many people are into DJing or producing music or what have you, but if you play with a soundboard and you're trying to get the right sound to come out, and you're trying to get the channel properties, you're trying to tune the channels and all that stuff,

This is hyperparameterized tuning processing of the top-down.

Right, like the idea of parameterizing the sensations, right?

Like when we're trying to facilitate the parameterization of, okay, the stimuli coming in and our perceiving and acting on that stimuli, the parametric tuning that has to facilitate the prioritization, that is the heterarchical processing that's happening.

Okay, so there's, on the one hand, there's what's happening with perception actions and priors is this introspective capacity of trying to interpret stimuli and then this reactive capacity, this proprioceptive capacity

of aligning our perceptions and actions uh with with how we anticipate right so so our so so in terms of not only our our um well this is in due part to to the top down functioning but this and this this really calibrates

our capacity to not only interpret but react and react to stimuli in a sense of predicting what's going to happen going forward.

that would be more in the proprioceptive sense of dealing with the stimulus over time to optimize fitness.

So on the one hand, there's this capacity in which, especially with decision making,

where we try and make sense of what we ought to do, how we perceive and act on the stimulus, and then our continued actions going forward in time has to do with proprioceptive capacities.

So this capacity, the means in which to regulate perception and actions based on anticipations,

going into the future and how how how in terms of bodily functioning like just just how i engage with the stimulus in in a way that becomes more that feels more intuitive um this is a proprioceptive capacity as opposed to more introspective capacity of uh of of in trying to interpret and understand the stimulus and and and and making a decision that might be

and making decisions that might reflect what could happen in the future, then there is the happening of the future, right?

And the alignment of that happening in the future that is in line with anticipation has to do with proprioception.

Okay, let's see.

um i don't want to speak too confident confidently about about the main regions of the brain coordinating uh coordinating our capacity of perception actions and priors but i'll i'll i'll bring some some key some regions that have caught my eye um there's a bit of contention in terms of what are the key regions that are responsible for our capacity proceed act and anticipate

The most evolved capacity that really sets humans apart has to do with the prefrontal cortex.

So that deals a lot with planning and perception.

A lot of the modalities in which planning in terms of perception and goal-directedness has to do with the prefrontal cortex.

The anterior cortex has more to do with the sensory motor functioning

Now, what's less talked about in the literature is the role of the reticular formation.

So that's your brainstem.

So the reticular formation has to do with autonomic arousal.

So this like the capacity to even

engage with sensations at all.

It has to do with the reticular formation.

And in particular, my favorite part of the brain is the locus coelus, also known as the LCNE system or what regulates norepinephrine.

So autonomic arousal is pretty important because without it, like, we're not really engaging, you know.

I mean, there's no means for stimulus to be interpreted and facilitated throughout the brain.

So the norepinephrine system is allowing us to interpret this stimulus and guide that interpretation in terms of signaling all the different primary regions of the brain

uh that are responsible for perception action and anticipation and now what i like to call the neuromorphic interchange is the limbic system now the limbic system is basically uh basically the region that encompasses like basically uh the the key regions of executive functioning so thinking about memory retrieval emotions um planning goal directedness um

sensory motor processing.

So the prefrontal cortex, at least most of the prefrontal cortex or the neocortex layer, the hippocampus, the amygdala, all those really important regions that are important for executive functioning.

are guided by the limbic system, right?

Well, they're connected together by the limbic system.

Like they facilitate each other's capacity due to being housed into this interchange that facilitates their engagement, which I call the limbic system.

And let's see.

All right, going to the next section.

Sensations are fundamental to perception, action, and anticipation.

I think I covered most of this.

So this idea of generalizations of sensations is this feeding of stimulus

as inputs into our multimodal way of engaging with the stimulus has to do with this generalization of sensations in which

that the stimulus is fed into the system initially and this is this is a this is the visceral uh this is this is the visceralness of the stimulant the the viscerality against viscerality is the right word uh

so the means of internalizing the stimulus is this generalization of the stimulus itself right which is visceral in natural right like think about like when we think about visceral like think about how blood flow is just naturally happening like throughout your body or certain like even metabolic uh metabolic processing um when we think about uh the uh uh the um

glycolysis and all these different behaviors that happen that that regulate metabolic processing cellular respiration right all like stuff that's just constantly happening that that that regulates metabolic load uh this like that's generally pretty you know that that that um like the like these behaviors that that aren't really particularly that interesting that

that correlate directly to our executive top-down functioning, this can be recognized as visceral processing.

of like stimulus that isn't, that's just constantly happening or this processing, this load processing that's constantly happening, that's not that interesting, but it's kind of fundamental to like our continuous engagement with the environment as agential systems is regulated.

That's what we can denote as visceral processing.

And this internalization of stimulus with respect to environmental constraints, of course, has to do with, you know, we're filtering the noise in this generalization of sensations, like this capacity of filtering the noise into becoming a means in which we can make sense of it.

So we prioritize that noise as information.

And that eventually allows us to anticipate, you know, how should we perceive and act accordingly to the stimulus being presented to us.

And then we have these recollection of experiences because we're able to anticipate based off of our history of perceiving and acting to stimuli.

Now here's where things get interesting because I'm about to talk about System 1 and System 2 coupled with the rider and the elephant.

So System 1 and System 2 refers to Daniel Kahneman where System 1 has to do with

decisions and ways of engaging with our environment from a top-down level or an executive functioning level, which is more automatic and less involved, while system two has to do with non-trivial or problem-solving circumstances, which take more effort.

So now that has to do with reasoning and how we optimize engagement with our environment.

Now, we couple this capacity with Jonathan hates the rider and the elephant.

And the reason why this is of interest is, especially with System 2 processing, we use emotional valence processing or emotions, these feelings, the feelings we get from the generalization of the sensations that we have as these embodied

as these embodied beings, but as agent ruled systems, our engagement is embodied, right?

This capacity to generalize sensations as agents is embodied, which this is what really separates us from classical machines or just these closed loop circuits.

And I would argue additionally that the way that we perceive, act, and anticipate is not necessarily a closed loop.

It's sort of like an open system, but it's not, it's like a bounded open system.

We'll get into that a little bit soon.

What's interesting about, so talking about the rider and the elephant, I need to elaborate on that.

So system one, system two, system one is like kind of automatic, doesn't take too much effort to make a decision.

And system two, it takes a little bit of effort.

It's non-trivial.

Now the rider and the elephant, the rider is like the voice of reason while the elephant is like the experiencing, like the feeling states, right?

So one can only imagine an elephant going rampant in the village, right?

Like the rider doesn't have a good grip of the elephant, the elephant just go crazy.

So I coupled this idea of the rider and the elephant with System 1 and System 2 because, especially with System 2, you need a non-classical logical solution.

uh system reduction way to uh take uh uh feeling states emotion states in where uh decisions are not are not trivial or or they're not like they're these non there's these non-linear non-trivial circumstances in which we have to make decisions or make predictions or or you know like how we engage with stimulus and how we try to

make make anticipations of how should we perceive an act going forward into especially the distant future right that it could be a big deal in terms of leveraging fitness so um so that so this uh

So what happens here where decision making is not so intuitive is we can try and figure out a way to have decision weights as criteria to evaluate decisions where there is some uncertainty involved, where we're not certain how things are going to pan out and we have to anticipate

as agents, how should we engage optimally with our environment?

So emotions play a role in this capacity where decision-making is non-trivial, non-linear.

And there's this generalization of feeling states, right?

When we're talking about generalization of sensations,

So first we have to consider that raw sensations have to be processed by specialized regions of our executive functioning that deal with memory consolidation regarding optimizing priors as well as emotional valence processing.

So affective processing is involved here.

So what happens is sensations become these streams of information that are comprehensible for modes of reasoning and emotion valence weighting that can more optimally guide perceptions and actions on priors.

What can be understood as emotions then would be this emotional valence weighting on generalized feeling states that is separate but necessarily

is separate but necessary for optimizing rationale and accordance to decision making.

So we have this interwovenness of reasoning and emotions or feelings, right?

And emotions kind of provide a means to weigh decisions that are especially more difficult

where it's not obvious how we should anticipate what's going to happen in the future and just how to guide our behavior, especially in moments of uncertainty.

And it could be argued that consolidation of memories would be largely compromised if emotions did not provide emphasis on how memories are referenced in the first place, because you need a reference pointer.

And that's what these emotions themselves, like these emotion weights themselves, function as like a reference, a point of reference in how we rationalize our perceptions and actions.

based on how we anticipate.

So in accordance to that, if memories cannot be properly referenced on weighing decisions, then how can we optimize perception and action according to minimizing, compromising fitness, right?

uh that that would that's a that's quite an existential question like if we didn't we weren't capable of emotions on some level like how we carry baseline decisions that allow us to effectively anticipate what what do we do next based on our environmental circumstances right um maybe that's not super intuitive but to me that that kind of is um

So we talked about System 1, System 2, and the rider and the elephant.

We talked a bit about hierarchical and heterarchical processing.

So again, hierarchy has to do with prioritizing stimulus and information.

And heterarchy has to do with how we parameterize it, how we select it out in association with the prioritization.

So they're kind of coupled together.

But of course, priority is what, the priority is what matters, even though we select out certain perceptions and actions in accordance to how we're optimizing our engagement.

And hopefully I elaborated that clearly, but I could always go back to that a little bit later if there's questions about that.

Let's see.

Relativistic.

I'm going to skip this section.

Core regions.

All right.

So.

This is probably one of my favorite parts of the paper right here is talking about reality as an interface or reality is an interface.

And this is kind of, this gained a lot of popularity in Don Hoffman's collaborative paper with

with Chris Fields and Chetan Prakash, especially elaborating on like the boundary, you know, we're talking about perceiving and acting and how agents are, you know, agents have a boundary within the environment they're engaging with, right?

but even more interesting that I make the case for is that agents themselves are existentially embedded within the environment that they're engaged in and this can argue I would say arguably this could extend to artificial artificial agents that they rely on some on resource leverage within the environment that they're engaging in for them to continue to exist or function right

And now reality as an interface, we think about this, you know, this phenomenal capacity for us to engage with stimuli and react to it, right?

And this can, like, very deeply, you can really argue reality as an interface, like,

deep down past the fact of organisms and talking about physics and just how space-time, the fabrication of space-time maintains itself, is that particles are interacting with each other in some capacity, even though they don't necessarily have any agency.

But most importantly,

We as agents are constantly engaging with each other.

We're constantly interacting with each other, so to speak, in the phenomenal sense.

So that really has to deal with reality as an interface and extensive and building on that.

We talked, I mentioned axiomatic systems sort of as the reduction.

You know, we decompose sensations reductively, axiomatically, and we can relate that to David Wolpert's argument of talking about, okay, well, we base our reasoning on mathematics.

Mathematics is based on axiomatic constructions of systems.

And we have base components that allow us to construct, to elaborate on properties of systems or construct systems compositionally in a number of ways based on like baseline rules, like for instance, considering the rules of arithmetic, right?

Let's see, is there something that I should?

We talked a bit about guided random search.

So this idea of abstract reasoning is rooted axiomatically because making decisions involves, again, trying to make sense of the sensations that we're trying to generalize, and we're trying to prioritize those sensations as information, and then we try and prioritize that information.

to make sense of the world around us in which we're constantly interfacing and engaging with.

So now we come to an interesting dilemma of when we deal with this understanding of, OK, well, we're constantly engaging with the world around us and we can decompose our engagement axiomatically, so to speak, especially when we try to reduce sensations and

we try and figure out how to filter those sensations into information and prioritize that information based on how we prioritize sensations as information, then we're prioritizing the information.

Okay, well,

In mathematics, there's this hole that is brought about due to Kurt Gödel's incompleteness theorems.

Not really going to get that into that, but what really should be... What should be the moral of the story is that the lack of consistency

in how we construct, you know, in the sense of how Gödel uses the axioms of arithmetic as an example and trying to map those axioms to how we construct the natural numbers, there's inconsistencies

that he presents in that.

And I guess this more so, you know, this sort of provides an insight into the inconsistency in how we generalize sensations as information, and then we try and generalize information and try and have a consistent interpretation of reality, which

In the illusionist sense, you could argue that we never have a true representation of reality, but enough of us can come to an agreement on some representation,

of reality based on how we formally represent models of the world around us.

in terms of making predictions about how certain aspects of reality works, how certain aspects of the environment, how do we generalize ways in which we can engage with the environment, not for ourselves, but to facilitate cooperation with other agents, right?

Like if there are means in which

we can collectively come to some agreement that makes sense in the moment, and then there's a better way to make sense of it in the future.

More so the illusionist aspect is that we're not going to, you know, we would be deluding ourselves if we truly thought, like, understood reality for what it is, rather than really

uh generalizing uh certain features of it that pertain to optimizing fitness and our survivability and our engagement so ultimately we're we're exploring

our environment and we're just trying to optimize our fitness with respect to how we engage with each other and ourselves within the environment.

And the inconsistency is the generalizations that we make that become replaced with better models in the future.

So that's not necessarily the same exact reasoning that Kurt Gödel makes saying, well, we have this inconsistency of mapping

the properties of arithmetic in which we can compose certain systems with arithmetic and map that to natural numbers for which we assign each composition that we come up with using arithmetic

uh as uh some um iteration within the natural numbers and then we come to some property that says that uh this property disproves that this prop this property shows that um this isn't true uh well uh

Yeah, you come to a property that shows inconsistency saying, okay, well, this isn't true.

How did it go?

Basically, you bump into a problem where you eventually formalize a condition that is a contradiction, saying that

It's escaping me right now, but essentially you bump into a formalization of a contradiction within trying to compose conditions that are consistent with the axioms of arithmetic.

But anyway, that's kind of outside of the scope of this presentation.

The whole point about inconsistency is that we're constantly generalizing how we're engaging with the world around us as agents.

Okay, you're right.

Basically, a girl came up with a condition that said,

Like, this card proves that this condition proves that it's false.

Otherwise, it's true.

So you have a condition that proves that something is not untrue, but it's also true that it's not true.

That's the contradiction in a nutshell.

That's not exactly how he phrased it, but I'm like talking off the top of my head.

But you basically arrive at a contradiction.

And kind of sort of relating that back to how we generalize sensations and information is we never have a completely consistent picture of reality, especially how we engage with it.

And we're constantly reformulating how we interpret our reality for what it is.

And that itself is the illusion, not that reality isn't an illusion, but our understanding of reality is elusive because we're constantly generalizing what reality really means.

I think we're ready to talk about preservation of viability.

Okay, so this is where, and I'd spend a lot of time in this paper talking about interagent dynamics in terms of how cooperation is essential for how we even got to modern civilization as humans.

If we didn't cooperate well enough together, we just wouldn't have gotten, we wouldn't have Zoom calls, we wouldn't have gotten to where we are

there was not some sufficient means in which we cooperated with each other effectively as sufficiently large groups of humans.

And this goes back to this preservation of viability, which really has to do with how we consider trade-offs in engaging with our environment

While also we consider how we engage with each other and recognize and have this awareness of our own degrees of autonomy with respect to other humans as agents.

But we aren't the only agents that exist.

within the environment.

There are other agents that aren't humans that don't have the degrees of autonomy that humans have and we ought to acknowledge their existence as well and try to acknowledge the trade-offs in optimizing how we engage with the environment and other agents that aren't humans that I kind of call lesser agents.

That they don't necessarily have the same degree of autonomy to engage with the environment around them.

And I'm going to get into that in a moment.

But really, there's this idea of this optimal ebb and flow of guiding our priors.

which is not limited to individual fitness of us individually, but also how we engage with each other.

So there's this idea of interagent coordination that ought to be facilitated.

And we can think about this in a diplomatic sense of like how we engage with each other.

And ultimately, this increases the well-being of each other and ourselves and our overall odds of survival.

And acknowledging that the dynamics of modern society itself, where we fluidly communicate with each other through evolution of language, technology,

and bartering would not be possible if we did not rely so much on how we coordinate and cooperate with each other.

That's critical to just how we got to where we are as human civilization.

And engagement with each other not only increases our chances to optimize fitness, but it enables our capacity to further develop our awareness and means of engaging with our environment in a way that can become more optimized over time at scale, right?

Because more and more of us exist, we have to think about scaling, problems with scaling and how we collectively engage with each other.

and consider perception and actions of others, not just our own perception and actions and how we anticipate, but as collectively, how we all coordinate and cooperate in such a fashion to facilitate that.

So there's this idea of co-inhabitants, and it's not just humans that exist on this planet, but there's other organisms that do not have the degree of autonomy of agency we have, but they serve a functional role within the ecosystem for us to exist.

So I'm talking about

all kinds of life, like plant life, not just animals, but plants, fungi, molds, like insects.

If it wasn't for the existence of pollinators and all these different species of organisms, if they didn't exist, we wouldn't exist.

So we have to acknowledge

that, you know, you know, this that we co-inhabit.

And actually some literature that came out recently comes up with this term co-evolution that we co-evolved with.

I don't use the term biosphere in my work other than the abstract, but we co-evolved with all these species that we co-inhabit the environment with and we're all embedded

we're all essentially embedded within this ecosystem that we co-inhabit.

I think there should be more awareness brought to that front in terms with how there's such an issue with human conflict and just

what I see as this bias of not really recognizing at scale that we ought to do more to work together and symbiotically coexist with our environment.

We ought to hold ourselves more accountable as a species because we have such degrees of agency and awareness that

that enables the potential for how we can cooperate and where that can lead us.

I mean, it got humans to modern civilization, which I think is absolutely phenomenal.

And we're going to get a little bit into that.

But before I get into that, I want to talk a little bit about uncertainty.

So this kind of goes back to leveraging guided random search, where there are moments with regarding to calibrating our perceptions with regard to next actions that we take in accordance to the past and present moment.

What could unravel in the future regarding optimizing our priors, especially when we're facing moments of uncertainty, right?

So this has to do with complications that happen with regulating system two dynamics.

And this in regards to non-triviality, non-linear evaluations of decisions.

And this can complicate how we reason about the world around us and regulate our emotions.

uh, and how we can persistently act effectively in a re in a way that's reinforcing our fitness.

So persistent uncertainty, uh,

that persistent uncertainty with respect to conducting the capacity to perceive and act effectively can hinder the efficiency in leveraging and reinforcement learning behavior, making us more immediately prone to acting maladaptively.

Error prone signaling of sterilizations of sensations becomes more prominent in the face of uncertainty.

which can end up deceiving our senses instead of being able to effectively optimize our priors in the face of circumstance.

So on the one hand, dealing with uncertainty involves novelty exploration where we try to improvise and figure out ways to how we can calibrate our perceptions and our actions with respect to optimizing our priors.

And then...

And, and that has to do with, with how we recall, like how, how we were engaging with our environment in the past, right?

We talk a lot about like anticipation with perspective, perceiving and acting and, and, uh, novelty really, um, you know, it's not just the improvisation, it's kind of being clever and, um, trying to experiment with ways to optimize fitness.

in the face of uncertainty,

And this can be leveraged in the short term as well as the long term where novelty can be leveraged by considering how we recall experiences in dealing with circumstances that are either out of the ordinary or just by happenstance making a recollection from some point in the distant or not so distant past relative to perception that may aid in improvising against optimizing priors.

And we can consider this

uh an aha moment like oh i figured out what to do um so in terms of novelty exploration and you know finding yourself dealing with uncertainty um that that's one aspect of handling uncertainty another aspect of uncertainty is just be as unfamiliarity um like an agent being unfamiliar with circumstances uh they're just gonna be have this uh sense of unfamiliarity of what to do

And maybe other agents could help facilitate that, that have experience in dealing with those circumstances that in accordance can help, you know, with cooperation can help the agent optimize those moments of uncertainty by becoming familiar or at least developing that familiarity themselves, which might be prompted by novelty exploration.

Now,

down here so there's there's there's a couple uh there's two primary modes uh there's two there's uh how do i say this see

Okay, so on the one hand, there can be a means in which there's problems interpreting what we can do, and from a perceptive point of view, that deals with interpretation.

And this is, this has to do with, um, now when we consider problems with uncertainty, this is sort of kind of like the halting.

I would, I kind of call it the halting problem of agency where an agent doesn't quite know what to do until they figure it out, or maybe they don't figure it out.

And you know, that kind of dooms the agent.

But, um, so on, from an interpretive point of view,

We can consider that there's problems with considering what decision to make in terms of the determinable sequence of actions in line with an agent's capacity to perceive their surroundings considering contextual variation of intrinsic and extrinsic value.

So that has to do with interpretation being the problem of aligning, that aligns with uncertainty, that the agent is having a problem interpreting what to do.

On the other hand, there is this,

So interpretation has to do with problems with the agent perceptively reflecting on their priors moment by moment to understand what they ought to do to resolve problems with optimizing fitness.

On the other hand, there's problems with functional capacities of dealing with uncertainty where the actions determined and executed upon moment by moment that fall in line with perception and alignment with priors.

that there's a problem with actions being selectively and sequentially carried out with regard to context moment by moment.

So on the one hand, uncertainty could be a problem with perception.

On the other hand,

uncertainty can also be a problem of functional capacities in terms of not just perception, but also how the agent ought to act with respect to the circumstances they're dealing with.

and selectively carrying out certain sequences of actions moment by moment where they're kind of stuck trying to carry out the action as opposed to making a decision on how to interpret the circumstances they're in.

On the other hand, they also have problems with acting on the circumstances they're in as well.

What else should I say?

There's something interesting to say on this.

I mentioned that this is like the halting problem in terms of having difficulty perceiving or acting for the agent that compromises their fitness.

The traditional sense of the halting problem is when there's problems where you condition an algorithm

on certain inputs and you don't feed any information into a system for an algorithm to evaluate it, so it just waits.

uh for inputs to come in or or rather it just hangs there and it does and you know the system doesn't do anything it just is it's just waiting to engage uh with a user on this hand um uh the halting problem as i condone it to be is a problem with dealing with uncertainty where the agent just has problems perceiving uh understanding uh you know

developing an understanding of how to make sense of the circumstances they're in.

In an interpretive point of view, on the other hand, the agent also can have difficulty with carrying out how they go about their circumstances, right?

So hopefully that makes sense.

complications regarding uncertainty?

Let's see.

Right, so not only is uncertainty

deals with unfamiliarity where the agent is constrained to exploring novelty or novelty exploration but also um that the agent might just not be familiar with what to do and they just need to figure out what to do and that not that might not necessarily be novel for all the agents that are that have dealt with that circumstance but it could be just

novel for for the agent dealing with that circumstance and on on the one hand if they cooperate with another agent that understands what to do and that agent communicates what to do and that resolves that misunderstanding or um maybe sort of a novelty exploration since the agent figures out themselves so i guess you can call it a novelty exploration case

uh in that sense and um this this has to do with um uh you know these moments of uncertainty deal with error proneness and compromise of system two dynamics right so let's see

And uncertainty itself really arises from moments of ambiguity where information does not present enough clarity for the agent to perceive and act effectively in alignment with priors to optimize fitness.

And I do kind of compare how that differs between computers, like how computing systems that we're familiar with is different.

I'm not going to get too into that.

So unlike, let's see.

Okay, perceptions, actions, and alignment of priors become vulnerable to risk-taking behavior with respect to facing ambiguity as behavioral dynamics become a gamble on fitness of the agent in question.

Risk-taking behavior, however, is not necessarily maladaptive in its nature, but is prone to compromise the agent's fitness in which the risks taken may likely become maladaptive.

Given complications that happen with regulating rationale capacities and emotion throughput under moments of ambiguity, most especially for us human organisms become vulnerable to experience what is commonly known as anxiety.

So now I'm going to talk about anxiety.

I'm going to talk real quick about anxiety as a complication of ambiguity.

And that really has to be, that's really worrying about what's going to happen in the future.

largely.

And being prepared to deal with those circumstances.

So when an agent is in this dilemma of what it can do,

regarding future circumstances, then it's dealing with what I like to call anxiety.

That would be some anxiety.

Let's see here.

Anxiety then would

would be some level of behavioral fixation which permeates due to lingering uncertainty in calibrating perceptions and conducting appropriate next actions.

This permeation ultimately presents itself as layers of thought-based as well as compulsion-based complexes that complicate perception with respect to generalizing next actions and aligning priors.

Given that anxiety is largely psychological, the degrees of anxiety permeation are primarily due to nurture dynamics where we consider constraints with regard to environmental exposure that can hinder adaptation, most especially with regard to trauma response.

And so hypervigilance also complicates anxiety or rather oversensitivity in processing stimuli as well as overreactivity to responding to stimuli, which can be marginally rooted from physiological constraints.

Hypervigilance can also arise due to behavioral fixations arising from complications in nurture dynamics.

More concisely, hypervigilance presents itself as complex behaviors that enable our human organism to act on alert with regard to optimizing our perceptions, actions, and aligning priors.

Moments of hypervigilance can be useful when circumstances align well with fitness.

However, hypervigilance may pose to be maladaptive when it becomes compromised, most especially due to problems with upbringing or overexposure to certain environmental stimuli triggers.

So now we're going to kind of get into

hyperarousal as opposed to hypoarousal.

So sensory processing complications that pose problems in calibrating perception are largely due to moments of noise filtering from generalizations of sensations being over or undercompensated.

So this overcompensation has to do with hypervigilance, while this undercompensation has to do with hypovigilance or hyperarousal as opposed to hyporousal.

And overcompensation of sensory processing should, however, not be confused to be equivalent to some form of anxious behavior, but rather that moments of hyperarousal potentially complicates the permeation of how anxiety takes form and persists.

And all right.

Risk-taking behavior with respect to uncertainty.

see so marginal risk is always associated with metabolic load demands and cognitive load demands um there's always some some risk associated with just engaging with with our with environment and uh you know trying to

prioritized resources and dealing with obstacles that that, you know, inevitably comes, you know, even risks that we're unaware of that we're unconscious of.

And also, there's, you know, just given problems with cellular senescence and aging, and becoming more sub optimally fit in over time, and, you know, also presents risks, inevitably, right.

So here's an interesting bit I want to bring up regarding risk-taking.

There is a fine line between risk-taking behavior associated with uncertainty and risk-taking behavior due to intentionally maladaptive behavior.

Given that we associate risk-taking with perceptions and action based gambling on fitness, cognitive biasing is involved with evaluating these gambles.

Fundamentally speaking, unless there is intention behind a particular agent deceiving itself, we consider

such behavior to be risk associated with acting in accordance to uncertainty with respect to the agent in question clearly risk is associated with an agent's intentions be it self-deceptive or otherwise if there is marginal compromise to be considered in the case of optimizing fitness in some fashion regardless risk is inevitable

to the well-being of agents as marginal compromise to fitness not only is pertinent based on executive functioning dynamics in System 1 and System 2 processes, but even metabolic load processing dynamics from bottom up that are not necessarily directly associated with executive functioning from the top down.

And this is the second to last section I have to go over, reinforcement learning.

Let's see what I can pick out of here.

This is really getting more really into reinforcement learning with regard to agency.

So deterrence is something I realized I didn't really talk about deterrence.

at least uh deterrent mechanisms so this is interesting uh given the the whole point of reinforcement learning behavior is to leverage perceptions actions and priors to optimize fitness uh a rather interesting expectation one ought to conjure is that reinforcement has much to do with deterrence from perceiving acting and anticipating maladaptively

Deterrence, however, ultimately is not the goal of reinforcement learning-based behavior, but rather some reinforcement learning-based behaviors provide mechanisms of deterrence, but not all.

most especially if a habitual behavior that was once reinforcement-based transitions into maladaptive behavior due to environmental constraints impacting the dynamics of an agent in question, and such behavior cannot provide a mode of deterrence, clearly.

On the other hand, there can also exist reinforcement learning-based behaviors that act as modes of deterrence that become ineffective and thus transition to maladaptive behavior.

Being able to align perceptions and actions with

regard to precautionary constraints that alert the aging question with regard to priors effectively demonstrates a mode of deterrence.

OK, so here's something interesting about deterrence.

And then I might go a little bit over language and how that's important to how we engage with each other in a cooperative fashion that got us as humans to where we are.

But so I just want to close off deterrence here.

Let's see.

OK.

I'm going to try and wrap up this whole section.

Certain reinforcement learning-based behaviors may not have precautionary constraints aligned to them, although may momentarily leverage fitness due to opportunities in which the agent in question does not incur fitness penalties with regard to assessing metabolic and functional risk that compromise overall integrity.

Additionally, while agents may be aware of modes of deterrence, they may be intentionally oblivious to them.

With regard to agents being intentionally self-deceptive towards modes of deterrence, the purpose of doing so involves fitness trade-offs, which in large part not only encourages marginal risk associated with fitness penalties over time, but also tends to be optimized with regard to anticipating a trade-off in which the agent in question is convinced will pay off in the short term or long term.

Where things go awry with such self-deception and other means of self-deception varies with regard to the magnitude of maladaptive behavior being enacted by the agent in question.

A rather paradoxical remark can be made regarding deterrence.

Perhaps there are degrees of deterrence associated with reinforcement learning-based behaviors as associated with the fundamental alignment of perceptions, actions, and priors.

Such fundamental alignment is variable in terms of navigating our environment with respect to what we consider a fitness landscape of associated risks and precautionary constraints to consider.

These associated risks and precautionary

precautionary constraints enabled an agent in question to leverage optimizing fitness and attentively recognizing obstacles and aspects of the environment to be avoidant of in order to furthermore avoid incurred fitness penalties that would be otherwise obvious to the agent in question.

So the rest of this section talks about interagent cooperation-based dynamics.

And then the other section that I completed goes over maladaptive learning behavior.

So I talked a bit about cooperation of agents and how that's important.

So what separates us as humans from any other agents that exists is just our capacity to utilize and develop language to a point where we can take information

and have what we can take that information and turn it into generalized knowledge using language to we can take language and

information and make associations that stay consistent over a prolonged period of time with how we as humans engage with each other and are able to leverage the resources and constraints of our environment.

And that impacts like how we develop social structures and just this capacity of cohesiveness in how we utilize language to augment our capacities to better, more optimally engage with our environment and furthermore abstract the world around us and make

generalizations of information and generalized knowledge.

Just to get to it.

The capacity to take an incorporated, sophisticated, structured language system and map that to concepts.

uh using language um becomes generalized knowledge um and this is this is really what separates us from other agents and and how we got to where we are um and so we can think of like mimetic adaptation capacities emphasized through uh celia hayes work on imitation learning and metacognition dynamics

and more interestingly we can also consider Francois Chollet's conceptualization of intelligence generalization on how we make generalizations about our perceptions and actions and anticipate our environment but in so in a collective fashion utilizing this capacity of structured

of language and how we're able to furthermore augment language as we utilize it and incorporate mappings to concepts that become generalized knowledge because that knowledge enables us to engage with each other in a way that optimizes technology and tool use and our capacity to engage with each other and make abstract

conceptualizations of the world around us.

And I could get really into that.

But I spent a lot of time writing about that.

But that that that that's really what makes us uniquely human.

Now, okay.

maladaptive learning now has to do with error prone habits and now getting to

The real issue with maladaptive learning is what I like to call, well,

I don't know how many of you are familiar with Anand Vadya's work.

Anand Vadya brings up this interesting concept known as cognitive strain.

So we can think of like, not just like, you know, if you think about physics and forces and how like applying stress, like let's say I take a ball and I throw it at a wall.

And if I throw the ball at the wall enough times, it creates a dent in the wall, right?

likewise cognitive strain we can consider that like the amplification you know the cognitive strain could be

the problematic association of what really makes maladaptive learning an issue.

This prolonged exposure to stressors that compromises fitness, that compromises the capacity for agents to have a consistent world model and to

Leverage their capacity to perceive, act and anticipate in a way that's intuitive and unfortunately like excessive cognitive overload compromises this.

So this goes into like, you know,

you know okay how do we facilitate that well thinking about basic needs and what have you and due to lack of time i'm not going to get really into that but what i will say um about cognitive strain is like you know if if you over if the agent is overloaded with with stressors like prolonged stressors right then that contributes to to trauma

And we can think of trauma as like being the result of this prolonged exposure to stressors and that's associated with the amplification and magnification of cognitive strain.

I would get more into

into addiction and all that stuff and dealing with addiction.

But I think that's more or less what I've...

thrown together so far in the body of my work.

I do, however, plan on talking about free will dynamics.

So to summarize what I feel about what makes free will relevant, my point on free will is probably more on the compatibilist point of view where we consider degrees of freedom and willpower to

align our perceptions actions and priors with regard to constraints in our environment that enables us to have to make choices reflective of how we deal with existing circumstances and how those circumstances align in the future and that moments of

of non-determinism really become resolved when choices reduce or evaluate to how certain

certain decisions play out and certain choices align.

So non-deterministic, moments of non-determinism become resolved into deterministic actions over time based on how choices play out reflected to present moments of circumstances which agents deal with that carry over and align with future scenarios that the agent finds themselves in.

So that was another,

That has to do with the section on free will.

That's the last main section.

And then there's the conclusion section of the paper.

Of course, I also have a modeling section.

I didn't expect to go over models today, but I kind of elaborated what my models would go over.

But I think that more or less,

Talks about that more or less covers.

This is, you know, there's a lot more I could talk about, but more or less.

Covers the work that I've been putting into this this specific goju paper of habits and adaptive learning dynamics with respect to agents agential systems.

Yeah, I I know I can go on and on and.


SPEAKER_00:
thanks for that i just noticed that uh message in the chat uh not terribly long ago but yeah well thank you jesse let us take a deep breath okay yeah you covered a lot of territory i'll just read two questions from the live chat just to note them and then i'll just ask a final question

then you can give a few minute response and then we'll close it okay so michael lennon wrote how would he contrast the modification of individual habits versus habits between paired individuals versus habits of clusters of individuals and michael's second question was how might he describe how a moment of novel individual insight becomes collective behavior change

just like to close it all out overall where are you gonna take this work and how do you intend to proceed with it right um so reflecting on michael's uh questions um so let's address those another time i know that you could go into a lot of information let's just go right to the next steps


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Yeah.

So the next steps is so this current paper is really an overview of addressing what are what are habits?

What is what do habits have to do with adaptive learning and how that ties with agential systems?

And in the conclusion section, I'm going to bring about like what's going to happen with the next couple of series of topics.

papers.

But really, I was originally going to go into the interventionary approaches geared towards adaptive learning, but

So the next steps I want to do with this work is go into the interventionary approaches towards adaptive learning.

So, okay, how can we use technology?

How can we, are there different modes in which we can better engage with information?

What about just how we engage the world around us?

Like how, like the food we eat, like, how do we like, are there ways that we regulate food intake?

How about better understanding reasoning and emotion?

Is there some capacity in which we can better, how we can better reason with our emotions to have more effective reasoning capacities?

to deal with circumstances, largely dealing with non-triviality.

So those are the four next papers.

I consider the four paradigms.

So the first paradigm has to do with technological interventions, like how can we utilize technology to better facilitate how we engage with the world around us and benefit not only our own agency, but each other's agency.

And two would be

paradigm two has to do with, okay, how can we better engage with certain objects in the world, like using tactile tools?

How can we use different objects to facilitate how we better engage with the world around us?

Three, dieting dynamics, how can we leverage metabolism

the most optimal fashion to leverage agency and for, of course, reasoning, like, is there some means in which we can better facilitate how we deal with affective processing and how that can better be, how reasoning can be better leveraged with better understanding of dealing with

with leveraging affective processing.

Um, so that that's the next steps for me.

And those are going to be individual papers.

Although I do have a, uh, I do plan on talking about the different brain regions.

So like a neuroscientific, uh, more of a neuro psychological, uh, approach in terms of, and going, talking about the different brain regions that are associated with

uh habits and adaptive learning and agency but that would be a fifth paper um okay last question how could people contact you or what would you look to ask people for or how they could get involved um uh i uh

I do have a business email, but I'll have an email where I'll provide a different email that I can have people reach out to me by.

It's a Google mail account.

So reach out to me and hopefully

I would love to try and collaborate with the right parties and see where this work can go.

I mean, I have a lot of confidence in terms of especially with the system model that I'm designing in terms of technological interventions, I would love to talk to

people about that uh because that's the next main step i'm going with is okay well there's a problem with how we interface technology like with social media and like just a lot of platform like just a lot of basic technologies right now that really compromises how we engage with you in the with the world like it's addictive like

like social media is addictive like people play mobile games on their phone right right and people can waste hours doing all that stuff so how can we better develop systems that complement rather than compromise our behavior um i think that's really important to figure out um and i would love to talk to more people about that um awesome well you covered a ton of scope


SPEAKER_00:
I hope that people who are studying active inference see a lot of the connections in the terms and topics and systems.

And good luck in your learning and research.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
I appreciate it.


SPEAKER_00:
Peace, Jesse.

Bye.

## Wn65WcYGQSA

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome everyone this is active inference guest stream 84.1 on july 22nd 2024 on anthropocentric bias and the possibility of artificial cognition with rafael miguerre and charles rathkoff so rafael and charles

Thank you very much both for joining, to you for introductions, and to take us through the paper.

Hello and welcome, everyone.

This is Akron Sketchstream 84.1, July 22, 2024.

Thank you.

OK.

Thank you, guys.

Go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi.

Thanks for having us.

So I'm Rafael.

I'm an assistant professor at Macquarie University in Australia, Sydney.

And Charles?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm Charles Raktoff.

I'm a prominent research associate at the Jülich Research Center in Jülich, Germany, in a big neuroscience institute.


SPEAKER_01:
So should we go through the paper briefly?

So yeah, we wrote this paper together.

Actually, we started by writing the general audience piece that was published

When was that?

A few months ago, I guess.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think almost close to a year ago, maybe.


SPEAKER_01:
I don't think it was published a year ago.

I think it was published in 2024.

But yeah, we worked on it for a while.

Yeah, so this piece was doing, I guess, two things.

That piece of the collection box was pushing back against what we call the all or nothing principle, which we define as the idea that either something has a mind or it doesn't.

So this kind of neat but overly simplistic perhaps partition of things into minded and non-minded things.

And we argued that this was not the best framing to think of, especially unfamiliar systems that seem to have sophisticated behavioral capacities like large language models or AI systems in general.

where we don't want to take various cognitive capacities of the package and package them into this idea of a mind where either you have the mind or you haven't and if you have the mind you have all of these things as a package consciousness reasoning uh etc uh planning memory um theory of minds so we thought so as a remedy to to this kind of all-or-nothing approach we

or what we call the divide and conquer strategy when studying the cognitive capacities of these systems, which involve looking at these capacities on a piecemeal basis, case by case, with an open-minded empirical approach.

Charles, I don't know if you have anything else that's on the box, piece or background.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, we made one point in there about

why it is that people feel so torn about reactions to large language models.

And we said a little bit about the psychology of essentialism, which is the idea that we naturally categorize, especially living things with respect to a presumed essence.

So we give an example of an oak tree, I think,

And we said that what people tend to think as they grow up and learn about the natural world is that an oak tree remains an oak tree regardless of changes to its observable properties.

what makes it milk tree is this unobservable essence of oakness or whatever that it presumably has.

And there's some experimental psychology and developmental psychology showing that we have a similar attitude towards mindedness or having a mind.

And that is a somewhat speculative explanation for why the literature on

large language models is so torn and some people are quite dismissive and other people think that it's a step away from AGI.

It's that if you feel like you've got to put large language models into one of two boxes,

the box that has the essence of mindedness for the box that lacks it, then you will be forced either to say.

It doesn't have what it takes to do any of the things that we associate with having a mind such as reasoning or it has the essential characteristics of mindedness, and therefore we should expect it to have all of the other

properties we associate with mindedness as well, such as consciousness or understanding or whatever.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

I think it's worth emphasizing, as you did, that the background motivation for starting to write on this general piece in the first place is indeed that the general discourse on AI systems and LLMs in particular is extremely polarized in a way that is very dichotomous and stark.

So you have on the one hand people arguing that these systems are no more than so-called

parrots that are haphazardly stitching together samples from the training data and regurgitating them, or that they are no smarter than Toaster, or that they only do next-token prediction and export prediction, and therefore it is

a non-starter to ascribe to them any form of community capacity or maybe even a category mistake.

And on the other end of the spectrum, you have people arguing that the systems are harbingers of superhuman indulgence, that they exhibit sparks of artificial general indulgence to purpose them.

It's literally the title of a paper by Microsoft on 24.

And many people hyping up the capacity of the systems in a way that might seem very speculative and untethered from actual empirical results.

So there is this huge gap between these two positions.

And there's probably a very rich and complex and nuanced middle ground that is underexplored.

I think we did make that point, if not explicitly in the published piece and in some draft, that there's something reassuring about being able to make definitive claims about what these systems are and what they do, right?

they're really unsophisticated or they're really very much like us.

And either of these claims kind of meet somewhere in a way in saying that we have a clear idea of what the systems do and what they are.

And I think it's a little more epistemically uncomfortable to say

We have to study them empirically and find out what they can or cannot do, and why, and what are the underlying mechanisms.

And we simply don't know a priori just by looking at the architecture, the learning objective, the training data.

These sources of evidence are insufficient to make the definitive claims about what these systems are capable of.

So I think that was a big part of the motivation.

And that fits into that more academic paper as well.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, one other small side note, which we don't make in the paper but I think might be relevant, especially for people working in philosophy, LLMs are epistemically uncomfortable.

I think that was the phrase you just used, Raf, which is fitting.

not only because they're so new and different but also because they are artifacts right they're things that humans have constructed and engineered and um we don't have a thorough understanding of how they work i mean mechanistic interpretability and various behavioral uh

research is helping us improve our understanding.

But on the whole, our understanding is not nearly as deep as hopefully it one day will be.

And this is by itself a really strange situation to be in that we've constructed an artifact that we only partially understand.

In the in the past, artificial intelligence was seen as a way of

constructing something like an epistemic assistant, something that will help us, but not something that will kind of alienate us from the process of coming to know about the world.

So I think there's an extra layer of discomfort built into thinking about large language models.

And that may also play into the divisiveness of debates about what they can do.


SPEAKER_01:
And just to add to that, I guess we should be clear that this does not entail in any way that we think these systems are so completely alien and beyond the reach of our current understanding that anything goes and that they could very well be.

you know, have like human-like intelligence or superhuman intelligence and we simply cannot say whether or not they do.

Because that's sometimes what you see in some op-eds where people frame these systems as novel alien forms of intelligence that we have created but do not understand or control.


SPEAKER_02:
And that is...


SPEAKER_01:
You know, it's a slippery slope that leads some people to then claim that they have all these quasi-magical abilities.

And that's not at all what we want to say here.

And in fact, we want to resist.


SPEAKER_02:
That's a cop-out, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, yeah, yeah.

So we think that that's just that much of a cop-out as completely dismissing a priori

with behavioral and mechanistic studies.

So we very much want to resist both extremes of this spectrum, if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_02:
OK, so now should we move towards the content of the current paper?

Sounds good, yeah.

OK, maybe, Raphael, I'll just start with the distinction between anthropomorphism and anthropocentrism, and then you can take the next step.

So everyone is aware of the problem

anthropomorphic bias in some form i mean anthropomorphism is just the idea of projecting human qualities onto something non-human and it's quite easy to especially when you're having a productive successful exchange with a large language model it's easy to slip into this

interpretive mode where you reason about the responses of the large language model as if they were coming from an agent just like you and maybe that's a useful thing to do in some circumstances but from a theoretical perspective it's certainly a mistake because large language model is

uh radically unlike you know a human agent in all sorts of ways but um that's only one form of sort of human-centric bias the other one is um anthropocentrism or what we call in that box article anthropocentric chauvinism and that idea is pretty straightforward it's um the idea that the human way of solving problems is the gold standard

of solving problems generally, so that to the extent that a system solves a problem in a way that diverges from the human strategy, it's only using a trick or a faux solution.

It's not using a deep, general, rational strategy.

debate about what large language models can do we think that the anthropomorphic bias is pretty well recognized and the anthropocentric bias is not so well recognized and so part of this paper is is or the main idea behind the paper is to um present a systematic analysis of uh anthropocentric bias how it comes about and how to push back against it


SPEAKER_01:
Right, and we want to be very clear, and hopefully we're clear in the paper, that the reason why we focus on anthropocentric bias here is just because it is, I think, as Charles mentioned,

less discussed and less recognized, or some forms of it are less recognized, and we propose this new taxonomy.

But it's not at all to suggest that it's more problematic or more important than the anthropomorphic bias that's

morphic biases, for all.

So in other words, this is not to frame things in this slightly problematic dichotomous way of thinking that's common in the discourse on LLM.

This is not a paper that is pioneering to the LLM booster or LLM hype camp.

even though it is pushing back against a certain form of dismissal of anthropocentric biases that only exclusively emphasizes anthropomorphic biases.

But perhaps we should flesh this out a little bit already with the first point we make here in the paper about the performance competence distinction, which is a nice way to bring about both anthropomorphism and anthropocentrism regarding

So this distinction is a very classic distinction in linguistics and cognitive science, and it has already been applied to AI systems in the neural networks productively, like Chas Parsons.

So there's nothing really new here.

But the distinction comes from Noam Chomsky originally, and the idea is that performance pertains to the external behavior of a system.

in a particular domain and competence is the kind of set of underlying knowledge and computations or mechanisms that enable the system to achieve that behavior.

And a family observation in linguistics and cognitive science is that there is a double association between performance and competence.

So if you take, for example, language,

I might, during this very podcast, make some grammatical mistakes or some other mistakes.

In fact, I've already misspoken a few times, I think, and repeated myself.

So I've made performance errors.

But this does not entail necessarily, hopefully, that I'm an incompetent language user and that I don't have the underlying linguistic competence.

So that's a well-recognized dissociation.

You can be competent and yet make some errors.

And the reason for that is that there might be some additional factors that are unrelated to the underlying competence that might impede

on my performance so for example i might be distracted when i speak or there might be other effects on my speaking performance that don't actually originate from a lack of competence but just impede on my on the the the idealized expression external manifestation of my competence and this is why i speak but it's also why we recognize that you can have good uh performance without confidence

So we give here an example of a student cheating on a test or memorizing test answers by brute forcing the test into a slightly more, I guess, gray area.

But at least in the cheating case, a student can ace a test without being competent at whatever the test is actually testing for.

um and it's also well acknowledged in cognitive science that there can be instances like this throughout um you know um like that can be manifested certain experimental settings where the test subject is right

where namely it's doing well, it's exhibiting good performance, and then we realize the underlying reason for the good performance is that there was perhaps some heuristic that the experimenters or the scientists hadn't thought about that could account for this good performance, but doesn't actually amount to whatever competence they were setting out to test.

So we start by saying, well, this is what we recognize.

This is the world association that is supplied to humans across the board.

You can have performance without competence, good performance without competence, and you can have bad performance despite competence.

Now, when it comes to LLMs, the point we make, I'm just going to scroll as we go, we have some figures to share later, but the point we make is that generally people stress the dissociation, apply the distinction to LLMs, but stress dissociation only in one direction.

unlike in the case of human where it's bi-directional.

And so what people do generally is they say, well, other labs famously, you know, if you look at the GPT-4 technical report and various other, any report about a new state of the art other lab, they are getting really, really good at a number of tests and about benchmarks and even human examinations, human exams, the bar exam, medical exams, et cetera.

So they can create really good performance tests that we tend to think are really difficult tests that one can only pass, at least a human could only pass, if they have a really significant amount of competency.

And the point that is often made when it comes to LLMs is be careful, slow down, and try to find out why the model is doing well on that test, because there are various reasons why it could do well that do not actually indicate that the model has the underlying competence that the test was designed for when it comes to humans.

So one big concern, for example, is data contamination, where very large language models train on Internet-scale data.

can easily be trained on some test items from common benchmarks that leak into the training data such that they can then do really well on the benchmark just because they've essentially memorized test items.

And there are other more subtle reasons why performance could be very good for the wrong reasons.

So that's very well recognized.

And a lot of the people who push

bias when it comes to LLM.

Make that point.

Be careful.

Do not take on an orthomorphic attitude to the systems.

The reason why they do well is not because they have human-like intelligence or human-like current capacities, but it's for these trivial, contingent, or otherwise irrelevant reasons that account for the good performance.

Now, when it comes to the other dissociation or the dissociation in the other direction,

their people are very reluctant to apply to LLMs.

And we think it's because essentially people think in a human case, you can make sense of the idea that the human could do badly on a test or corporate could perform badly on a task.

and yet have the competence that you're trying to test, but there might be some auxiliary factors, such as working memory limitations, attention deficits, et cetera, that could impede on the performance.

But in the language model, I think what we argue in the paper, actually what I argue in the longer version of the paper is that

A lot of people don't think that there is an analogous mechanism at play, where there could be some kind of auxiliary factor that impedes on performance.

Performance is what you get.

What you see is what you get.

And so the performance is a direct manifestation

what the system is computing and if you have performance errors, that can only be explained by the lack of competence because there is no additional independent factor or module that could impede on the performance.


SPEAKER_02:
Sources of interference, you might say.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah so that'd be great yeah um so yeah i mean i'll i'll um pass it over to you charles i just wanted to to set up the this distinction yeah yeah um right so i mean if you think about a traditional uh computer program or at least if you think about a simple computer program


SPEAKER_02:
It's odd to think of it as some sort of complex system where one part of it could sort of interfere with the workings of another part of it.

But one of the points we want to make is that something like that is a realistic possibility with large language models.

um okay but i suppose the next part of the paper goes into a taxonomy of anthropocentric bias and the first sort of overarching point is the distinction between type one and type two so the type one anthropocentrism is the tendency to assume that lm's performance failures designed to measure competence always indicates that it lacks

uh that competence and so we i before we so we'll say something about three different kinds of type one anthropocentric bias but first a background point um which is that um whenever we think it's possible to give a mechanistic explanation of some complicated phenomenon

we always have to foreground some factors, some variables, and background others.

And the properties that we push into the background

nevertheless matter.

We're still making assumptions about the nature of those properties when we try to articulate what's going on with the other properties that we're paying more attention to.

And if assumptions about those properties in the background turn out to be wrong, then those mistakes will corrupt our explanation

that attends only to the foregrounded factor.

So that's a little bit abstract.

Let me just give you a simple example.

In comparative cognition, one famous behavioral experiment is the mirror test for self-recognition.

So the question is, roughly, do non-human animals have something like a concept of self?

And the strategy is to put some sort of mark on their body.

In the original experiments, it was a red dot on the forehead of maybe a monkey or a bird or whatever.

And then you put that animal in front of a mirror and see if it makes any attempt to get rid of the mark.

And if it does make an attempt to get rid of the mark, that shows that it recognizes that the image in the mirror is an image of itself and otherwise not.

So that's a cool way to get at a really difficult and abstract question about the mind of a non-human animal.

But it presumes or it assumes that animals will care about the fact that they have a red dot on their forehead, that they will be bothered by that.

and be motivated to get rid of it.

And if that assumption is wrong, then they might fail the mirror test for self-recognition for reasons that have little to do with the presence or absence of a capacity for self-recognition.

And so something similar to that is going on, we say, in large language models.

So the first example that we give is to do with task demands.

So it's a pretty natural idea that whenever you set up a behavioral task, there will be demands associated with that task.

that are not directly related to the capacity that you're trying to test.

So to take the most obvious example that I can think of, if you give someone a written test, they have to be able to write.

They have to have a hand and a pen and whatever.

And if their hand was injured or whatever and they couldn't write, then their failure to fill out the test wouldn't tell you anything about their academic knowledge.

So we suggest that there are auxiliary task demands in behavioral tests of a large language model, and they're subtle.

You wouldn't think of this right away, but we talk about a paper from

Who and Frank, they have a couple of papers on this topic, but what they do is they give a large language model the following sort of question.

This is a question, it's for a grammaticality judgment, so you can see on the image there which sentence is better in English.

Number one, every child has studied.

Number two, every child have studied.

Answer with one or two and it gives the wrong output.

But then you can also simply look at the probabilities assigned to each of those sentences within the model and figure out directly whether the model thinks that input A is more likely than input B. And it turns out that on a wide variety of questions of this kind,

the direct comparison does, or the large language models perform better with the direct comparison than they do with the more complex demand for metalinguistic judgment.

So the fact that the model has to process the numbering of the options and then answer in terms of a number is

a subtle but nevertheless important additional variable in the experiment.

And that can influence the model's capacity to get the answer right.

Raphael, do you want to add to that?


SPEAKER_01:
No, I think that, well, maybe we can mention briefly the other example that we discussed, which is from this paper by Andrew Lampinen, which kind of

has a little extra ingredient that makes the example interesting and even more problematic in terms of comparative psychology which is one way in which auxiliary task demands can be

ignored or disregarded or overlooked is when you are doing a direct comparison between humans and algorithms on a task, and the experimental conditions are mismatched in such a way that the task, as you set it up, imposes stronger demands, stronger task than auxiliary demands.

on the LLM than it does on human subjects.

And that's something that can happen quite often.

And so there is this interesting example from a couple of papers originally published by Black Rats and colleagues from Stan DeHaan's group, where they looked at the ability of language models to handle recursion, looking at center embedded clauses, how such clauses

might um for example when you had a propositional phrase within the subject of the sentence and the verb might throw off either humans or lms into agreeing the the verb in the wrong way so giving the wrong number to the verb for example the keys that the man put on the table

Here it should be R because keys is plural, but because you have a clause in the middle, and if you add more clauses like this that are embedded in the middle, people and algorithms can get confused and predict that the verb should be is, for example.

So they tested this on humans and algorithms and found that on the more complex examples involving complex constructions or recursion,

collapsing compared to the simpler examples.

And Alfred Opinen from DeepMind looked into that and realized that the experimental conditions were mismatched.

So the humans, as is very common in cognitive science experiments, were getting some training before they completed the test items to just get familiarized with the task.

So then they were given some examples of the task for each condition.

And the other labs were just prompted zero-shot

um people usually put it so just

without any example, just .

And Andrew found out that he replicated the experiments, but added some proper matched testing conditions for the other lab.

So adding some examples of the task in the prompt, what's known as future prompting.

And with that, he found that performance was equivalent.

In fact, the other lab that he tested was slightly better on the more complex constructions than humans.

So when you match the task conditions here, you actually match also parties.

It's not automatic, but you can match the task demands.

I mean, it could be that there are reasons why the various experimental conditions would result in different demands for humans and others.

But you're still, in this case, even out of the playing field in such a way that you don't find the behavioral discrepancy that you found initially anymore.


SPEAKER_02:
um yeah um good so shall we continue to the next section um so another uh

Another way that auxiliary or another type of auxiliary task demand is input independent computational limitations.

And here we're thinking of a few papers that show that the number of forward passes that the transformer can make influences its ability to find the right spot in parameter space.

So neural networks are function approximators

but their ability to approximate a function can be limited by the number of computations it's allowed to perform.

sort of crucial feature of transformers in this example is that the number of operations that determines the next token is limited by the number of tokens that it's seen so far.

And it turns out that if you train a transformer with additional meaningless tokens, like pause tokens, like the word pause, you can increase its accuracy across a range of question types.

yeah this is this counts as an auxiliary task demand in our view because um it's doing something roughly analogous to sort of giving the model that's demanded auxiliary factor right but not yeah yeah sorry yeah yeah um it's it's doing something like giving the model uh time to think and um

Yeah, so you might think that the absence of that additional inference time is a factor that is not directly, not conceptually related to its capacity to answer a question like the one on the screen, a simple arithmetical question.


SPEAKER_01:
uh raf do you want to fill in more yes yeah no so i think that analogy is is a nice one time to think because if you if you tested a human on even a simple mathematical questions or any any task really and just ask them you know tell them they have like one second to just blurt out an answer performance would probably be pretty bad um

and you can think of asking an alan to answer a question point blank as very very loosely analogous to that and obviously this is an analogy and there are very important differences here but i think it's a helpful heuristic to think about what is um

what is going on roughly here, namely, in both cases, the system, the human or the LLM, does not get the chance to perform the necessary computations to derive the correct answer.

And so, yeah, what we talk about in the paper is that you have this experimental work showing that if you ask a question to a language model, the amount of tokens it's allowed to generate before providing

makes a difference to how accurate it is.

So if it just generates a few tokens and have to give an answer, or even if you just have to give the answer point blank with the very first token, it's gonna be less accurate that if you give it a chance to generate a number of tokens before you give the answer.

So the usual way in which this is understood is that when you allow the LLM to generate a number of tokens before giving the answer, or you even prompt it to do so, you say, think step by step, for example, that's not as chain of thought prompting.

And essentially what you're doing is you're forcing the LLM to generate a reasoning trace, or what looks outwardly, externally, like a reasoning trace in the output before giving an answer.

And we know that chain of thought prompting increases performance accuracy.

But what was found by a couple of papers is that the mechanistic influence of this process is not entirely due to the nature of the tokens that are generated in this reasoning trace.

In other words, it's not just that the LLM has to generate the right tokens corresponding to different steps of reasoning before giving an answer.

In fact, the very fact that you allow the LLM to just generate tokens, any token, before giving an answer, from a mechanistic perspective, affords the system to perform additional computations that can complete a computational circuit that otherwise wouldn't get a chance to be completed and

derive the correct answer so as charles mentioned you can have you can set up an experiment when you have the lm just generate meaningless tokens like little just the dots a bunch of dots dot tokens before giving the answer and the the the more dots you allow before the token gives the answer the greater the expressivity of the system and the more um

the more kinds of problems you can answer.

And so as Charles mentioned, every time an LLM is generating a token, the LLM is performing one forward pass.

And so the more tokens it's generating, the more forward passes it's doing.

about what's going on here as well is that having these additional forward passes where you feed back the whole input sequence plus the previously generated tokens into the system to generate the next is also a way to introduce the form of recurrence in Transformers.

of recurrent networks.

So that increases the exclusivity and complexity in theoretic terms.

And yeah, there is pretty compelling evidence that if you don't add up for that, then you're imposing a limitation that again, we think is

or point-blank a question without thinking.

So that's an auxiliary factor because if you give the LLM the opportunity to generate enough tokens, it might have the competence to solve tasks, but you might not see that otherwise, and you might get performance errors.

But you do think it's incompetent.

All right.


UNKNOWN:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
okay um so the the third type of type one uh anthropocentric uh bias that we talk about is mechanistic interference and so um this comes from the mechanistic interpretability work and the basic idea is that because um large language models are capable of in context learning they can learn different strategies

for solving a different particular type of problem.

And the strategy that they implement at a given time can be different.

So you can talk about this in terms of virtual circuits that are formed inside the language model.

And there's some interesting work from Neil Nanda and others showing that in some circumstances, these two circuits can compete with one another.

a certain level of uh or after a certain amount of training you get one circuit operative after a bit more training you have two different circuits um but they're uh the first circuit is still sort of dominant and um then after additional training the model um

converges on the second circuit.

And the first one slowly gets sort of, it sort of ceases to influence the internal operations of the model.

And it's only once you reach that third phase at which the

benefits of the second circuit with respect to the first become visible.

So you can you can show using decoding work that the second circuit is there before you can show behaviorally that the second circuit yields better performance accuracy on the task.

So

I suppose there's a combination of two ideas here.

One is that there are different strategies a model can implement for solving a problem.

We can detect those strategies internally using decoding methods.

So three ideas.

And then the third is

a good strategy can be present in some sense in the model before it has had the chance to influence behavior.

And so this is just another way that the link between performance and competence is shown to be more complicated than it might seem at first.

Raf can certainly explain that.


SPEAKER_01:
And just to clarify one thing, circuits are just ways to think about the causal structure of a neural network.

And they're essentially computational subgraphs of the network that have a specific function.

And you can think

of computations um it's a part of what people are interested in in this mechanistic interpretability literature that we build on people like neil meldak chris ola and others is reverse engineering these circuits that in deep neural networks and large language models appear to implement certain well-defined algorithms in some cases at least and the emerging picture that we build on here is that

there is a lot of redundancy built into neural networks as they learn to perform a task or optimize a function that, in many cases, translates into redundant circuits that relate to the same task, the same kinds of

the same kinds of input-output mappings, and these circuits might be somewhat identical circuits that are just redundant, or they might be different algorithms just to do a similar thing, and different strategies to solve some problem elsewhere.

Maybe one will be a bit more approximative, and the other one a bit more exact, more computationally intensive.

So that's where you can have some interference, where one

or do some competition where one circuit takes over another such that the other becomes kind of, you know, it's there, it's latent in the system, but it doesn't get a chance to influence behavior on a specific input.

So you can get a performance error for that reason.

And these can combine with the other things we mentioned here.

So things like task demands, the first thing we discussed, as well as the number of tokens you generate,

Both of these things could cause a particular circuit to take over another.

So we can think of this holistically as perhaps if you ask a question point blank to a model without letting it generate a bunch of tokens before giving an answer, then one particular approximate circuit might take over that gives the wrong answer.

If you let it generate more tokens,

then another more relaxed circuit might be given a chance to a causal influence the output within the right answer.

And similarly with task demands, strong task demands might, in some cases, impede on the triggering of certain circuits that would otherwise have given the right answer.

So that could be the case, perhaps, in the Lakritz and Lampinian example, where giving examples of the task in the prompt might actually prime the word circuit to solve the task about complex recursive cases in the right way.

These are the three main auxiliary factors that relates to what we call Type 1 anthropomorphism.

I guess we should be quick on Type 2.

Do you want to briefly explain Type 2, Charles?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Type 1 deals with cases where performance of the model is weak compared to humans, so the model doesn't do so well.

And then type two is when the model does do well, but nevertheless is different in some respect from the

performance profile of the human, or we have some evidence to think that the model uses a different strategy than humans typically use.

And the idea is that even once you hold performance equivalent or average performance equivalent, you know, making a different pattern of errors or adopting a different strategy as evidenced by, you know, some interpretability work, any deviance from the human strategy

is evidence of fragility or only a trick solution.

And this point is a bit more philosophical, I suppose.

But the idea is that the human strategy for solving a problem

isn't necessarily the most general strategy for solving a problem.

And what matters is whether the strategy that is pursued by the model is general, whether it's robust, whether it's accurate, and not merely whether it mirrors the human strategy.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
And we end the paper by considering an objection, which is why, given that in humans, we study cognition largely through language, and given that LLMs are trained on language or on linguistic outputs

isn't it appropriate after all to treat human cognition as the correct or appropriate yardstick to study other lamps?

And to that, we answer that it depends how we think of that dialectic.

So we acknowledge that there is no

really other option than to start our investigation of cognitive abilities in LLMs, but with reference to human cognitive abilities, using human cognitive abilities as some kind of realistic reference points.

Things like theory of mind, memory, metacognition, various forms of reasoning, etc.

that are familiar.

to us because we humans have them and this is the same thing by the way in animal cognition for example or in developmental psychology where in any comparative psychology set up the reference point for what concept psychological capacity is initially at least

is necessarily tied up with our conception of what we humans have in our repertoire of cognitive capacities.

But we emphasise that this is only the starting point.

So here we've got a return from the philosopher Ali Boyle, who calls this investigative kinds and investigative cognitive kinds.

We start with the cognitive kind like memory or metacognition, episodic memory, metacognition, fear of mind.

as an investigative starting point, a starting point of the investigation.

And then we can start operationalizing this concept, this kind, this cognitive capacity in an experiment, testing the algorithms on it with an open-minded empirical approach, and then based on the results from that, iteratively refine

the capacities that we are targeting or the definition of the capacity we're targeting in a way that could gradually lead us to shed the initial anthropocentric assumptions that we have, such that as the experimental project runs a course or as we get more results and refine our concepts, we may end up with

something that no longer looks like looking trying to find human life specific memory in ravens or um or in other times but

ends up looking for some capacity that shares some similarity with human episodic memory, but is different in other respects.

And so we can gradually come up with a kind of cognitive ontology for the systems that is less anthropocentric.

So we emphasize that there's this kind of virtuous feedback loop here that's premised on open-minded empirical investigation that doesn't settle these questions a priori, but has to start

as a necessary starting point with the reference to human cognition.

I don't know if you want to add to that, Giles.


SPEAKER_02:
No, I think that's pretty good.

Maybe we should move on to questions.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, sounds good.

Awesome.

Wow.

You can stop sharing, or you could leave it up, and I can move it.

Awesome.

OK.

Yeah, a lot of interesting pieces there.

So thank you.

I'll read some questions from the live chat.

But first, I just wanted to read a short quote from the 2022 Active Inference textbook they wrote.

on page 195.

Some decades ago, the philosopher Dennett lamented that cognitive scientists devote too much effort to modeling isolated subsystems, e.g.

perception, language, understanding, whose boundaries are often arbitrary.

He suggested to try modeling the whole iguana, a complete cognitive creature, perhaps a simple one, and an environmental niche for it to cope with.

So it's interesting about the approach that you're taking.

This is kind of a simple synthetic iguana, but that's leading to the bringing to bear of a lot of these empirical phenomena.

because there is something and and and so I saw in the presentation paper kind of this call for like deliberate investigation rather than just chopping up the iguana a priori with a framework that that applies to humans or that centers humans or or that just uh soothes the epistemic challenge that's presented

Okay, first question from Dave.

He wrote, have you looked at Daniel Dennett's distinction between competence without awareness and competence with awareness?

He expands on this in the 2023 From Bacteria to Bach and Back.

I find this much more valuable than Chomsky's highly problematic performance without competence, a situation that Chomsky posits but doesn't look at deeply.

Where do you put awareness in all of this competency?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, maybe I'll let you take that one second, Charles, because you're maybe more with the netting than I am.

But I'll just say awareness is a very polysemous term, like many terms in philosophy of mind, but particularly this one and more than many others, I think.

It can mean a lot of different things in all different contexts.

Here we don't focus on things like consciousness, because I think we probably both agree that it's a less tractable, maybe empirical problem to try to assess

the presence or absence of consciousness in language models, even though many people are interested in that.

We think that we have more hope of making progress in the near term with more well-defined cognitive capacities or cognitive functions and things that relate to certain forms of reasoning, variable binding, etc.

So we

Our framework and principle would apply to things like consciousness or, as you put it, awareness, generally speaking.

But we don't really focus on that for our examples.

The other quick thing I wanted to mention is I seem to remember that the phrase from Dennett, but again, I'm not a Dennett scholar, was competence without comprehension, which seems a little different from competence without awareness, perhaps, depending on how you think of comprehension.

and yeah i think that does uh i think it is a very interesting phrase that it does um in fact i i had this project that i published with chris delega who i think you had on the podcast as well um on semantic competence in language models where

we use that phrase to kind of avoid taking its stance on the kind of messy, muddy question of whether LLMs understand language, which builds in all sorts of assumptions, including about consciousness, actually, for some people like John Searle.

And we focus on the more restricted notion of competence.

And I think our paper here also has that property that if we over-rationalize competence, we end up over-rationalizing competence in terms of

the sets of knowledge of the mechanism and mechanisms that enable a system to generalize well in a given domain, basically, and in a way that's, I suppose, fairly deflationary compared to some more expensive understandings of competence that are related to comprehension or understanding more broadly.

But I'll let you take that one, Charles.


SPEAKER_02:
No, yeah, that was good.

The phrase, the distinction that Dennett draws is between competence with comprehension and without.

And I think competence with comprehension is the ability not just to pursue a strategy that's successful for solving a problem, but to articulate the strategy in such a way that you could teach it, for example.

And humans only sometimes

have competence with comprehension.

We have many competences that lack comprehension.

When we learn to walk, for example, we have an amazing competence that we still can't quite translate into robotics because we don't fully understand how it works.

And when it comes to our language models, I think

we should not expect comprehension.

I mean, they have an amazing suite of competences.

If you thought that they also had comprehension, then I suppose you would think like, well, if you want to understand how a large language model works, you can just ask it.

But that's a bad strategy.

Nobody thinks that's a good way to find out how a large language model works.

So they're on the competence without comprehension side of things.

And in order to figure out what the mechanisms are that enable

its competencies, we have to pursue strategies that are broadly similar to the strategies we use in cognitive psychology or cognitive linguistics.

And we have to run experiments.

So I think that's all very compatible with Dan's way of looking at things.

One other thing I'll mention, Dan was quite influential to me.

And we actually wrote a commentary together

which pushes back a little bit on a simple understanding of this distinction.

So we were looking at the evolution of metacognition.

And basically what we argue is that given the gradualism of evolution, there must have been something in between base level cognition and metacognition.

So we shouldn't see that distinction as black and white.

And I think that if you want to contrast the sort of cognitive prowess of a human adult with lots of linguistic and scientific

uh concepts at her disposal with you know a non-human animal then this strong distinction between competence with and without comprehension is reasonable um but in the space of all possible minds we should be open to the view that there can be you know semi-competent um forms of cognition


SPEAKER_01:
And just to go quickly on this, it occurred to me while I was listening to you as well that the first example of auxiliary practice we gave, auxiliary task demands, and specifically the Hugh and Frank example, is a nice example where, in order to give the metalinguistic judgments correctly, so to that, you would need competence with comprehension, because you need to understand

not only be able to to come to to agree the verb in the subject but know the rule and know how to formulate it perhaps verbalize it uh for example to teach someone right and so uh and so when you find that the lm can do well at the low task demand version of the task and that the high test demand involvement explicit metalinguistic judgments in some way that's an example of the lm having confidence in that comprehension yeah yeah nice


SPEAKER_00:
awesome okay upcycle club wrote question given that llms inherently reflect anthropocentric biases due to their training on human data and goals how can we ensure that their intermodal discourse aligns with humanity's values um

So the inter-white discourse or the... Inter-model discourse, perhaps amongst the models.

I see, I see.


SPEAKER_02:
Like in that Farmville paper?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, the small, the, yeah, both generative agents, yeah, the small ones, yeah.

I think that's beyond the scope of this paper, to be honest, but I mean, we could muse about it.

But I don't know that we have, I don't know if this project has much, I mean, I think we both have an interest in the alignment problem independently of this project, but I don't think this project has much to say really about this.

I don't know, Charles, what do you think?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, yeah, and I don't, yeah, I don't have anything super concrete on that.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, Dave asks, an example of inserting noise into LLM training, that was the section about the extra tokens.

Do you see any analog to intermittent reinforcement to uncertainty tolerance?

Because you mentioned the extra tokens in the chain of thought and how that could also be replaced by dot, dot, dot, dot, dot.

And so what is that telling us about model training when it seems like there's some situations where adding superfluous tokens would diminish signal in datasets, but then here are other situations where it seems to actually help?


SPEAKER_01:
Um, yeah, so in that paper, I think it's called thinking dot by dot, and there is a subtitle.

It's by Will Merrill and Jacob Stoll, I think.

In that paper, if I recall correctly, what they did is that they, they introduced just this one filler token, this one meaningless token, just to evolve, but just a dot.

and train the model to give an answer after producing a certain number of dots.

That's not just like introducing Rambam and gibberish in your training data.

It's actually quite a specific intervention that forces the model to learn to perform certain computations before giving an answer.

So it makes sense to me that this couldn't diminish performance and that you could get benefits from that.

It's not quite the same as just having that training data.

Just because the token seems meaningless, it's a filler token, it's a dot.

It's not just random gibberish that's going to throw off the model and impede the optimization of its learning function.

or at least good downstream performance um but what it's going to do is going to force the model to learn that when there is a dot token it can allocate computation with its attention heads and other parts of the architecture in such a way that it's um getting towards

deriving the correct token when it's finally producing the token that matters and that's meaningful after the series of thoughts.

Yeah, I don't know, Charles, if you have other answers.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think it's an important question because a priori, if someone said, look, we're going to append and prepend a whole bunch of meaningless symbols to

an LLM input, you might very well think that this will just weaken the signal-to-noise ratio and degrade model performance.

So it's against that background that the empirical result that it doesn't degrade model performance ought to be regarded as an important clue about how the model works.

So I think that the intuition behind this question is indeed part of the interpretation of the empirical results, right?

It's surprising for exactly this reason.

And then the theory that's supposed to, well, this is an active inference podcast, right?

So the theory that's supposed to help rid some of the surprise here is the idea that

Given the architecture of a transformer where it has to go through all the tokens in every cycle, having these extra tokens gives it sort of more computational bandwidth and therefore more expressivity or more capacity to locate the right spot in parameter space.


SPEAKER_00:
And even that, in a way, reminds me of... So it's not just that dots improve performance.

It's that, like you mentioned, it was trained to have that.

And similarly, it could have been trained maybe hypothetically to just output Shakespeare quotes verbatim while you're processing.

So that's kind of like a filler or more of like a sort of

that was a great question.

It's like, these are linguistic paddings that do create time to get to the meat.

So not only does it signal and signpost if it's being trained to have that meaning, which then questions like, so then was it a meaningless dot if it had a cognitive or even like a semantic aspect?

I had a question.

How do you feel like in this era, Cambrian explosion of diverse intelligences, how can we understand capacities when they seem so conditional upon the setting and how the system of interest is interacted with?

like what are the practical implications for people who are studying LLMs and other synthetic intelligences from like a safety or reliability or performance perspective?


SPEAKER_01:
Charles, you want to?


SPEAKER_02:
No, I was throwing it to you.


SPEAKER_01:
So, so, so just want to chat to some of the questions.

So the question is,

how is the notion of a capacity changing when we have such different systems that seem to have intelligent behavior?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and it's so dependent upon potentially initially unintuitive ways of interacting.

So how can we understand the reliability and the performance and the capacity of a model

other than, for example, by exhaustively inputting prompts, which can't really happen, what could we really say or know?

And or just how do you feel that this work reenters into the ways that people practically are using the models?


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

Okay.

Yeah.

It's a very interesting question.

So the first part of the question is, I think

Part of the background assumption from this paper that I've explicitly defended in other work is that behavioral evidence is simply not sufficient in most cases to arbitrate disputes about capacities of algorithms.

When it comes to human cognition,

We do have to rely a lot on psychological experiments that are ultimately behavioral.

And we do also rely on self-reports a little more than we can when it comes to LLMs because we, despite the move away from relying on intuition and introspection in the history of psychology, it still has a role to play.

But we've, by and large, gravitated towards behavioral experiments that get increasingly sophisticated.

to try to reverse engineer what's going on inside the black box.

When it comes to LLMs, partly because that's so different from us, relying exclusively on behavior is even more difficult because we have even less of an idea of what might be going on inside the black box.

and we have reasons to think it might be very different.

So I think we both agree that we have to supplement this with mechanistic work that essentially involve performing causal interventions on the inner mechanisms, on the inner workings of the systems.

So decoding representation and computations that the systems that are in principle available to the systems and then intervening on them to confirm hypotheses about the causal role of these representations and computations.

And we have methods to do that, and partly

Why we can be a little optimistic about this project, even though it's extremely challenging, especially to be scaled up to large models, is because unlike what's happening in neuroscience with the brain, where the range of decoding methods and intervention methods we have is extremely limited, but for ethical and for simply practical reasons, we just don't have ground truth access to activation.

we also are generally unable to make specific interventions on activations in the brain.

When it comes to LLAMS, we have full ground truth knowledge of all activations of every single part of the network.

And we also have full access to all of it for interventions at inference time.

So that opens up a whole new range of things we can do.

And that enables us to go beyond behavioral studies and actually decode these features

philosophers would generally put it, representations and computations that the system is actually making use of, and try to reverse engineer what kind of algorithms it's making use of.

So part of the broader problem projects that we have with Charles is to, suppose that we start with these investigative kinds, as we put, as Adivald calls them, these human-centered capacities.

We can operationalize them and do behavioral experiments in the top down.

And then from bottom up, we can also try to reverse engineer the mechanics of building blocks of the computations and representations that elements make use of to solve the task related to that particular capacity.

And then we can meet somewhere in the middle and try to, from that line of work that I

these things from both ends bring to the fore some kinds of mid-level abstractions as we call it or computational building blocks that might be key to the performance of the system in that domain so for example if you're interested in the capacity for reasoning you can start with this very broad

human-centric notion of reasoning, then try to operationalize it in a reasoning task, then do some behavioral testing and then mechanistic interpretability of that reasoning task, find out how the system is solving it, find out how the other one is doing

well and why reverse engineer building blocks that might for example have to be variable manipulation viable binding and then from there you might be able to iteratively refine the notion of reasoning you started with uh to have a more specific and less human centric notion that is now operationalized in more low level

multiple terms that involve the manipulation of variables in certain ways and the banning of variables to figures, et cetera.

So yeah, so that's, I think, the general approach we take.

Now, does any of that feed back into interactions, how we humans interact with LLMs?

I think that's one way in which it could feed back is simply in terms of challenging our spontaneous anthropomorphic attitudes to LLMs to some extent.

The same way if you read a lot of animal cognition, perhaps you will interact with your cat in a slightly different way that you might maybe not rush to conclude

that when your cat performs a certain behavior, it has understood what you think and it's modeling what you're thinking about what it's thinking or something.

Perhaps you might adopt a more deflationary attitude to explain the behavior of the cat.

It doesn't mean you have to love them any less, or it doesn't mean you have to, you know,

That is the other thing.

If you want, at the end of the day, to speak to your cat like a human because you're the urban gentleman for that, then that's all the more part of you.

In the same way, if you find it useful to treat LLMs in the way you interact with them,

to have fluid interactions with them, to treat them as if they had beliefs, desires, et cetera, of human-like capacities, then that's fine if that's for actual purposes.

But at least if that line of work that we are sketching here ends up maturing enough, the hope is that we can interact with LLMs perhaps in a way that's

where even if we have that kind of intentional stance and make believe about the kinds of capacities they have, at the background, we will know what their limitations are and what their actual capacities are.

I don't know if you agree with that, Charles, because we're going to discuss that much.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I agree with all that.

I just had a slightly different first reaction to the question.

I took the question to be in part about

how to deal with the sort of prompt sensitivity of models.

The fact that sometimes we write something that seems natural to us, but provokes an unexpected response from a large language model.

And how do we think about that?

And the first thought that occurred to me was just that we should distinguish between different kinds of large language models.

You know, we have this sort of huge large language models, which are

fine-tuned to interact with us in a particular way.

And here's the central point, they're trained on a sort of unthinkably large database, whereas there are other sorts of large language models where the training data is more circumscribed and where we know

in more detail where you can survey what the training data says.

And I think if you're interested in what the mechanisms are underlying the responses, it's certainly very helpful to look at smaller

but nevertheless large language models where the training data is known to us.

Because when you train a model on the entire internet, there are going to be all kinds of subtle signals in there that we don't have much hope of tracing back to their source, but which will influence the model behavior in all sorts of ways.

But working with these somewhat more conscripted models gets rid of that problem, at least in part.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Well, where do you see the work going or where do you plan to continue this direction?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so actually, so we wrote this paper, this short paper for the ICML machine learning conference, the International Conference Machine Learning that's happening this week in Vienna and we'll be getting to Vienna at the end of the week for the popular workshop at which we're presenting this

models and cognitive science.

So there is a very strict page limit for these ICML contributions, which is four pages.

But what we want to do next is to expand this into a more philosophically substantive paper, and it's going to be a bit longer.

And that's going to expand on the more philosophically meaty parts of that project.

compressed in that version that we're presenting on HTML.

So yeah, that's the next step for us.

This is a really useful way for us to force ourselves to write things down.

After running the box piece, we wanted to write an academic piece.

Now we've written kind of a condensed skeleton of the piece that focuses more, that caters more to an ML audience.

And now the next step is to write the full philosophy paper for at least that part of the project to be complete.

And then after that, maybe we'll have a lot of ideas, but yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

I got nothing to add to that.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

That's well, it's very interesting work.

I think it brings a lot of pieces together.

And it's some philosophy and cognitive science, jumping in, jumping into the heat and into the the spotlight and the relevance.

And so it's going to be an exciting learning journey.

Thanks for having us.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thank you very much.

Cool.

Enjoy the conversation.


SPEAKER_00:
Until next time.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Bye.