## eIZjx0miM9o

SPEAKER_02:
Hello and welcome.

It's March 14th, 2023, and we're in Active Bookstream 1.010.

Off to you, Blue.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi.

Today we are going to be discussing this Governing and Continuing Transformation book.

We're moving into the third and final section of the text.

And so we're going to kick it off today and next week, and we will wrap up our discussion of the book over these next couple of weeks.

So we are the Active Inference Institute, a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

These are all of our social media links.

This live stream is recorded and archived, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we will be following good video etiquette for live streams.

If you would like to get involved in this project or any of the ongoing projects at the Institute, get in touch, reach out at ActiveInference.org.

I think we're actually ActiveInference.Institute now too.

So either one works.

Okay.

So we are in the 10th chapter.

of this Governing Continuous Transformation book.

We're going to actually discuss chapters 10 and 11 today.

This final section really is just a conclusion and wrap up of the information that's been presented in sections one and two.

So we can just introduce ourselves briefly.

I am Blue Knight, an independent researcher in New Mexico, and I will pass it off


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, I'm Tyler.

I'm a DAO researcher and protocol designer in California.

And Daniel?


SPEAKER_02:
I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California.


UNKNOWN:
Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
So doing this third part, the conclusion part, the chapters today.

So chapter 10 is really just an abstract, which we'll read.

And then it's like a giant table summarizing the free energy governance model versus traditional corporate governance.

And so we'll just cover that and just summarize how these are the same and different.

And then we'll get into chapter 11 and some of the content, the conclusion content that is presented there.

Tyler, do you want to read this one for us?

And then we'll take the next part.


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

So through the lens of the theoretical concepts developed in this book, FEG and traditional corporate governance, TCG, are assessing comparative perspective.

TCG models are predominantly characterized by a compliance mentality centered around board effectiveness as a matter of managing agency conflicts of interest through optimizing stereotypical board diversity, enforcing director independence.

FEG introduces a radically new logic, exercising the corporate wholesale reinvention that strategic renewal is now imposing.

Indeed, any such juxtaposition of two governance logics can hardly escape the accusation of oversimplification.

However, once we embrace the world as discontinuous and distributed, we start understanding that today's entrenched corporate governance approaches are a low-scale, low-leverage legacy business creating inertia.


SPEAKER_01:
And I'll just read the second part.

Public policy prescribed best practices guiding corporate governance is an anachronism of modern business, reinforcing upper echelons risk aversiveness, i.e.

compromising epistemic foraging, and consequently entrapment in the incapacitating perception of the world as volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous, or VUCA.

Free energy governance embraces any dimension of VUCA as information rich input for top down, bottom up prediction error minimization in pursuit of minimizing surprise.

An over reliance on CEO framed information flows and analysis, which is so characteristic of traditional corporate governance, is as good as flipping a coin.

The very processes that explain success equally breed failure.

And this table 10.1, there's a little bit in the chapter, but this table 10.1 is one of the very few figures or tables presented in the entire text, if not the only one.

And here we can just see there's three columns.

The first is the logic.

And then the second is free energy governance, like how it relates to that logic.

And then the third column is traditional corporate governance and how that relates to the logic.

So, for example, so here the structure or hierarchy is the logic where the free energy governance method is top down, bottom up, top down belief propagation and bottom up message passing.


SPEAKER_00:
In circular causality, unidirectional upper echelon belief propagation only.


SPEAKER_01:
So there's not that bidirectional information flow and the process.

for free energy governance is generative or continuous and traditional corporate governance is static or agenda driven.

Capabilities are metadynamic, cognitive in free energy governance and operational or domain centric in traditional corporate governance.

the dominant neural network is this, um, direct, no default, default mode network, direct default.

I think it's default, default mode centric network.

Um, and then the traditional corporate governance is task positive network centric.

So this is interesting to me.

Like I thought that, um,

When we were talking about these neural networks, it was really like the conjunction of the two networks that I thought was characteristic of free energy governance, as opposed to like one neural network being more dominant than another.

Did you guys get that too?

Or is this like, I don't know, to me, like, I think that this is kind of like weird.

This took me by surprise.


SPEAKER_03:
I think when they say DMN-centric, they're not saying that one is limited to free energy governance or QTG.

They're just saying that there's more of an emphasis on this kind of exploratory default mode processing with free energy governance.

But you still have to switch between explore and exploit, or actually not switch between, but pursue them both simultaneously.

And so both are happening in parallel, is my understanding, at least.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep, agreed with that, Tyler.

And also, is it the case that the normal operating function is task-oriented and then we pull back to review?

Or is it the case that we're pulled back in review and then we drop into the task?

That's like DMN-centric, but in both cases, you still would want the effective oscillation.


SPEAKER_01:
And then the learning for free energy governance is double loop learning and single loop prevails in the traditional corporate governance.

And then there's different performance metrics and performance variables and corporate purpose, which I don't know that we like got too into that.


SPEAKER_00:
Like this is kind of maybe...


SPEAKER_01:
was like lacking.

So I was surprised to see this here, the corporate purpose.

So he says in free energy governance, it's existential and axiomatically integral to the free energy, minimizing governance mandate.

Like the purpose is that, um, where in traditional corporate governance, it's diffuse and opportunistic with no relevance to governance.

Um,

So maybe I like just skimmed over that or like blanked it from the text, but it was from like the very, the very first chapter.


SPEAKER_03:
So this is like, you know, what, 13 live streams ago that they're just linking like corporations want to survive, linking that very much into like calling up the corporate purpose is to just survive and continue on.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

So then the second part of this table, we talked about strategic and financial control, like the dual mandate management in FEG, where traditional corporate governance is focused on financial environmental engagement.

We talked about in free energy governance as enactment with traditional corporate governance is adaptation.

Digital transformation, which is like, that's interesting.

Like, it's an interesting logic, like the logic of digital transformation, where FEG is holistic wholesale reinvention and traditional corporate governance is selective transformation or domain specific.

But like, I'm like having a hard time relating to this digital transformation logic.

I don't know if you guys want to shed more light on that.


SPEAKER_03:
I think what he potentially might mean is like say that you're a business that like sell something and like you sell it over the counter, right?

The selective transformation would be like, okay, well now we have like a web checkout flow.

But the digital, like the wholesale reinvention could be like,

You know, using AI to take your bombs up input to transform those into top down predictions, right, like really doing something fundamentally different with your digital tools, rather than just like mapping physical processes into digital is my understanding.


SPEAKER_01:
And then strategic renewal is autonomous under free energy governance, proactive, and it's like this dual information flow again, where in traditional corporate governance, it's induced or reactive, top-down mandates driven by belief propagation.

The machine learning logic...

I thought this was cool and maybe, I don't know, Ruby Daniel wants to speak more to this as we've been talking about the need for free energy minimization in active inference or not.

So the machine learning logic in free energy governance is optimizing the principle of least action to resist dissipation in order to persist in traditional corporate governance.

It's like supervised or rule-based maximizing predetermined reward functions.

I don't know, Daniel, do you want to speak any more to that?

I know you've been thinking about it.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, the first thought was free energy bounds, surprisal.

We would minimize our surprisal if we had the perfect generative model.

So minimizing surprisal is like having the most model evidence, and we're gonna bound surprisal with free energy minimization.

And so in this machine learning logic, it's almost like we're gonna bound our surprisal so that we can persist and thrive in our niche.

the other side it's almost like we're going to be following best practices and compliance getting to the governance mandate below we're going to be bounding and staying within lines on all of the checklists and then question mark question mark question mark we will have impact in the niche

Whereas in free energy governance, surprisal minimization slash bounding as a first imperative ends up taking on some of those outcomes that under the traditional corporate governance column would be seen as consequences of reducing mismatch with compliance and regulation.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, thank you.

And then finally, the final item in the table, the logic is the governance mandate under free energy governance is continuous strategic renewal, firm outperformance and firm survival.

So like optimizing governance and operational coupling, environmental enactment and dynamic duality management of exploration, exploitation, as well as financial and strategic control.

all powered by inactive inference.

And then traditional corporate governance is regulatory compliance, board effectiveness, firm performance, by monitoring, advising, challenging, boundary spanning, networking, all guided by CEO-centric and principally upper echelon dominated frames.

And so this like table in a nutshell, like really sums up a lot of the concepts that we've discussed throughout the text and what we are kind of looking for in

this new governance model.

Maybe Tyler, do you want to read the first half of this abstract for chapter 11?


SPEAKER_03:
So how can one possibly redefine the board's strategic meta-role when traditional governance modes are ridiculously entrenched in cognitive capabilities so poorly developed or non-manifest?

To be practice-relevant, theory must be intuitive and inspire upper echelon questioning.

It's very habits of mind.

To conceive strategic renewal as continuous and during the process of top-down predictions, bottom-up stimuli, surprise minimization urges upper echelon to consequently optimize the multi-intelligent sources of stimuli, redesign processes, as well as incentive structures, and develop a new language to empower an active inference.

Indeed, today, corporate governance research and practice are more concerned with defining behavioral responsibilities rather than addressing its very capability needs.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

take this second part.

There is no one-size-fits-all best practices catalog, but FUG's nexus of structure, cognition, and capabilities provides the building blocks for a fundamentally new governance logic.

In a discontinuous world, the essential governance challenge is to ensure the self-organizing optimization of top-down, bottom-up prediction error minimization, learning to infer

Once we embrace FEG as a novel organizational framework and early detector of firms impending entropic decay, we must reckon that unless replaced with an FEG inspired logic, traditional corporate governance is likely to continue relegating the board of directors to strategic irrelevance, reinforce financial control at the expense of strategic control, prioritize top-down content over top-down bottom-up processes, cultivate inertia, and inhibit the full growth and survival potential of firms as self-organizing systems.

Um, and so this chapter had some sections in it that I just tried to summarize, um, here.

And so he talks about, um, The dimensions of the theory and like the relevance, he says the relevance of theory to the practice of strategy management and governance is essentially determined by three dimensions.

Theory must first be intuitive as well as problem or opportunity driven.

Second, establish new metaphors or give new meaning to existing language that empowers purposeful sensing, sense-making, and strategic renewal.

And third, inspire upper echelon questioning its very habits of mind, i.e.

provide a new and enriching perspective around doing things differently.

And this, like, I brought up the theory particularly because, like, what's not here in the dimension of, like, a theory or, like, the relevance of theory to the practice of strategy management?

And, like, I don't have any background in this, so maybe, Tyler, you want to say some more about it.

But, like, I feel like the relevance of theory to the practice of strategy management, like,

For me, what's missing through this text, and I think we're getting a little bit more into it now and we've uncovered it, but it's not very obvious, is how do you find a practice that's grounded in this theory?

What are specific practices that this theory is imploring us as a firm to

to do.

So I don't know, Tyler, do you want to speak maybe to that?

And just in terms of strategy management overall, like do all theories do that?

Or am I just like, where is the hard evidence?

Maybe I'm just being a stickler.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, first off, like a good grounding in like economics and corporate theory is that most of it is wrong, like completely bullshit.

Like a lot of like even like microeconomics theory is like totally debunked, never was correct in the first place.

And so there's a very low bar for like having a good theory like economics.

or corporate governance but with that said like i've been trying to think of what makes free energy governance like different to process than like other kind of business management theories from the past and like usually with other business management theories like there's do these 15 steps or here's your best practice guide to what this looks like

Whereas with free energy governance, it's not that at all because it has to be receptive to your environment.

So it really demands a spiritual embodiment of these principles to really do or even understand at all.

It really is a spiritual... I keep coming back to that.

That's what it feels like.

And you have to really own this and internalize it for it to be used.

Whereas you don't have to understand... You don't have to feel that with anything else in economics or corporate governance.

You can just follow the steps.

But here,

lot of the same things we talk about you know free energy governance are the same ways we talk about like creativity for example and a lot of like spiritual practices it's like a very like receptive dynamic environmental practice which like you really can't just put down to a series of concrete steps uh and so that's why i feel like i think this is both so powerful and also so frustrating at the same time because it's just like it's like how do you be creative like i don't know like

this is something you figure out by in conversation with your environment right it's the same thing with free energy governance like the most powerful things you can get from this theory no one's gonna like be able to directly teach you you have to kind of just live it um so yeah so calling this a theory is like even though it is grounded in like hardcore maths

at least for the way a lot of business people, including myself, will practice it, does not feel that way at all.

It feels much more of a spiritual mindset.

And that's very new for a lot of these kind of... I haven't experienced that before in a business context.


SPEAKER_02:
I'll give a few other notes.

Thank you, Tyler.

Very interesting.

The first point that theory should be problem or opportunity oriented.

I think Blue, that's where we would feel like we were getting our hands dirty with the theory.

And free energy governance gives a continuity between what might be happening in the analytics department

with the actual generative models and in the communications department and the tools they use and in the boardroom.

Whereas one thing that we could say about the traditional corporate governance theories is whether they were more mindset-based or more behavioral and practice-based, their limitation in relevance was that they were doing these three points, but then what would the work actually be about?

would the machine learning engineer actually be doing something totally ad hoc so there's always this like disarticulation between the narratives and the values and the broader purpose of the organization and then the implementation so here we're coming from the upper echelon to the front line and part of feg is i think that by

being imbued in theory even if this book was not heavily equation or simulation based yet it can provide a continuity within the organism within the corporation so i like here that um


SPEAKER_01:
You brought in spirituality, Tyler, and I'm sorry, like it says my Internet connection is unstable, so I'll apologize in advance if I'm cutting in and out.

But I like how you brought in spirituality to this and also creativity, because here it's like the job of the theory is to inspire upper echelon like question.

their own habits, right?

And so, like, in this way, it's very, like, it's like a koan, right?

Like, it's like, you know, some puzzle that you sit down to just, like, think about and solve and reflect upon.

So, like, the job of the theory is to be, like, a spiritual koan, like, to just think about it.

And then...

Secondly, like the creativity part, you're talking about creativity, Tyler, and also like interaction with the environment, like the what it's brought about literally by like interacting with the environment.

And there's a really cool book that I don't know if either of you guys have read or heard about.

It's called The Artist's Way.

and like literally it's just like a series of tasks that like get you into your environment so that you're like inspired to be more creative it's like a series of just like um it's it's in its own way like its own riddle or puzzle to be reflected on um in that that's what they lead you through in that book so it's just and that's actually that's actually why i mentioned that because i'm simultaneously reading the artist's way and also uh rick rubin he's a famous producer he just


SPEAKER_03:
released a book about creativity and like the way that they were talking about um creativity in both these books is very much about like bottoms up sense making and like listening to your environment i was like wow like a lot of even like the language is the same with

free energy governance, because at some level we're talking about the same thing.

And so it's just like, again, that's one of the things I love about free energy governance is that it is so broad.

It can encompass all of these different disciplines from creativity, corporate governance, ant colonies, whatever.


SPEAKER_02:
Just a few short notes.

Receptivity is not passivity.

It's the opposite.

It's the sentient engagement.

the receptivity with the generative process that fine-tunes our generative model so that we can be who we expect and prefer to be so receptive and engaged with the niche does not mean sitting back that's probably been clear and then also the framework shouldn't be providing specifics i know that's a normative claim

But it's like, if somebody said, I have a linear regression machine and it always comes up with positive linear regressions, it'd be like, well, let's maybe separate that.

Let's have the neutral linear regressor, and then we can have a second order preference for ones that are positive, or let's filter out the ones that are positive only.

So in a way, because it is a framework or a theory for this strategic renewal discussion, which is the positioning of the book,

it is at a level above any specific practice because just like you couldn't say, well, a wing or a tooth or a poison is like simply a high fitness adaptation of an organism outside of its context and niche, there's no practice or any pattern

that would apply to all different organisms or organizations in their niche so the discussion had to be moved back to this not ultimately neutral space in fact a very principled space but one that gave the expressivity to then specialize according to the dimensions that we basically looked at in the parts of the book and in this table from today


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome, thanks.

Okay, so moving on from the dimensions of theory, I think Bijan goes through a very good summary of all of the things up until this point, I think.

So he says, free energy governance provides rich and new meaning to existing concepts and establishes new relationships.

First, top-down, bottom-up prediction processing is applied to strategic management and defined in form of a generative process.

Integrating circular causality in circular causality, top-down belief propagation, and bottom-up message passing.

in pursuit of one objective, minimize surprise to resist entropy to persist, powered by one first order principle of least action, i.e.

free energy minimization.

A purpose-directed firm is the foundation for free energy governance's top-down bottom-up circular causality to come and stay alive.

And he goes on to say in the same context that upper echelon communication is centered around four dimensions, dynamically linked in FEG's circular causality.

Purpose, prediction models, predictions, and stimuli.

The simplicity and plasticity of the language are critical to ensure that reach and inclusion of team members are optimized.

More importantly, firm members must be incentivized to stimulate challenge predictions.

Underlying prediction models, according to the first order free energy organization principle, will self-evidently evolve by the way of unsupervised self-organization.

And he refers back to the structure, cognition, and capabilities that we've been linking through this entire text.

So this, I like, but I'm not...

I'm not sure how to, like he says, the simplicity and plasticity of the language are critical to ensure that reach and inclusion of team members are optimized.

I'm not sure how to do that.

How do you make language simple and plastic to ensure optimal reach and inclusion, inclusivity?

I don't know if you guys have thoughts on that.

I'm like, where are my step-by-step procedures that I'm supposed to follow to make this happen?


SPEAKER_02:
I think there's many angles on it, just a few comments.

One, a starting point would be making sure that the language are in the native or preferred tongue of that person or augmented entity.

So having the active inference ontology translated into multiple language is one first step, but then there's some second order considerations about still using language.

And then the self-organization

I thought, well, just pouring water on a mountain landscape, the water is going to self-organize, but it might not follow the path of least action to organize the way you want.

Okay, so then you modify the generative model or the generative process and you put a ditch here and a wall here.

And again, it follows a path of least action and it self-organizes given the constraints.

So it's like a combination of whatever will be, will be.

However it unfolds is how it is going to unfold.

We can't really dissent from that level of tautology.

However, that is the space which modifications of the niche and of the generative model can then self-organize to be whatever it will be.


SPEAKER_01:
That speaks...

a lot too to like the receptivity and um action or interaction active inference is interactive right with the environment and the niche um the inability to separate those things uh okay so he says so this is back here free energy governance provides rich and new meaning to existing concepts and establishes new relationships so this is another one of the new relationships um that bijan claims he says enactment coined by carl wick and astutely applied by

Smircich and Stubbert's strategy process has conceptually inspired free energy governance.

And he goes on to say, enactment is redefined as an active inference.

Essentially, free energy governance is liberating upper echelon from the overwhelming cognitive distortion that their biggest challenge is taming or taming uncertainty.

When, instead they should be really surfing it and like, this is kind of these cool 2 references he throws in here unless environment is redefined as a purpose directed.

An action centric generative prediction challenge in the form of prediction error minimization firms will continue being incapacitated by the faithful pursuit of adaptive fitness.

More importantly, redefining strategy as top-down, bottom-up predictive coding lays the foundation to optimally leverage and co-evolve the human-machine potential.

Cognition.

I don't know if you guys have comments here on this, or we can move on if not.

Okay, and then the third relationship that Bijan describes is he says, dynamic board capabilities in the form of duality management are an entirely new genre of upper echelon capabilities that FEG establishes.

He goes on to say that inactive prediction processing becomes manifest in duality management in the form of balancing financial and strategic control, as well as exploitation and exploration.

Duality management is all about probabilistic resource reconfigurations in superposition waiting to be enacted.

Duality stewardship is FEG's essential governance mandate.

And then he continues later.

The R&D or research and development percentage share of total revenues is potentially a good indicator of a looming financial control trap.

Within each industry, there is a rough percentage benchmark for R&D investment for organic reinvention.

Once a firm operates year on year below industry R&D investment standards, financial control is likely to be the only control left.

and describes that as the capabilities.

And so here, like, I really appreciated the section of the book because I think that we're starting to get some good, like, how do we know if we're minimizing free energy?

How do we know if we're adapting free energy governance?

Like, are we doing a good job?

What are the benchmarks?

Like, these are the kinds of things that I'm looking for.

And so here, I liked this, like, you have to be investing at least the minimum industry standard into research and development

to ensure that you're doing the strategic part and not just going for financial exploitation, like the R&D is the exploration part.

And so I thought that this is kind of a concrete application of what we've been looking at so far.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, thank you.

The superposition, it's a quantum shout-out, and it made me think about some task that needs to be done.

We need to vectorize some images and then print stickers.

There's a superposition of plans.

We could upskill, we could hire somebody, we could acquire the company, we could do all of these different plans, including crossovers with the different plans.

And those pure plans, maybe in their extreme form, are never even on the table.

But the...

organization can think of its strategy as this mixed state that is truly quantum and it's doing a quantum optimization over those pathways maybe not even needing to brute force through them but rather just letting the quantum annealing work its magic so that's one interesting and then the other piece is um like you mentioned blue once the firm

is below a critical point in its research and development only financial control is left and so it's almost like um if if there's still wiggle room to turn left and right it's still a very maneuverable car but if you're in a position where only one of those sides wiggle can only happen to one direction like okay well now we need to be cutting costs that's our only degree of freedom is cutting costs now

It doesn't even say that's not going to be a functional strategy, just that that is on that pathway to entropic decline, because by having a reduction of affordances, you are on the pathway to the ultimate reduction of affordances, which is the failure to persist.

And as long as you have options on the table and the expectation of future options on the table, if not more, you're in the game of persisting.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, thank you for those thoughts.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Bijan says, how to make it all work in practice is a daunting task.

There is no best practices catalog.

First of all, best practices should be considered a potential source of inertia.

Throw those things out the window.

We don't need them.

We need first principles to empower structural organization, formal and informal throughput, environmental engagement, and capability to foster self-organizing processes.

Free energy governance does exactly this.

And Tyler, you had spoken earlier to like the throwing away best practices also, or like there is not a map to do that here in free energy governance.

So we don't have a 15 step book.


SPEAKER_03:
though it's also the case too if you like make this analogy between like currency governance and creativity spirituality like it's always the case where they can't say like okay you're just all of these steps and this is exactly how it's going to work out for you but i think what's effective a lot of times too say like hey well this is what it doesn't look like um like for example if you find yourself um

kind of enslaved to your addictions, for example, you may not be on like the spiritual, the spiritual path, or you may be kind of like off course a little bit, right?

So there are things that you can focus on, okay, well, I can't say define what it is, but I can define what is it.

And I think we have some like good clues to that from this book, even though it might not be as prescriptive as we might like.


SPEAKER_01:
All right, and speaking of persisting, I almost wanted to skip to this slide directly.

Why should this business exist and prevail in the first place?

Bajan asked this question in the middle of the book, and I don't know, why do any of us exist or prevail in the first place?

We're all just hanging out, minimizing free energy, taking the path of least action, I guess.

It's just interesting.

Why do you exist and prevail?

And he encourages people to...

ask themselves this um as part of like the governance mandate um what like why should we exist and prevail for what for what reason um i thought i think that's always a good question yeah one thought on that we can always take the um how did things come to be


SPEAKER_02:
question and just whether we take that descriptively or as a mystery, but given where we are or how we recognize ourself, it's a little bit like a stay or leave question.

We can stay on our path of least action or we can push the trim tab a little bit, push the rudder a little bit, and then be on a different path of least action.

So again, we don't get to dissent from being on a path of least action, but we have affordances, which are our

space of local adjacencies.

And this claim, as I think you're pointing to, it's something that the individual employee could ask themselves.

It's something that the team could ask themselves or the department and the organization.

And maybe the organization's level of conversation is happening in the boardroom for certain kinds of organizations.

And it's like, should we make the next six months look a lot like the last six months?

Should we pivot in this direction or should we just shut it down?

And having a space for those kinds of multi-level questions and meaning finding, I think part of the subtext is that's not a waste of time.

That's not a distraction from the work itself.

This is like the fountain that the work performance or alignment on any given scale actually flows from.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just to add on that, I think the context of this book has been large corporations that there's a legal mandate for this thing to exist and for you to meet the obligations of your people who are financing the business.

Whereas there might be more of lifestyle businesses you might have, or there might be a nonprofit or something where the free energy governance mandate to survive at all costs may not make as much sense.

Maybe this business organization is more of an extension of your personal passion rather than being this own entity that needs to survive on its own terms.

So I think it's also important to reflect like, okay,

free energy governance is this useful frame for thinking about it, but like, am I really trying to create this larger entity that exists independently of myself?

Or is this like, what am I actually trying to do here?

And is this a relevant framework?


SPEAKER_02:
One other thought on that, with the organism organization, conversation in mind, are we a seasonal grass?

Are we a 17 year cicada?

and then have that conversation, even if that's playful or in the beginning stages of team formation or of DAO formation, so that if some people think that they're going to be building the 100,000 year Arctic vaults and some other group of people think that they're doing a one-time concert, that those can be like recognized and integrated in a way that isn't just as much of just like,

keep things going which is how maybe this question can seem at first pass that it's just about existence and and and prevalence but existence and prevalence in the biological space is so rich and complex that it would make sense it would be that way for organizations too definitely um okay and then here um


SPEAKER_01:
Bijan quotes like, and this is part of a long quote, and we're going to carry over these over across the next two slides.

But he says Jan Stahlberg's practice relevant statements from Stahlberg 2021, the reference, if anybody wants to look it up, concerning transparency, communication, and reaching out to the bottom should inspire management practice.

The first of these statements is everyone is informed in real time about everything.

And then Stahlberg goes on to say, I believe looking at some of the core propositions of free energy governance, this is free energy governance, connecting top and bottom in circular causality of sensemaking with the least friction and optimal response time.

So this is like something that I've wondered about.

Like, how do you prioritize information flow, top down, bottom up?

belief propagation and message passing.

And like they're saying like full transparency, everybody knows everything all of the time.

And that to me was kind of like mind blowing because it's not how I would ever think to run a company, like not at all.

Daniel.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

I hear you on that.

I have a slightly different reading here.

I'm just imagining starting with this agreement and

Wherever you are, there you are.

So whatever you're informed about, that's what you're informed about.

Whatever your situational awareness is, that's what it is.

And then that's the part that's been infuriating.

There's no suggestions for who should be in what messaging channel or who should be on what email thread or who should be in what video chat.

but whatever we do decide with the chats and the emails and the meetings that will be your local message passing your information environment your capacity of for inference and action so i don't think this means that every single employee or contractor has the full dashboard i think everyone's dashboard is respected though as their dashboard which helps

bring the discussion to like what function, what accessibility do they need and so on?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think this is part one, but John was talking about a management theory called like open governance, I think it was called, which is like the extreme version of everyone knows everything all the time.

And he was criticizing that because he was saying, well, if you give everybody all the information all the time,

that doesn't necessarily give them the tools for making meaning of that or having that be relevant to like their specific context so i think what he's implying here is like yes like you give every like everyone access to information as well as tools for processing that information and like a locally relevant way i don't think he means just like pure chaos information dump but could be reading into it


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, Blue's paused, but I hear you on that, Tyler.


UNKNOWN:
Cool.


SPEAKER_03:
I think her internet may have cut out.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

Cool.

What other parts have you found interesting so far?

Oh, there you go.

You're back, Blue.

You're back, Blue.

Maybe you can disable your video if you want.


SPEAKER_00:
Sorry.


SPEAKER_02:
blink you can disable your video blue i want to give a thought on some synchronous and asynchronous things but you never really know when it will be now and real for blue but we're in a different now and real moment tyler


SPEAKER_03:
I think she's back in R&L.


SPEAKER_00:
I think I got it.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Continue, Blue.

Thank you.

It was fine.

It's all fine.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Okay.

So this is, again, to continue quoting Stahlberg, value creation, in my experience, has been usually determined by a combination of the following governance imperatives.

First, you must start with a clear purpose and long-term goal.

Prepare to invest for the long term and into structure.

Second, you need to continuously question yourself.

Paranoia is key.

Third, team decisions are critical.

Create a culture that empowers and encourages people to contribute, to take decisions, and not to be risk averse.

In summary, it really comes down to three things, communication, transparency, and respect.

And so reading this whole quote in context is kind of what

Made me think that like they're encouraging open channels of communication.

Everything flows to all the people all the time.

But that was just it might not be the read the correct reading.

And I do think that in more in what you're saying, Daniel, like you have your information channel and like you live in that river and like that is where everything comes to you in real time and whatever, like you're just in the river that you can sense make about, right?

Like you don't necessarily need to be in the ocean when you live in a river.

And then that makes more sense to me in terms of information flow.

Do you guys have more thoughts here on value creation?

Transparency, respect, communication?

No?

Okay.

All right, so Stauber goes on to say,

Oh, no, this is actually Bajan.

Sorry.

So Bajan says, the essential governance challenge in a discontinuous and distributive world is now a matter of setting free the self-organizing optimization of top-down, bottom-up prediction error minimization, learning to infer.

The firm is the generative model.

The continuous nature of strategic renewal makes prediction modeling as well as prediction error minimization an integral and direct default mode network centric.

dimension of traditional monitoring, advisory, and boundary-spanning board responsibilities.

Effectively, in the absence of board-level meta-capabilities as developed in this book, the board can no longer fulfill even its most basic and traditional responsibilities.

And I think that maybe Bijan here is calling out the discontinuous nature of the world and how disruptions are regular and things move fast.

change is always happening and the board needs to get on board or not.

But that's the wrap up of this chapter.

Do you guys have any thoughts on this?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, one thing is whatever is working in the niche today, if you expect the niche to remain the same, you can keep your strategy the same and it will be the same.

However,

Biological ecosystems have variability and patterns over different timescales, and also organisms and organizations develop.

So it'd be like saying if the two-year-old baby

can't fulfill its meta capability to learn and to change, it will eventually no longer be able to fill even its most basic and traditional responsibilities.

And so that is where we start to see general claims about system operation and development and evolution, and potentially the ways those are linked in the FEP with the kinds of conversations that today can happen

by differently framing the upper echelon frontline dialectic.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, I think that that's it.

So we're gonna get in next week to discuss the last two

um sections of the book and then hopefully bring bijan and maybe you if you're interested anyone else who's interested in maybe discussing this material hopefully we'll get some new voices and perspectives um that would really be great so thanks guys nice to see you thank you bye

## 5IGzzm28qec

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome.

It's March 28th, 2023.

We're here in Active Bookstream number 1.012.

Off to you, Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
Great.

So we will be continuing our discussion of the book, Governing Continuous Transformation by Bijan Kesri.

And this actually is going to wrap up our coverage of this book.

We're not going to go into the interviews covered in the final section, but we're going to just cover this concluding part and then

wrap it up now.

And then in a few weeks, we will rejoin for a discussion section or a discussion session.

So if you've been following along with the live streams to this point, please get in touch with us so that you can come on and discuss some of the contents of the book with us.

And hopefully the author is available to join us.

So we are the Active Inference Institute, a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning and practicing applied active inference.

You can reach us at social media at all of these links.

This is also a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.


SPEAKER_02:
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we will be attempting to follow good video etiquette for your livestreams.


SPEAKER_04:
Again, there's many ways to participate and collaborate with the Active Inference Institute, so if you are interested in active inference and are not yet collaborating with us,

just get in touch, activeinference.org is our website, and there's a link to fill out a form if you want to contribute in other ways to the Institute, besides joining us on the live stream.

All right, so the goal of this book stream is to conclude our discussions of this book.

So we are going to cover chapters 12 and 13.

I want to skip to the right back.

So we're going to cover chapters 12 and 13 in this part three conclusion of the book.

So

Chapter 12 is the future research agenda, and Chapter 13 is outperformance and survival as a matter of self-organization.

So we can just quickly introduce ourselves before jumping into the contents.

I'm Blue.

I'm an independent research consultant in New Mexico, and I'll pass it off to Tyler.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm Tyler.

I'm a protocol designer and DAO researcher also in California.

And Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
I'm a researcher in California.


SPEAKER_04:
Did I say California?

I meant to say New Mexico.

I think I said New Mexico.

Did I say California?

Oh my gosh.


SPEAKER_01:
All California.

I'm probably getting confused.


SPEAKER_04:
Maybe I said California.

I'm having visions of the beach.

Okay, so chapter 12 has a few different sections.

Again, this is like future research directions.

Bijan discusses language and communication, embodied cognition, artificial intelligence, board capabilities, developmental paths.

And then chapter 13 is

is really just a provocative conclusion section and reminds us of some of the things that we've learned in the book so far, and also outperformance and survival as a matter of free energy minimization.

So we will jump right into the content.

Tyler, do you want to read this first part of the abstract for us?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

SEG is the product of a multidisciplinary research project connecting the dots among strategy, governance, and neuroscience research, opening a new conversation of headlines, introducing the free energy principle of strategy management.

SEG redefines the nexus of structure and cognition, ABV, so attention-based view, advances the dynamic capability view, and from the managerial to the core level, and establishes strategy as an inactive Bayesian inference challenge.

In terms of future research, four areas should advance the optimization of FEG.

One, language and communication, in particular, explainability of corporate purpose, prediction models, and predictions.

Two, body cognition in terms of a deeper understanding around the neurobiology underlying leadership's world engagement, as well as false inference.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, and I'll leave this next part.


SPEAKER_04:
So the third area is artificial intelligence, in particular, the strategy application of AI-powered machine algorithms.

And fourth, board capabilities developmental paths, in particular, the board's ability to collectively develop meta capabilities.

Free energy governance as a framework provides the fundamental building blocks that empower a firm to implement free energy minimization as a self-organizing principle.

Structure, top-down, bottom-up connectivity.

Cognition, environmental enactment, and capabilities, duality management.

Within the FEG framework, many vibrant strategy research topics lend themselves to be repurposed as a matter of optimizing free energy minimization.


SPEAKER_02:
More specifically, survival rather than just performance is the critical dependent variable.


SPEAKER_04:
So getting into the first section, language and communication.

So I just pulled a couple of sentences out of this section.

Bijan says that the effectiveness of free energy governance is critically determined by transparency in communication, specifically around the explainability of corporate purpose, prediction models and predictions to obtain the most possible human energy for productive effort.

And I think like this is really something the communication overall is an area that I would like to discuss with Bijan further.

But he does really kind of clarify some of the questions that we've been having over the last couple of weeks.

here in this section and even maybe the next section about what specifically needs to be communicated to all members of the firm and at all levels.

So he really does kind of clarify.

He says, if organization is emergent in communication as we believe, then it is not a being, but a becoming.

And that's a quote from Taylor and Van Every 2000.

And then he also says, language is not a tool, but a force.

And with this, I think he specifically is referring to like a force that holds the firm together, like contributes to the self-organizing purpose and sustainability of the firm.

And really he does talk a lot about the purpose of the firm, both in this chapter and the next as like everybody needs to know what is the point for the firm's existence or for the corporation's existence.

And so I think that that is one aspect that might not necessarily be like a governance strategy or like something that's like internal, like a method of operation.

That's like, you know, we think about like the top level executives, but something that like, why are we here?

What are we doing?

What purpose are we serving as a corporation, as a company?

And I think that like, that is like one reasonable thing that can be communicated to team members at all levels.


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know if you guys have any thoughts here or.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so one thing that was like not really clear on about what the genre is getting at here was what it means to have explainable purpose, because on one level, like the F.E.G., like ultimate purpose, as I understand it, is just like survival.

I'm not sure if he meant purpose in like some other sense of like survival.

I don't know, if we are improving our customers' access to healthcare or something like that, that style level of purpose.

And I wasn't quite clear what he meant.

And he didn't quite give that many examples.

So I'm not sure if you guys have any thoughts or a clear sense of what he meant.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, very good question.

It does seem to be like there's

competing communications around what purpose is is purpose in this deflationary sense merely survival and persistence at which point the clear communication would just be around whatever we are we need to continue even if that involves change versus more sub purposes or topical performances which then might resemble


SPEAKER_04:
standard non-survival oriented purposes like to deliver the most x in y yeah I'm sorry so I would question also if survival is the purpose of free energy governance or if free energy minimization is the purpose like I think about you know when a firm swallows another firm like you know in M&A right like so

you know, that then the little firm is not, the purpose is not to survive, right?

Like the purpose is to become like amalgamated or whatever, subsumed by the larger corporation.


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry, sorry if I cut you off or interrupted your thought.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and I guess something that I feel like has been not,

Maybe I just haven't gotten it, but not necessarily consistently communicated as whether purpose is at the highest level of organization or at sub levels.

So in the same way as a pancreas cell may not know the meta purpose of the pancreas.

I don't know anything about biology, so I'm not misstating something here.

Is it necessarily true that an individual team has to always keep in mind the larger meta purpose of this organization?

Or is it really OK to have something that's more relevant to its subunit organization?

And that hasn't always been clear to me.

I'm still kind of struggling with that.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so I do think that Bijan specifically, when he was talking about purpose, and I think that it comes more in the next chapter, but it might have been this chapter, I don't know, it's all blurring together, just one big chapter.

but he talks about purpose being on the front lines.

The people that are on the front lines are as much determining the purpose as they are communicating the purpose.

So it might be not a top-down directional communication method, it's a reciprocal.

Like communicating the purpose of the organization is probably like a bi-directional information flow, ideally anyway.

So like if the people at the top don't know what the people at the bottom think the purpose is, and the people at the bottom don't know what the people at the top think the purpose is, like there's no unity.


SPEAKER_02:
And then the firm has a divided purpose, I guess.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think that makes sense.

I mean, my take on what he's saying is like, it's like this co-created, maybe amorphous thing that you're not necessarily like pinning down and defining and putting on like a landing page on your website.

Maybe it's something that's more of like a shared felt and sense thing.

And so like, that's what I think he's saying, but like, he doesn't explain it that way.

So I'm not totally sure.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so these are good questions that we will, I think, hopefully have the opportunity to discuss further, for sure.

Okay, unless there's anything else, we'll go to embodied cognition, where he says, brain, body, and environment together form one integrated cognitive embodied inactive extended system.

Recasting the phenomena of false inference and institutional psychosis as a matter of impaired prediction error minimization

may highlight how critically firm performance is also a function of upper echelons embodied cognition as determined amongst other by psychological aspects, as well as neurobiology.

So like in this section, there was like a big, like a whole bunch of like neuro neuroscience, like about dopamine and the reward system and prediction error minimization.

And obviously like a firm doesn't have like dopamine as a prediction error, like

or reward, but they do.

The whole firm isn't getting a dopamine hit, but the individual members within that firm are getting that dopamine, I guess, when their predictions are correct.

So, yeah, this was kind of like a... It was like a big stretch for me to jump into... I guess the embodied cognition of the firm is...

the embodied cognition of the upper echelon, but shouldn't it be like the embodied cognition of all of the firm members?

Or how do you get that like bi-directional integration of information without like the bottom mattering just as much as the top here?

I don't know.

This was like fuzzy and weird for me.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, so, I mean, I think like at one level organization, it's, you know, like all each member's individual, like dopamine receptors and everything.

Right.

But then at the next level, like you can abstract that away and say, maybe it's like the response to, uh, financing, like maybe having more access to like venture capital funding, for example, is a way of like motivating action for an organization or, um,

visitor growth on a landing page it's like the signal like hey like you're going in the right direction like double down here and keep keep moving or keep exploring so that's maybe how I would think of it at like an organizational level uh in a way that maybe feels kind of like at a different level than just the sum of the dopamine receptors of all of its members


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, like hearing you on the gamification metrics for the organization, like hits on the landing page or the number of subscribers or the number of viewers or the number of Twitter followers, all those things that we know that are like rewarding us personally with dopamine, like why, I guess like that, that's like an easy bridge to cross regarding like dopamine and institutional success or prediction or minimization, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, what I mean by that is a little bit differently.

It's not like, yeah, like on an individual level, like if you see more hits on your landing page, like that's going to have a dopamine response with you as an individual.

But I think some of these things, like for example, like press coverage or getting venture capital funding, for example, like those produce systemic changes in an organization that aren't just merely about the dopamine response in the individual.

And that's something that I feel like is like a higher level change that is like harder to explain.

I'm struggling to come up with the words for it, but just like when you get like a lot of funding into an organization or a startup, or you start getting traction on something, like it produces a kind of like social contagion.

I don't know if that's the right word that is more than just the sum of its parts of dopamine changes of its individuals.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Anything else here, or we can move on to?

Artificial intelligence.


SPEAKER_04:
So here, Bajan says, free energy minimization is a machine logic in its own right, empowering living as well as artifactual organisms to optimally resist entropy.

And this is, I think, a shout out to the many

people who are working on using active inference in machine learning instead of reinforcement learning.

So that's kind of great.

And like he really talks about like the ethics of that, like what happens when we like, you know, have like, he talks about the singularity, right?

Like when machines become like smarter than us.

And he says that effectively the challenge is moving from coding, like programming with even with active inference, right?

So coding to ethics, like how are we going to ethically like program the machines so that, you know, they're not like self-driving cars aren't running over, you know, people or whatever, right?

Like, so there's the ethics and then to survival, right?

like to human survival, right?

Like why, like, yeah, if the machines get to a point where they don't need us anymore, like why should they follow the ethics that we've programmed into them?

I guess, Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this was a very interesting section.

First, we can imagine a kind of trolley car problem with some organization and some people and eventually the kind of decidability that's gonna have to come into play there.

And the other provocative aspect in this from coding to ethics to survival

is we often hear you can't get an ought from an is.

So no amount of mechanic definition is going to result in an ethical imperative.

Can't get an ought from an is.

And that kind of describes this codings to ethics difficulty.

You can't really get an ethic just from how something is encoded.

But in a way, survival is being proposed as a post-ethical imperative

a first principles we couldn't necessarily go from is to ought but we can go from is through ought back to is which is survival and so it kind of re-insinuates a type of first principle ethic more like a work ethic than like a moral ethic

but that opens up a lot of questions about what kinds of ethics are of what statuses under or after the survival imperative.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

It's interesting.

Cause like,

I think with active inference or free energy governance specifically, there are two ways where I think it's interesting.

One level is thinking about an organization as an organism where it's independent of my human experience of that organism, of what makes this organism survive.

And then I think the reason why I care about it the most, which is my own human experience of how meaning is created for me in an organization.

And I think ultimately, that's personally at least what I care about the most.

And then when I think about AI, I'm like, okay, well, even if you have an embedded AI on your system, if it doesn't mean something personally to the humans in that organization, I don't really care, even if it makes the organization survive more, or more likely to survive.

So it's just interesting, these two different takes of like,

okay, even if it makes the organization more likely to survive, why do I care if that isn't meaningful to me as a human in that organization?


SPEAKER_02:
Not sure if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so then Bajan also says, first order principles, such as AI's free energy minimization, will lay the foundation for governance models to increasingly self-organize.

Um, so I think that like the, the, like, this is very meta.

It's like the, um, how Daniel was saying, like, we go from coding to ethics to survival.

I think like maybe ethics is like the fog between like coding and survival, um, where like free energy minimization, um, like is about persistence, um, and like can be used in coding and like will.

lay the foundation for governance models to increasingly self-organize.

So like self-organization based on free energy minimization, I guess.

Yeah, the section was interesting.

And I do think that there's like, John is super excited about AI and like we got a long way to go.

I mean, we'll get there.

It's not impossible.

It's just going to take some time, I think.


SPEAKER_02:
Any other thoughts here in artificial intelligence?

I mean, I have lots of other thoughts here, but I think like getting Bashan's perspective will be really fun.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I guess I'm just not, I think the thing I really am not quite understanding here is the explainability piece.

And I think I was trying to mention this earlier of like, if you have an AI that's like bubbling up insights about your organization, saying like, hey, this is what's going on, or like, this is the right answer of what you should do in this situation.

But it isn't like understood by the people in that organization.

Like, does it even matter?

And is that what Bajon means by explainability, right?

Like, even if AI gives you the right answer, but it isn't like,

understood and integrated into the people in that organization, is that AI actually useful in that organization?

And that's the tension I've been grappling with here.

And I don't quite understand.

And he talks a lot about explainability of predictions.

I'm not sure if that's exactly what he's talking about or not.

But good question for Bijan.


SPEAKER_02:
For sure.


SPEAKER_04:
And then the last section for future

development is the board capabilities, developmental paths.

So he says indeed the board is ultimately responsible for anticipating the firm's future capability constellation, including that of the board itself to sustainably succeed with continuous strategic renewal.

However, to avoid the cognitive traps related to individual board profiles that layman and wallet and identified, we must study the cognitive micro foundations of capability development at the board level.

To date, this area represents a void in both strategy and governance research.

So I thought that this was cool, especially with respect to the Active Interference Institute, as we are fleshing out our own board, and the board decides what this and future boards will be capable of doing now and forever.

And like, they can always, all this stuff can be changed with approval of the board.

Right.

So I think that, um, I liked this like capability constellation, um, phrase.

I thought that that was kind of neat because there's a lot of like, there's a lot of little like, um,

like sub capabilities within the board.

Like there's committees and this and that, and like everybody can do or take care of many different things.

Or like, what don't we want the board to do?

Like the possibilities are pretty like endless and expansive, but like what is purposeful and what will gain like the most bang for the buck in terms of what should the board focus on?

That's kind of, I don't know, crazy.

And then he outlined a little bit of these cognitive traps, but I didn't go too far into them here.


SPEAKER_02:
Do you guys have anything here on board capabilities?

Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, so I did go actually a little bit into them.

So what capabilities are required at the level of the individual board member when the necessary firm capabilities are not

yet developed.

And so as Bajan was thinking about this, he goes to this theory U, which I had never heard of before.

And so he outlines three of the principles developed in this theory U, and it looks like that there's quite a few.

But he talked about like, what are the capabilities required at the board member level when we're defining the firm capabilities, like the board capabilities for now and forever.

And so these I really liked.

So he says, number nine, practice, principle number nine is what it is.

Practice deep listening and dialogue.

Connect with your mind and heart wide open.

When connecting to other people and contacts, open up all four channels of listening.

Listen from what you know, from what surprises you, from the whole, and from what you sense wants to emerge, the emerging whole.

And I really liked this, like four different ways of listening.

Yeah.

something that we don't always think about.

We just listen.

And we listen in one way.

We're just like, I listened, I heard this.

But when you're looking at listening in different aspects, it's different.

Listening from what surprises you.

Can you listen to it four times and pretend like you don't know anything?

Pretend like, how does this relate to what you already know?

I thought that this was really nice.

I don't know if you guys have

but like if you were excited about it as I was as excited, or I can read a collective sense-making next.

Or maybe Tyler wants to read collective sense-making.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah sure and I was just gonna say I really love the convergence of like new AG and corporate governance uh literature kind of converging in free energy governance it's wonderful um all right so number 10 collective sense making so use social presence in theater and embodied knowing so whatever process you use to make sense of the learning Journey what matters most is that you pay discipline attention to all the voices and manifestations

of the field uh paying discipline attention means that you are intentionally holding back all inclinations to mix your own interpretations or solutions just spend all that because you want the data of the field to speak for you the data this field cannot the field cannot speak to you if your mind is too busy so that was also cool and then um


SPEAKER_04:
Oh yeah.

But the data of the field cannot speak to you if your mind is too busy expressing opinions and proposing solutions.

Oh, that cuts to the core.

Yeah.

Sorry.

I guess I cut that off and then whatever.

My slide making capabilities were subpar.

And then the last one, the last principle is principle 22.

I'm like, now I'm like, I want to read this theory.

You're like, what is this all about?

I'm like totally interested in learning more about these principles.

Number 22 is create enabling infrastructures that allow the system to sense and see itself.

And he quotes, making the system sense and see itself can change the coordination dynamics among the players in a field, moving them toward ecosystem awareness.

As traditional governance models are increasingly uprooted in a discontinuous world, there is not only a need for a new governance logic, but correspondingly new board capabilities, developmental paths.

specifically duality management as a dynamic board capability demands dedicated research.

Um, and that duality management just to like remind everyone is like financial and strategic control.

So it's like both of those things, not one or the other, like they, they both work together.

Okay.

And then we can go into chapter 13, or if you guys have more thoughts about this, these theory principles.

No.

We can go into this chapter 13.

Tyler, do you want to read this portion of the abstract first?


SPEAKER_01:
Classical cause-effect determinism, upon which the paradigm of strategy management, as well as governance research, has been built, is uprooted.

The parian academic's relentless pursuit of empirically establishing, qualifying, and then falsifying mechanistic cause-and-effect relationships is struggling to inspire the business community, which is itself reeling too often with the self-inflicted limitations of its own

of its very world models together academia and practice are challenged to reconnect organizing to that self-evidencing dimension of the universe's uh information system ifg is as valid for business organizations as it is for political contracts or for that matter matter navigating geopolitical dislocations and debt cycle disruptions thank you and i'll read this last piece


SPEAKER_04:
It says any organism that suffers from one top-down bottom-up hierarchical disconnectivity and a top-down dominance of supervised content prescriptions, two, an urge to adapt to the outer world amid an incapacity for an active inference, and three, the non-existence of both a timeless deep purpose as well as meta capabilities is naturally entropy bound.

In the absence of a generative Bayesian model, we become incapacitated.

Indeed, camping on seesaws is the categorical imperative of survival pursuing self-organization.

Organization as a means, not an end.

It is right here where the fundamental difference between traditional corporate governance and free energy governance models lie.

Free energy governance sees through formal organization as organizing manifests itself as self-organizing generative model operating as a whole.

within and without the firm, embracing self-organization as a self-evidencing universal information system.

And so he makes like, I just pulled out several claims that he made in this chapter and a couple like little summary sections, because this is like the official summary.

He says, together, academia and practice are challenged to reconnect organizing to that self-organizing or self-evidencing dimension inherent

inherent of the universe's information system to purposefully create, extend, or modify the firm's resource base.

And that's a quote from Helfet et al.

And he says to thrive and survive.

Purposeful behavior is one of life's defining features, but it is only possible if living systems operate as a whole.

It is only by managing information that the cell can impose order on the extreme complexity of its operations and therefore fulfill its ultimate purpose.

purpose of staying alive and reproducing.

And this is a quote from Nurse 2020.

And like, I just, I don't know, this is so hard because, and like, I'll always go back to like Mike Levin's beautiful explanation of like the constraints imposed by the larger system on a smaller system, because a cell's ultimate purpose is not staying alive and reproducing.

In fact, like if it's one cell, sure.

Like, but in a multicellular organism, some cells, like the purpose of the cell is to die.

Like, I mean, we all start off with like webbing between the fingers and that webbing is cells.

And then that webbing, you know, goes away.

Like, so that cell in like the construction of our existence, our morphology, like its purpose is to die.

So, um, I guess that that's, well, like we were talking about MNA earlier, like the purpose of the smaller firm that gets subsumed by a larger firm is also to like die or become incorporated.

or to somehow integrate with the current larger firm.

And so these constraints, I don't know.

So like the nested hierarchical levels, like each top level or each larger level constrains the function of the inner level and also that information.

So, sorry, I have to just like say that because it's otherwise, it's not,

Staying alive and reproducing is not the purpose of sauce.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know if you guys have thoughts here.

I can move on.


SPEAKER_04:
Bichon says, free energy as an information theoretic rather than thermodynamic measure is uniquely positioned to measure and guide a firm's survivability as a self-organizing information as well as belief system.

And he quotes this book from Lindsay 2021.

Daniel, have you read this?

I haven't read it, but it's like a Friston memoir, I guess.

He says, Friston recalls a thought he had as a teenager.

There must be a way of understanding everything by starting from nothing.

If I'm only allowed to start off with one point in the entire universe, can I derive everything else I need from that?

In Friston's world, the free energy principle is now the nearly nothing that can explain almost everything.

I like this quote from this book.

And also, I've got to go read it now.

I don't know, is it a Friston memoir?

Maybe it's just an interview or a long article or something like that.

But I haven't read it, but it's someone else giving a detail of Friston's life and ideas, I guess.


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know if you guys have thoughts here.

No, yes, no.

Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
So I just want to just call out, we just talked about like very early on, like maybe it was like the fourth video.

We did talk about like, you're going, what are we talking about?

Like thermodynamic versus information, theoretic, free energy, like go back because we really did get into that.

So if you're going, what are we talking about?

We did talk about that quite a bit in one of the early videos.

So now might be a good time to just like refresh your memory that we did detail that.

if that's looking weird to you, go get a refresher.

Okay, and then claim here.

In summary, the inferential discovery of informational dissonance as an error minimizing source for optimizing the accuracy of posterior beliefs, rather than explaining dissonance away, is essential to firm survival in discontinuous environments.

And I liked this like informational dissonance part.

This was like a couple videos ago, not that far in the past, but yeah.

So this like brought up the initial communication question for Bhajan.

Like, does everybody need to know everything all of the time?

And also like your information getting updated with like the outside information to like resolve the dissonance.

Anyway, there's that.

Do you guys have thoughts here?

All right, I'm gonna make somebody else read these because I'm tired of talking, tired of hearing myself talk.

Tyler, do you wanna do this?

This is the building blocks of an active inference.

So this is a nice little summary recap of what we've learned so far.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Building blocks of an active inference.

So one is the four states that's active action, sensory perception, internal from resources and external, the hidden unknowns to one internal external, external Markovian boundary.

The site where actions upon hidden states generate outcomes that feed in circular causality, our perception and allow the precision enhancing, updating of prior beliefs, predictions.

Three, one first order principle, free energy minimization as a measure of minimizing equivocally error and uncertainty, i.e.

the divergence between predictions, prior beliefs and outcomes, posterior beliefs.

Eventually, everything becomes miserable.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
And so Bijan makes this claim.

that once managers start approaching exploration in the form of an active inference linking in circular causality all four states conditioned by the Markov blanket and governed by free energy minimization, we can straightaway see that success in exploration is critically determined by the level of sophistication of a few things.

First, prediction models, a self-evidencing eco-niche model that connects corporate purpose with the very predictions the firm stipulates.

second the bounded set of external states that the firm decides to act upon to bottom up sample the world and test hypotheses with the least required computational resource investment and third belief updating resulting from the consequences posterior beliefs that the firm's actions generate and so this is also like a nice little summary section i thought um and this can he continues to say it is now self-evident to appreciate

that action is central to perception.

More importantly, the firm's generative model and actions control ambiguity and uncertainty.

The firm's generative model is the firm's eco-niche.

The firm is more in control than it traditionally resists to believe.

The perception of uncertainty is actor-observer, i.e.

firm-specific.

And I did like that, like real uncertainty versus the perception of uncertainty.

And when we're talking about like,

embodied, enacted, extended cognition.

It's all about like your perception of uncertainty versus actual uncertainty.

So like, you know, unless you can count cards, you're uncertain of like, if you're playing blackjack, you don't, you don't know what your chances are of getting 21.

But like, if you can count cards, right?

Like it's just, that's just one example.

Like you're less uncertain if it's a single deck blackjack, like you're less uncertain as to what,


SPEAKER_00:
are the possibilities as the game continues to unfold it's also interesting there with the um kind of declaration of independence like self-evident appreciation that reflects the real bright line between passive inference and active inference and it's like that claim does one agree or disagree and then if they did agree

then they have already seen their own eye movement and decision to seek out this information as central to their perception of that expression so it kind of serves as like a koan of self-evidencing and then there are some downstream implications for example

one that he attacks many times throughout is that the external world is not uncertain there's not uncertainty in the commodities market there's an observer dependent

uncertainty about external states and about action selection and active inference is just is a generic family of strategies for jointly resolving uncertainty about external states and actions that bring alignment aka provide pragmatic value so many of those implications of feg are downstream of the acceptance or acknowledgement that action is central to perception


SPEAKER_02:
Very nice, thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, so he lists these requirements for outperformance and survival.

Tyler, do you wanna read these for me?

Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
All right, one, a timeless, deep purpose.

Two, generative top-down, bottom-up prediction error minimization, form of free energy minimizing and active inference.

Three, principled values and aspirations determining eco-niche prosperity and sustainability.

If all three elements are articulated in simple, explainable language and communicated to all members within and beyond the firm's boundaries, then the firm's long-term prospects will be sustainably enhanced in form of a self-organizing and generative model.

The board of directors, rather than executive leadership, only must ensure that those elements come to life, and more importantly, stay alive.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks.

And oh, wait, sorry.


SPEAKER_04:
So this goes back to, um, like we were talking about purpose earlier and like, where does purpose come from?

Who decides what the purpose is?

Uh, so this, it was more talked about, I think a lot in this chapter.

Um, and, and we've also talked about it before through the book.

So this is a nice little, um, wrap up section.

Um, and then Bijan goes on to make the claim that free organization, free organization.

Okay.

I've said organization so many times, I think like if I were to count, like I probably have said the word organization like a thousand times in this live stream, maybe not, maybe 150.

Free energy governance is as valid for business organizations as it is for political constructs or for that matter, navigating geopolitical dislocations and debt cycle disruptions.

Any organism that suffers from a one top-down bottom-up disconnectivity is

Two, top-down dominance of ideological and supervised content prescriptions.

Three, dominant logic to adapt to the outer world amid its self-inflicted incapacity for an active inference.

And not least, four, non-existence of a time's purpose as well as Medicaid abilities, such as listening to what wants to emerge in the web of random interactions and observing the observer, is naturally entropy-bound and incapacitated to navigate macro disruptions.

So he gives that like recipe for survival and outperformance here.

So, and in the last requirements for outperformance and survival.

So I think that those are just like the three, those are just like the inverse statements of each other.

Like, this is what we need.

This is what we can't have.

So that's a nice like way to wrap up, like how free energy governance will contribute to the firm's outperformance and survival in the world.

competing with other firms and such.

Do you guys have any thoughts here?

Good.

Okay.

And then I just pulled this final quote out and we kind of alluded to this earlier.

It says, does the uncertainty that humans face come from the inherent instability of the human landscape or from the perceptions and belief systems that we have about the human environment?

And this is kind of nice.

like what what is it that's unstable like where is the uncertainty is the uncertainty like in our perception or is it in the world somewhere so um i don't know this is a nice like thing to think about and um how to in resolving that uncertainty through action i think like gets to kind of the core of free energy governance um here at the end of the book so thanks

for listening.

I don't know if you guys have any final thoughts on any of the content presented here in these two chapters or on the book overall, or, you know, questions that are brewing through your mind.

Nothing like that.

All right.

We're quick through the concluding sections and we look forward to having an open discussion with the author in a few weeks, as well as other participants who have been keeping up with the content.


SPEAKER_02:
So thanks guys.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Tyler.

Thank you, Blue.

Farewell.

## thO3nsvgego

SPEAKER_01:
hello and welcome everyone it's december 6 2022 we're in act inf book stream number 001.01 a numbering convention that will be explained soon it's a discussion on the book governing continuous transformation by bijan khazri and i'll pass the blue


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, everyone.

I guess that's my job is to explain the bookstream numbering.

So this is our first bookstream.

That's why it's bookstream 001.

And this is our first dot zero contextualization video for this bookstream series.

So each week we will present a chapter-ish, a chapter or so of the book, and then periodically we will get together for the 001.1, 001.2, and so forth, those discussion sections.

So if you want to participate either in a contextualization video or in a discussion video, please get in touch with us, and we would love to have you on the stream.

And I'm blue.

I've been here before, so hopefully you've seen me before and know me by now.

And I'm an independent researcher in New Mexico.

And I will pass it off to Tyler, first time appearance, I think, in the Active Inference Institute.

So Tyler, do you want to introduce yourself?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, cool.

Thanks for having me.

This is my first time here to Active Inference.

So I have an unusual background.

I actually don't come from an academic background at all.

A lot has been about applied governance.

So I actually started as a strategy consultant working in major corporations.

More recently, it's gotten more to DAO governance.

I currently lead product and protocol design for the 4K protocol.

It's a project that

It's connecting the physical world to the on-chain world.

And I'm also a contributor at MediGov, where I think about how we can model these abstract formalisms about governance in a real-world setting.

And so a lot of times I think about DAO governance, but most recently it's been thinking about active inference and implications for real-world settings.


SPEAKER_00:
So we are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

These are all of our media links, and we will be recording and archiving this live stream for future reference.

Everyone is welcome, and hopefully we will be following good etiquette for live streams and not arguing or talking over each other for the duration of the book streams.

Okay.

So this is our first book stream.

Our goal is to learn and discuss this textbook, Governing Continuous Transformation, Reframing the Strategy Governance Conversation.

It's a 2022 book by Bijan Kesri.

And this video, like always, is just an introduction to some of the ideas, not a review or a final word at all.

So we will just go through here.

The sections of this book stream, we're going to do the book map and the roadmap, some keywords, the preface part one and chapter one will be covered in today's video.

And in the coming weeks, we will be continuing to discuss this.

So get in touch if you want to partake in these conversations.

So I guess we introduced ourselves briefly.

Oh, backwards.

So if either you guys want to maybe mention something you're excited about or that you liked or remembered from the book, from these first sessions, otherwise we can go on to just cover it.

I think we have a lot of material.

Tyler, what are you most excited about?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, I think for me, like, especially being in like real world organizations, nonprofits, a lot of times we think of like uncertainty as something that could be wished away or something that we're incrementally going to solve.

Like, oh, if we only were collecting like more information, we would be in a better spot or I don't think we had more capabilities.

We wouldn't have this problem.

But a lot of times we kind of get confused.

very anxious about the uncertainty rather than we're an active inference and free energy governance that uncertainty is placed at the center.

And it's something you could actually take ownership over, but also be a source of, you know, creative growth.

And so I think that's really exciting and inspirational and yeah, really excited to be here today.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

I'm excited, too, to unify some of the concepts of active inference with governance, which I know a little bit about, but not very much.

And now that we're like formalizing our structure as an institutional entity in the Active Inference Institute, I'm excited to learn more about governance and how things should work.

Okay, so this book has four parts.

So we're here.

Well, we're not even in part one yet, but we're going to go over to the beginning of part one today.

So part one is reframing the strategy governance conversation.

Part two is about free energy governance.

And part three is a conclusion for the book.

And then there are some interviews in part four.

along with acknowledgements and an epilogue.

And this is from the bookmap software.

So this is like our roadmap for a book, but this bookmap software is used in trading.

So if you guys have never seen it, that's what these graphs are from.

So when I think about bookmap, I always think about that.

Okay, so our roadmap for today.

So we're going to get into the preface.

There are no section headings.

So we just kind of chunked out like what makes sense in terms of the text and how it reads.

So we're going to go over a summary of the FEP, how to ground firms in the framework of active inference, strategy governance models versus meta governance, the triplet structure of free energy governance.

And then realists and anti-realists in management science.

And then just a brief intro to part one.

And then chapter one, which is pretty short.

Thinking born of curiosity, revolt, and change.

So here is like a huge list of keywords that we're going to get into today.

And I think Tyler is going to start us off in section one in the preface.

In the summary of the free energy principle, Tyler is going to start us off.


SPEAKER_04:
talking about the FEP.

Tyler, unmute.


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry.

So the free energy principle, or FEP, as we're going to be calling it, this is John's definition that he gives in the preface.

So the FEP is a mathematical formulation that explains from first principles the characteristics of biological systems that are able to resist decay and persist over time.

It rests on the idea that all biological systems instantiate a hierarchical generative model of the world and firstly minimizes its internal entropy by minimizing free energy.

Blue, anything you'd want to add there?


SPEAKER_00:
No, I think it's best like we could take a deep dive into the FEP.

There are many live streams where that's done.

So if you want to learn more about the free energy principle, I would just refer out to other live streams.

It's best here to take what Bijan presents, the aspect that he's using and go forward from there.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

And I think similarly, we'll do a similar cursory treatment of Markov blankets.

And so Markov blankets, the way you can think about it is that it's a statistical formulation for defining the internal versus the external.

So the definition that he gives is Markov blankets establish a conditional independence between internal and external states that renders the inside open to the outside, but only in a conditional sense.

So the internal states only see the external states and

through the veil of the Markov blanket.

Again, huge topic.

I'm not going to go super into it.

And what's going to add anything blue?


SPEAKER_00:
No, it's great.

And there are many, many live streams.

Like really, if you want to get into it, probably the emperor's new Markov blankets is maybe where we undertake like a very thorough discussion of the Markov blanket.

If you want more information there.


UNKNOWN:
Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

So grounding firms in the framework of active inference.

So here's a claim from the book.

Learning to actively infer will determine the firm's competitive advantage and survival in a discontinuous and distributed world.

The more fluid the boundaries between firm and eco niche, the more important the definition of what constitutes a system

and how non-dissipative Markovian boundaries preserve the firm's integrity, i.e.

belief systems.

Our interest is shifting away from pursuing deterministic truth through clever analysis towards designing entailing a generative self-organizing model that empowers the firm to master the shifting conditional independencies between the known and unknown and what lies within and beyond its control.

Well, so there's a lot there.

So I think these next keyword slides hopefully will unpack it a little bit.

Active inference, which we've seen many times in the Active Inference Institute, is a process theory grounded in the free energy principle that explains behavior, perception, planning, and action in terms of probabilistic inference.

Bijan doesn't yet mention active inference, but he talks about learning to actively infer, which I'm going to actively infer means active inference.

And here we see this classic action perception loop where we have internal states and external states separated by a Markov blanket or a non-deceptive Markovian boundary.

And we have sensory input and action.

And these are the ways in which an agent can interact with its world.

Do either of you guys have anything to add here?

Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

Um, in that framing, I found it really interesting when there's increased fluidity or fuzziness or blurriness of the engagement of the firm with the niche or the context or the community.

In those cases, it's like more important to have a uncertainty oriented definition of what the thing is.

And that is what confronts every organization today.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, interesting.

Okay, so he talked a little bit about shifting away from deterministic truth.

And so I Googled, because I'm a truth person.

I'm weird about truth, if you've ever listened to me talk about it before.

So deterministic truth is like the truth.

And I liked this paper.

I just Googled it.

What do people talk about?

What is deterministic truth?

And I found this paper, Approaching Deterministic and Probabilistic Truth, a Unified Account.

And in this paper, it's a 2021 paper, so pretty new.

In this paper, they talked about the truth itself, like the truth being either deterministic, like I think about that like hitting a bullseye, like the truth is the number seven, right?

And then probabilistic truth is more like a probability distribution around that truth, like hitting seven plus or minus the standard deviation or like a probability density, right?

And this paper talks about like deterministic and probabilistic truths.

Like that the truth is one of those things.

And then also there are ways to approach it.

Like you're approaching your search of the truth in either a deterministic or probabilistic way.

So I thought that this was an interesting read and kind of, if you are interested in delving deeper into like deterministic versus probabilistic and these theories and approaches and truth likeness, I thought that this was a cool read.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think one thing, oh, sorry.

No, go ahead.

One thing to add there is just that I think like,

our personal ideas about what truth are, like whether it's terministic versus a probabilistic conception of truth, really carry over onto the organization level.

And so whatever kind of delusions you have about your personal truth in your personal life, a lot of times they view the organization as, like the CEO views the organization as an extension of their own self.

And so their own worldview gets carried over and strapped onto the organization's worldview.

And so it's really interesting that you could kind of


SPEAKER_03:
frame these like philosophical ideas about truth that are often applied at an individual level and then kind of like scale that up into an organization.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, very cool.


SPEAKER_00:
And we see that in this generative self-organizing model.

Again, this is kind of like it was cool to just search up what is a self-organizing model.

And we see generative model a lot.

We don't really see self-organizing model.

We see generative model in terms of self-organization, but a generative self-organizing model, like what is this really?

And so this is just from this Stanford

machine learning cheat sheet, supervised learning cheat sheet.

So here it says discriminative models divide the data space into classes by learning the boundaries.

And this is like the different neural networks, whereas generative models understand how the data is embedded into the space.

like an autoencoder or Boltzmann machine or self-organizing maps.

So this is like a self-organizing model.

And you can really see here, like this is like a decision boundary on the left in the discriminative model.

And like either it's a cat or a dog.

right and on the right it's there's a generative model like it's a cat with some degree of certainty or it's a dog with some degree of of certainty and so you see these like probability distributions like probably it's a cat but then there's like some fuzzy like if your data point lands like a little bit in the red or a little bit in the blue like then then it might be a cat or it might be a dog or maybe we don't have enough information to tell um so i thought that this was a cool like

replication of the probabilistic truth versus deterministic truth.

Like either you're looking for cat or dog, or you're looking for with what probability is this a cat or a dog?

Do you guys have anything to add here?

Cool.

Okay.

So this is moving on out of this claim into the next claim.

The firm is envisioned as an inactive, sophisticated and resource dependent inference machine.

in form of a generative learning model.

Essentially, it is a statistical model linking in circular causality, action, perception, firm resources, and the unknown external world.

And I just put this active inference loop up here again.

So you have like the firm and the world, the firm would be the agent, and then you have the resources of the firm, which would be like the internal states, and then the external world.

which is everything that's not the firm.

And I highlighted these terms inactive and sophisticated because there's a lot to unpack here.

And I think it's kind of in the textbook, maybe like just you can say the words, but unless you like open them up and look what they mean inside, look inside of them, like you don't have any idea the kind of depth that goes behind these things.

So do you guys have anything to add there on that?

OK, inactivism is a position in cognitive science that argues that cognition arises through a dynamic interaction between an acting organism and its environment.

And so these are the four Es of cognitive science or cognition.

And they're embodied, inactive, extended, and encultured.

So cognition is grounded in our senses and concrete experience that's embodied.

Enacted means it's goal-directed action in the real world.

Extended is cognitive systems include the tools, the devices, the people around us, our smartphone, these kinds of things.

And embedded, or that's kind of what we always refer to as encultured, but I think that they kind of mean the same thing.

So this is cognition is woven into culture and learning is done in a social context.

So these are the embodied.

So when you say the firm is inactive, yeah, that's it.

It's for goal-directed, it's doing goal-directed action in the real world, inactive.

and sophisticated, or do you guys have anything to add there on the four E's?

Okay.

Sophisticated is from this paper, I believe, Sophisticated Inference by Friston and colleagues, and we've done Sophisticated Affective Inference, I think, on a live stream, but I don't think we've ever done Sophisticated Inference, but the Affective Inference is...

like a later paper and covers this one a lot.

So sophisticated inference is really like in deep time, right?

So here, I'll just read this, the figure caption.

So I have this like decision tree model picture from the paper.

And it says, this schematic summarizes the accumulation of expected free energy over past

and trajectories into the future.

This can be construed as a deep tree search where the tree branches of allowable actions at each point in time and the likely outcomes consequent upon each action.

So this is one, two, three, four time steps here and going off.

So this is like a trajectory, the path of least action.

So we talk about the way that a system can decide and go forward in space.

So that's what's meant by sophisticated, I think.

Oh, Daniel.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, the purpose of introducing these terms from cognitive sciences and neuroscience like the 4E cognition and of this type of model, it's not a novel idea to make a decision tree.

That's how, for example, early chess playing artificial intelligences work.

It's the way that the expected free energy can be calculated across these different paths of consideration with respect to a generative model.

that are allowing new ways of thinking about these kinds of deep time and nested strategic questions.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, definitely.

Okay.

So temporal thickness and counterfactual depth.

Here in this claim, Bijan says, the proposal on offer here is that the mind comes into being when self-evidencing has a temporal thickness.

Models can be thicker and thinner, deeper or shallower, depending on how far forward they predict, or counterfactual depth.

How far back they post it, that is, whether they can capture how things might have ended up if they had acted differently.

There is no real reason for minds to exist.

They appear to do so simply because existence itself is the endpoint of a process of reasoning.

Consciousness, I'd contend, is nothing grander than inference about my future.

And in this, this is from Bajan's book, but he's quoting a Friston 2017 paper.

So that temporal thickness goes back to the sophistication, right?

Which is why, like, so here you can see how far back you can post it.

Like if I had done something differently, what could have happened?

This counterfactual reasoning and prediction going forward into the future.

Okay, going on to strategy governance models versus meta governance.

All right, so I'm kind of out of my comfort zone here, so I might call on Tyler to help me out a little bit.

But Bijan says, the common understanding underlying entrenched strategy governance models rather erroneously has been that action is a consequence of perception, and therefore, strategy must be environment-driven.

So I look up strategy governance model, and it gave me some figures.

And this is one of them.

And it appears to be...

pretty linear, but there's not a lot of feedback happening with the external environment.

Like there's a vision, a strategy, a roadmap, design, and then insights come forward to the design and back to the vision.

And then there's like a performance review.

So I don't know, Tyler, do you want to give any additional comments here on this?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, I think something that could be potentially confusing for people who are maybe not coming from an academic background is that a lot of times when business leaders are thinking about how they're going to plan for the action that their organization is going to take, what the strategy looks like, they're getting data, right?

And they're having feedback from the bottom levels of the organization, feedback to the top levels, right?

And so that they're taking information, they're creating a perception of that, and then they're creating a strategy based on that that

kind of in a linear fashion, the organization executes.

And at some point they reflect back and be like, Hey, did this work or not?

What do we do with our new information?

Right.

But really what they're not realizing in the process of that is like in that linear flow, they're not recognizing how they're constraining the perceptions and actions of their organization and a top-down fashion and allowing people

and allowing bottom of the information to change how information and actions can be changed in the future so like that kind of cyclical nature really is understood it's really more conceived in this linear way of like hey we're going to collect as much information as we can uh our information is going to be imperfect but we're going to get better over time um rather than like hey fundamentally

Our actions and perceptions are constrained by the actions we're taking right now.

So it's like just a different model for thinking, but it's a lot more linear and not doesn't have that cyclical causality baked into it.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool and I think about here like it seems like it's very like sequential like one after another after another after another whereas like the active inference kind of method like you have to sometimes act in order to perceive right like the if you want to know whether like the surface is rough or smooth you have to move over the surface with your finger to determine if it's rough or smooth so it's action and perception that are happening simultaneously and I think that that

That is the shift that Bijan is calling for, as he says.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and I think just to add on that a little bit, I think a lot of times business leaders conceive of reality as independently existing out there, and it's just a limitation of their tools and resources to understand reality, rather than the nature of perception itself of being able to understand reality.

And so I think that's really...

the fundamental difference.

And a lot of times people don't realize that that's even like relevant at all.

And so that's why this is fun to talk about.


SPEAKER_00:
It's for sure.

Why, like, what is deterministic truth?

Like, where is that reality?

And it all kind of links together.

So Bijan goes on to say, in fact, action upon the firm's eco-niche akin to pointing the light torch in the dark determines perception.

Inference is inactive.

The generative model itself never encodes anything.

It just expresses the circular causality among all four states.

The generative model, hence, is a model of the firm's eco-niche.

If not, it is no good regulator, and consequently, the firm will rather sooner than later dissipate in the face of entropic forces.

And so I included here a different kind of strategy governance model that's like the lean startup model that's like a little bit more action and perception happening in companies

like a more simultaneous way.

I don't know if you want to add anything here, Tyler.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think a lot of the way we talk about like lean startup model of really, the lean startup model is basically like, you don't necessarily know what people want.

And also it's not that you're discovering what people want, it's that you're putting ideas out there and finding how people respond to them.

And so it's basically truth is something that you create.

You can create a new state of the world rather than like,

uncovering it so it's kind of like a method for uncovering something that's going to work and a lot of times it's kind of done how it's like very like fluffy and also just like experiential terms like hey this works we've done this we built this company this way but what's interesting about active inference is that can take that very like fluffy wispy framework and apply that into a more rigorous context

So yeah, a lot of these ideas that we're talking about now, they're not necessarily new, especially in the startup world, but there hasn't been great language for talking about it.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, so here's another claim.

Therefore, the firm's true governance challenge is a matter of meta-governing its generative model as an enacted, sophisticated, and resource-dependent belief system

exercising the entire organization, quote, the body itself, in contours, we should now start seeing a model emerging that underwrites a form of autopoiesis, i.e.

self-organization.

Effectively, it is all about casting inference as optimization, mathematically by way of gradient descent, starting with two essential constituents.

First, a hyperprior, which is the firm's resistance to entropy in order to persist, and two, epistemic foraging and hypothesis testing.

i.e.

acting upon the eco-niche to generate belief-evidencing data.

Do you guys have any comments here?

Do you want to delve into this a little more?

Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
yeah one interesting uh usage of a term there is that the firm's true governance challenge is meta governance and that's a term that is used differently or compatibly but with a different focus in metagov and so just to kind of flesh that out here meta governance

is being used in the sense of metacognition, like self-reflection, memory, anticipation, attention, planning, all of these individual level cognitive and metacognitive processes that we model in active inference.

Often meta gov in another sense is meant like social cognition, like relationships amongst organizations or amongst teams.

So like within a team, you have their own governance structure, then also there's teams of teams, and that's a meta governance structure with respect to the team.

And then that's very interesting because the two times that we've seen nested models, nested generative models in active inference are the metacognition models and then the ecosystem nested models.

So it really brings integrity between thinking about what happens like within and across groups.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, thank you.

OK, so hyper prior.

In Bayesian statistics, a hyperparameter is a prior distribution on a hyperparameter.

That is, on a parameter of a prior distribution.

As with the term hyperparameter, the use of hyper is to distinguish it from a prior distribution of a parameter of the model for the underlying system.

So, like, the hyperparameters influence the prior here.

And like the hyper parameters here influence the parameters here.

And so it's backwards at least one step in time in this sophisticated format.

So there's, oh yeah, this is a better diagnosis or illustration.

The hyper prior goes to the prior, goes to the data.

So it's just in a previous time step in some way.

Anything to add here?

All right.

Epistemic foraging.

I pulled this from Active Inference and Learning, this quote.

It says, in Active Inference, behavior has explorative, epistemic, and exploitative pragmatic aspects that are sensitive to ambiguity and risk, respectively, where epistemic ambiguity-resolving behavior enables pragmatic reward-seeking behavior

and the subsequent emergence of habits.

And I just wanted to kind of point out here that active inference is kind of like, has been illustrated as like a balance, a way to balance exploration and exploitation.

and epistemic and pragmatic value.

And like in business, is this like knowledge and money?

Is that like epistemic and pragmatic value, like knowledge of your customers, your clients?

So it's just trying to think of like how this might translate to that.

Like money, pragmatic value is like more resources and like epistemic value is like more knowledge of your client base or of the future maybe, uncertainty reduction.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, I could just give a concrete example of that because this is especially true in software engineering where that is actually framed in explicitly these terms in growth organizations.

So if you're on a growth team, you're like,

okay, we can either like turn up the dial on this thing that's working.

We're like, okay, like we know this flow is working.

This wizard, this checkout flow is working.

Let's make it like 10% faster would be an example of exploitation where like, we know that's going to work in some level where exploration could be something we have like really no idea.

This is like a shot in the dark.

Let's figure out the minimum amount of effort we can put out to uncover new territory.


SPEAKER_03:
And so like this exact trade-off is very much explicitly thought of in a lot of tech organizations.


SPEAKER_04:
Very cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Yeah, so epistemic foraging is like, you know, searching around, like, you know, for epistemic, seeking out epistemic value.

Okay, so moving on to the triplet structure of free energy governance.

Tyler, this is for you, I think.


SPEAKER_02:
So,

You know, John's frames, like really there's like a key question of free energy governance when you're thinking about your organization, how do you embody that in your personal organization?

And it's really about how you create and update your generative model so that the firm can survive.

And he presents this framework of thinking about it, and he calls it the triplet structure of free energy governance.

There is structure, cognition, and then capabilities.

So we'll go through each of these in turn.


SPEAKER_03:
All right, structure.

So, oh, sorry.

This is confusing me.


SPEAKER_04:
That header is wrong.

Just get to the next slide.

All right, structure.


SPEAKER_02:
So John writes that connectivity emerges in flow and language.

Bottom-up stimuli emanating from resource markets such as clients, technologies, suppliers, and others are only as relevant and meaningful to resource reconfiguration asset allocation as clearly as top-down predictions and prediction models articulated, communicated, and above all, programmed to process bottom-up incoming signals.

So like kind of touched on this earlier, but like a lot of times decision-making at organization is very linear.

where like you have the very top you're coming from the strategy and then like that's executed in turn at every rung of the hierarchy a lot of times like okrs if you've ever heard of this it's like a really good example of this it's like objective key results where like there's an objective that the top organization comes with and then like the minions the next run have their subs the subsequent parts of that tree and it kind of filters down to the rest of the organization

Um, where sometimes what's not as clearly articulated is about the interconnections between different parts of the hierarchy and how those different parts of the stack, uh, have to relate to each other.

So like a really good example of this is that, you know, this is very true in tech companies.

Tech companies collect a ton of data and none of that data is like ever processed in a meaningful way.

And so like a lot of times they'll say like, Oh, like we got, we're data driven company.

We collect all this information.

But in reality, a lot of the information is trapped at the bottom rungs of the organization.

It may not have the political ability or also even the technical ability to process that in a meaningful way and bubble that up through the organization.

And a lot of times, there's a huge gap in being able to actually process that information and bubble it up appropriately in a way that can actually crater the organization.

And so designing this in a really thoughtful way is...

much harder than it would seem.

And even if you call yourself a data-driven organization, there's a good chance you're not processing data in a way that can actually generate new top-down models later on.


SPEAKER_03:
So yeah, anything to add there, Daniel?

All right, let's go to the next one, cognition.


SPEAKER_02:
All right, so cognition embraces the environment as enacted through relations and interactions constructed in our brains.

Environment does not objectively, actor independently exist, but it's revealed by a firm's actions and perceptions that those firms, that those very actions generate.

In fact, the consequences of a firm's activity construct its eco niche.

And so we've already touched on some of the earlier slides, but a lot of times these firms conceive of external reality existing independently of their own actions and perceptions.

And then it's just up to them to get better tools and information to be able to understand that reality, understanding this fog of war that they're slowly uncovering.

but they actually do real insights.

Then also the actions that they're able to take.

So like to make this like a little bit more concrete, you can say like, I mean, if you're not, this very much applies in a real sense on like a website where like, if you're not collecting information on views on your page in a very basic level, it's really hard to like generate actual information out of that.

Right.

And so you have to basically make a decision of like, this is the information we want to gather.

This is what we care about.

And that's going to structure everything.

the insights you can glean in the future and what you can do with that information.

In a similar way, if you're not putting resources out for interacting with the world, like creating a new department that's maybe a little bit more exploratory, that's going to constrain the actions you can take in the future.

So all this is saying is that the reality doesn't exist independently of you.


SPEAKER_03:
It's something that you actively perceive through your actions and perceptions.

Daniel and Blue, want to add anything there?


SPEAKER_00:
Is it like actively perceive or actively create?


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry, actively create is a better way of saying it.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, or both.

I mean, I think like you have to be actively perceiving, but I don't know.

I think it's a rare treat when someone takes responsibility or even like a company takes responsibility for the reality that they're creating.

And like we see this, especially like in tech companies, like

I don't know, Facebook.

And I mean, like just like a lot of the technology has been life-changing and world-changing.

So like they're really actively creating reality.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this is interesting about the revealing of the firm's generative model through its actions.

And we've talked about that fourfold partition with the internal, external states and then the sense and action blanket states.

So the firm has access to sense and internal states to some extent.

But the world or others have access to one's actions and or inference on their consequences in the niche.

And so it's a way to talk about what the entire action perception loop is with all of its different inward facing and outward facing dynamics.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, to add a little more here too, there's a lot of folk wisdom around this idea as well in startup culture.

And so I'm going to totally butcher it.

This is like a Steve Jobs quote.

I'm going to totally butcher it.

But it's something around the lines of if you had done a marketing survey of people before they made the iPod and asked them how they want to listen to music, they wouldn't have told you that they wanted an iPod.

They would have told you something else that was conditioned based on their previous experiences with products.

And so the idea is that you just put something out in the world.

It's a creative act.

And then you create something in the world and then the world responds to it.

And so there's like this big idea, especially in like tech culture around like reality is something that you will into existence rather than discover independently.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's interesting, too, to like think about, I mean, especially you think about Google Glass that came out like, I don't know, 10 years ago or something.

Now, probably not that long ago, but it's been a little while.

And I think like now there's like the re-release of like Google Glass or some kind of similar products.

Like the world just wasn't ready when the Google Glass version came out.

But like we'll be ready soon.

They've willed it into existence and it'll be that way soon.


SPEAKER_03:
All right, capabilities.

The last one is capabilities.


SPEAKER_02:
So the inferring firm is constantly optimizing belief propagation as well as updating beliefs sophistication.

That process of optimizing recognition densities is only as good as the firm's general world model.

So we are no longer just interested in the actions consequences per se, but how the actions consequences impact ulterior beliefs.

So

Another way of saying this is that the firm has to actively balance this exploiting versus exploring.

And I think there's a lot of, again, folk wisdom, especially in Silicon Valley culture, around this trade-off, whereas a lot of times we say, hey, failure is good, as long as you're learning and creating those insights.


SPEAKER_03:
And so, yeah, Blue, anything to add there?


SPEAKER_04:
No, good.

All right.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so realists and anti-realists in management science.

All right, so here's a claim from Bijan.

Management science is equally divided along not too dissimilar realist and anti-realist fault lines.

It is best captured by Carl Week, 1977, when he states that environment is located in the mind of the actor and is imposed by him on experience in order to make that experience more meaningful.

It seldom dawns on organizational theorists to look for environments inside the heads rather than outside of them.

Indeed, the rise of cognitive lens in strategy management and governance research has enriched our understanding around improving the design of strategy governance processes, but has largely remained constrained by the notion that environment is something objective out there waiting to be analyzed and adapted to.

And in this section, Bijan talks about blitz scaling and mentions some examples of this anti-realist claim.

So he says, Google, Uber, Airbnb, and Facebook are the product of a fundamentally anti-realist enactment of an interaction with,

the respective eco niches powered by unique and continuously evolving sets of capabilities, fostering action generated top-down bottom-up prediction error minimization to iteratively optimize the very generative models and implied recognition, posterior probabilities of beliefs about the actions consequences.

These companies redesign while they fly, which is in the words of Silicon Valley veteran, Reid Hoffman, equivalent to throwing yourself off a cliff and assembling your airplane on the way down.

Sullivan 2016.

In fact, we are more in control than we resist to believe.

Blitz scaling has been integral to the founding DNA of these super outperformers.

They listen to and sense what wants to emerge.

They are the enacting designers of their very eco-niche.

For these companies, strategy is rather a matter of ex-post-sense-making than ex-anti-long-term planning.

It is a matter of survival.

And I just thought that that was maybe a good example of this anti-realism, um,

thing that he was talking about here.


SPEAKER_02:
Do you guys have anything to add?

An idea that kind of arose as you were talking about this is that one interesting point about Google is that they're also kind of famous for trying really hard to do this but failing to create new products.

So they have created and killed hundreds of different new products that people genuinely truly loved even that were quite innovative.

And so it's kind of interesting of how you even think about

what is trying to emerge and whether that's best done in like a single monolithic organization versus in a more like decentralized distributed way.

So I don't know, this has been like a tension I've been kind of feeling throughout the book as well as kind of like, what is it that this entity is trying to exist or needs to exist?

Or is it something that is more distributed and decentralized is more appropriate in certain cases?


SPEAKER_00:
So having loved and lost several Google things in the past that have like, you know,

Yeah, Google or Google App Maker, like the low-code app development thing.

I mean, just like tons of things, right?

Having loved and lost.

I wonder if this is like epistemic exploration on the part of Google, really.

So if like you're, you know, I don't know.

I feel like people come in and like, I'm going to build this app.

And Google gives them a lot of freedom.

And they're like, go ahead, build the app or build the platform or build the thing and do the thing.

And they build it and it's great and people love it.

And then they move on and do something else.

And then nobody steps up to support them.

The love of this part or what what was this person's like child at Google right so as I feel like maybe that might be a lot of what's happening but but perhaps in this like creation and then unsupporting creation and unsupporting Google is continuously generating like epistemic knowledge right it's epistemic foraging.

of, and learning about the niche and what people like and what they will use, you know, like on the grand scheme.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I think it's, I think that's true, but I'm not going to make this argument, but a lot of people have made the argument that what they should have been doing the whole time is exploiting.

Cause like their whole business is just ads and they're like, just like run that till you die.

Like, that's the only thing that matters.

Like your resources aren't well used here by like trying to do like all of these random things.

And so like, there is like a legitimate argument too, of like the limits to which you can explore maybe, but,

I don't know, that's probably out of scope for our discussion today, but Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just one short note.

The entire discussion of epistemic and pragmatic value is motivated by the fact that they're unified in the free energy functions that are used to determine perception, cognition, and action in an integrated way.

So at the very least, conversation can be had about adaptive changes in these variables at different levels of the organization in a different, if not better way that's very integrated with how we think about the world internally.

and built upon neuroscience in that area as well as about thinking about the complex dynamics and the relational dynamics of the niche which for information doesn't exist until you're seeking it out and in feedback with it and in attention of your previous data in anticipation of future data all of these cognitive dynamics so the anti-realist take doesn't need to be

um someone who doesn't think like a real world exists or anything like that even though that's like too deep for this current discussion it's just a purely pragmatic approach to thinking about and modeling these kinds of scenarios


SPEAKER_00:
Very cool.

All right.

What else?

Ah, okay.

So here we are.

We got through the preface.

That was the preface.

And so getting into part one of the book, there's just a small quote, which I'll read.

It says, reframing the strategy governance conversation.

The evidence suggests that we are in the midst of an evolutionary punctuation.

We are witnessing a mass extinction in the corporate world in the early decades of the 21st century.

Since 2000, 52% of the Fortune 500 companies have either been acquired, merged, or have declared bankruptcy.

It is estimated that 40% of the companies in existence today will shutter their operations in the next 10 years.

Merely following the trends of change is not enough.

Just like organisms facing the great oxidation event, organizations need to reinvent the way they interact with the changing world.

And this is a quote from Digital Transformation, Survive and Thrive in an Era of Mass Extinction, 2019 by Siebel.

All right.

Chapter one, Thinking Born of Curiosity, Revolt, and Change.

All right.

Here's our abstract.

Tyler, I'm gonna let you read this one.


SPEAKER_04:
All right.


SPEAKER_02:
Environmental complexity and velocity have been dominant monitors in strategy and governance research.

The underlying structure of environmental change is becoming increasingly distributed and discontinuous.

The disintermediating nature of information technologies is challenging entrenched business models as well as the logics of organizing.

Centralized top-down strategy processes are rather anti-clocked unless dynamically and generatively intertwined in real time with bottom-up stimuli and data emanating from field operations in pursuit of prediction error minimization.

Neither established logics of organizing nor prevalent corporate governance models are a match for wholesale digital reinvention and continuous strategic renewal.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

And going on, he says...

In fact, akin to the AI evolution from a supervised to a deep learning logic, corporate governance is challenged to evolve from a supervised and rule-based best practices learning system to one of unsupervised unlearning, i.e.

self-organization.

To survive, the firm must be conceived as one cross-hierarchically integrated inference machine.

Organizing is generative prediction error minimization.

Strategy is redefined as top-down, bottom-up predictions processing.

The search for knowledge is not nourished by certainty.

It is nourished by a radical absence of certainty, thinking born of curiosity, revolt, and change.

And that's a quote from Rovelli 2021.

All right.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

All right.


SPEAKER_02:
So one of the core premises of the abstract is saying, hey, the environmental complexity and velocity have been increasing over time, and that makes it more challenging for organizations to survive.

So what he says is environmental complexity and velocity have been dominant moderators in strategy and governance research.

Indeed, the rate of change has not only been accelerating, but the underlying structure of change has become increasingly distributed and discontinuous.

sense of urgency and heedful interrelating are critical to survival in a world that is now commonly perceived as uh full of surprises and so you know this is something just by being on like the inside of a lot of these organizations including corporations a lot of times it's perceived as hey there's it's a scary world out there we just need to get our information better to kind of understand what's actually happening so we don't have um any problems

But I think the problem is that, like, that world is changing so much faster than it had been before, where, like, this kind of relentless approach of, hey, we're just going to get more, we're going to gradually improve our processes to wash away this uncertainty that doesn't work as well anymore.

And I think this kind of former approach strategy is very much encapsulated by, like, Six Sigma design.

I don't know if you guys are familiar with that, but it's kind of like a manufacturing idea of, like, hey, we're just going to slowly and incrementally increase the precision of our

techniques and our processes, because these any inserts you have cascades across your whole supply chain and all of your other processes.

So we just need to figure everything out.

And so everything will be perfect, and we won't have any issues.

And that may be like somewhat of a illusion that you can tell yourself if things aren't changing that quickly.

And maybe they'll work for like some constrained amount of time.


SPEAKER_03:
But in the modern world, it's hard, really hard to have that illusion, you have to have a different mental model of the world.

All right, move on to the unless blue Daniel had anything.

No.

All right.


SPEAKER_02:
So the second piece of this is like, yes, the world is changing really quickly.

And that means that there's going to be more discontinuities.

And so he says our discontinuities are fundamentally a function of the cost of interacting with the outer world in form of generating and testing predictions.

And so when he says discontinuity, it's really about like this gap between perceiving the world and saying, okay,

how are we going to take action?

How are we going to update our generative model accordingly?

what he's saying is that, you know, as the world becomes more complex, changes much faster than ever before, there are more of these discontinuities, but also the discontinuities are larger.

There's just more information to integrate.

And so like on one level, you could say like, this is really terrifying, world's changing, what do we do?

But he also sounds this optimistic note of saying like, well, yes, the modern world creates more discontinuities, but it also creates more tools for navigating those discontinuities.

And so the first one he says is, well, you know,

is about disintermediation and decentralization.

So it's a lot easier to aggregate data and process that information and have backup plans in case plan A fails, you have plans B through Z instead.

The other aspect of this is AI.

And so it's a lot easier to process bigger and deeper sets of data.

And so he's trying to sound this optimistic note that, hey, not all is lost.


SPEAKER_03:
There is a way to navigate through this uncertainty.


SPEAKER_00:
I just have to say, I love this meme as someone, as someone who's like tried to like organize and restructure my life, probably, I don't know, 500,000 times at this point.

Like, it's like, do I just do the work or do I spend time like agonizing about how to like document and structure and like time plan my day into five minute blocks.

So like, like I invest so much time in like some method.

Right.

And then I'm just like, okay, well I methodized it.

And then I never used the method.

I just go back to doing the work.

So it's like,

It's like this weird, like all this time analyzing what it like, or dumping it into like moderating my efficiency is like wasting my efficiency.


SPEAKER_01:
To connect that to the earlier discussion about the two senses of meta, this time cost associated with strategy and with consequences in the real world, that time cost can be understood as a cognitive cost.

and something internal that's happening, metacognitive, how should I decide how to decide how to perceive this?

Some of those are variables and knobs you can understand and change.

Other ones are really subliminal.

And then also that time cost strategy nexus

of course, exists for organizations and teams and all of these nested and complex interactions.

So we want to use active inference as an integrative principle because it helps us connect what's happening on either side of the Markov blanket, which might be like a data set passed between two areas of a community or of an organization, understanding how the emission model and the reception model work together.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, to touch that a little more, is that like,

Yeah, I've been a product analyst at a couple of different startups.

And you actually see this in a real way where sometimes you can get an okay answer by just taking a super simple average of a couple different categories.

Or you could try to do something really clever and create an ML model or something over...

um to predict something and a lot of times just like it doesn't the predictive power you gain doesn't match the time cost of that and by the time you created this really sophisticated like publishable uh model the world has fundamentally changed so much that your model just like doesn't matter anymore uh and so like you're very like time bounded and like how you can even like use the information you gather and the results you you glean so for example if you even if you have like a

a checkout flow and you say, Oh yeah, like with this button, the checkout flow is 10% more effective than with this button.

Well, it could, it will very likely be the change in six months.

The context of that checkout flow has changed so much that it's actually just kind of meaningless information.

And so like the time boundedness of the information you collect and the perceptions you can form of that matter a lot.


SPEAKER_04:
All right, so the inference machine.


SPEAKER_02:
So to survive, the firm must become one cross-hierarchically integrated inference machine that continuously builds predictions, which are calling to be bottom-up challenge.

And so I think this very much aligns with what we talked about before, like agile methodology, this kind of lean start-up method of you build,

see if it worked.

You integrate those perceptions and learn from it.

Use that to ideate in something that is a creative act into the world, not necessarily something that is fully informed by data.

And then you build and act on it.

And he uses this quote a few times, both in the preface, I think he actually opens the book with this.

He says, this is a Carlo Revelli quote, the search for knowledge is not nourished by certainty, it is nourished by a radical absence of certainty, thinking born of curiosity, revolt, and change.

So this is actually very important because I've actually encountered this tension very often in a lot of organizations where

like a lot of organizations want to be data driven and they don't actually, another way to say this is this is the best product advice that was ever given.

And he, it was from a CEO of one of my last companies.

He said, there's two types of product work.

There's art and there's science.

And the science work is like, you're like, hey, like, we know this works, we know we can speed up this checkout flow, it might get like incrementally better, we kind of can just keep going down is like the exploit path.

But then there's art, which is really just like not informed by the data.

And a lot of times organizations have trouble with this, because it is truly a creative act.

And they're not comfortable taking that leap of faith.

And that's really what like you have to do to do anything meaningful.

and a lot of people are much more comfortable in the exploit path which is a lot easier to sell to your bosses it's a lot more comfortable and you have to really like like very consciously create a culture within your firm that like the explore path is like even okay and something that can be rewarded um all right anything that you guys want to add here before we on the next slide


SPEAKER_03:
All right.


SPEAKER_02:
So something that I found, something I found that was interesting with, you know, reading this preface and the first chapter was that like a lot of the themes are kind of emerging in a less technical frameworks and also kind of like, or more like pseudo spiritual ideas about business management.

And so this is like a quote that was from the paper or from the book.

It said that firms are called to open up all four channels of listening and

listen from what you know, what surprises you from the whole and what, and what you, and what you sense wants to emerge the emerging home.

Right.

And so if we kind of think about integrating information across different levels of the hierarchy, like the genre was talking about, like you can think about that from a more like rigorous academic perspective, but there's like a lot of other folks, especially that come over the last five years that are conceiving the organization in almost like a pseudo spiritual perspective.

lens where it's conceiving the organization not as like the extension of the CEO's ego, but really as like this entity that needs to be nurtured and cultivated and understood on its own terms.

One of the most famous books about this is called Reinventing Organizations.

And this is rewriting organizations introduced the idea of teal organizations.

These are like non-hierarchical heterogeneous organizations.

So in that book, he says, instead of trying to predict and control the future, members of the organization are invited to listen in and understand what the organization wants to become, what purpose it wants to serve.

Which like on first reading, like that can feel very like pseudo spiritual and kind of like hand wavy.

is actually like a very real thing that can actually be modeled in a more rigorous way with active inference.

So I think that's really exciting.

Another way that this has been talked about has been in Brian J. Robertson's book, Holacracy.

Holacracy is another similar to like tool organizations.

It is a non-hierarchical form of governance.


SPEAKER_03:
And so he says, each tension human beings sense is a signpost telling us how the organization could evolve to better express its purpose.


SPEAKER_04:
All right.

Anything you guys want to add there?


UNKNOWN:
Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So I don't know.

Anything else that you guys want to add?

Just thanks for being here and going over this stuff with me.

And is there anything else you're looking forward to?

Or what's next?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm really excited.

Just logistically, how is the series going to continue?


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

So we'll finish one chapter a week is the goal.

Maybe like we're trying to still work out the logistics of the holiday, but I think it looks consistent.

So one chapter of the book per week, something about that, something like along those lines, and then a discussion after each like section of the book.

So there's part one, part two, part three.

And we will get in touch with the author and see maybe if he is willing to come and discuss some of these ideas with us or, and hopefully we'll have other questions.

people that want to participate in the discussions of the work.


SPEAKER_01:
Tyler, then I'll give a thought.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, I think the thing I'm looking forward to is, you know, so far what I've been excited about is that putting a concrete framework behind ideas that have so far been expressed in very abstract kind of hand-wavy terms across, you know, different kind of startup folklore and kind of business type, business-y books.

And so I'm curious as a next step about how it can become a little more like tangible and practical and like,

For someone who is from the perspective of being in an organization, how would you actually design an organization to embody free energy governance?

And so I'm really excited to see how that can become a little more concrete and clear.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

The part I'm looking forward to is continuing to explore that explore-exploit dialectic.

Both of those in the extreme...

lead to failure in some way, or at least increase risk.

And so this frames our strategizing as being like in some sort of landscape with explore and exploit, which of course is really complex with these nested organizations.

And then you brought in the art and science or science and engineering or just art and communication or whatever other dialectic.

And then even within an artist's day, there's realities like accounting and the mixing of the paint and even the prompt engineering for someone who's using those kinds of artistic forms.

So it lets there be sort of a light

and adaptive, quote, explore-exploit scenario happening within the context of something that's a lot more meaningful, which is the integration of like art, science, personal meaning, collective meaning, and so on, without denying that those kinds of explore-exploit, attentional and strategic dynamics must happen also.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Well, thanks for participating, guys.

And we'll see you next time.


SPEAKER_04:
Bye, y'all.

## d8c0iFU8vms

SPEAKER_02:
hello everyone it's december 13 2022 we're in active book stream number 1.02 on the book governing continuous transformation off to blue


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, everyone.

We are the Active Inference Institute, a participatory online learning institute that is learning, practicing, and thinking about applied active inference.

You can reach us here at all of our media links.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve upon our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we will be following good video etiquette for livestreams, hopefully.

Get in touch if you want to participate either in this book stream or the dot zero contextualization contextualization streams or in another live stream or maybe in the discussion stream.

You can reach us always at active.org or by email.

Okay, so here we are, Bookstream 1.02.

The sections will go through the book map and the roadmap, the keywords and the claims, and we'll be continuing the discussion of governing continuous transformation.

So I don't know if we want to just maybe mention a couple of things, one or two things that we're excited to discuss more today or learn more about from this section of the book.

Tyler, is there anything that stood out for you specifically?

Or maybe we want to give an introduction and then maybe say one or two words about the book, the chapter?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, sure.

So I'm Tyler.

I work more on the applied side of thinking about governance, organizational design, both work in the DAO tooling space and also protocol design.

I also work in a lot of corporate settings as a strategy consultant.

I think for today, what I'm excited about is that I went to business school, something that I hear a lot about, like some of these organizational design frameworks that Bijan references in the book.

It's really interesting to compare that directly to free energy governance and compare and contrast, see where the gaps are.

So I'm excited about exploring that more today.

What about you, Boo?


SPEAKER_01:
I am really excited to kind of link, and so I'll do this right up in the very beginning, but to link what we have talked about in the Active Inference Institute over the last couple of years about biological organization and hierarchical information flow in biological systems.

I'm excited to connect that to

how that works in an organization.

So I just, as I was reading the book, that was something that stood out to me as something that's maybe necessary for like a more elaborate discussion of the text.

Cool.

Daniel, anything?


SPEAKER_02:
I'll have a comment at the roadmap, but I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and just looking forward to this discussion.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Thanks.

Okay.

So here we are at the book map.

We are in Chapter 2, Sensing, Sensemaking, and Strategic Renewal.

And the roadmap for today is just two sections.

These were structured actually by the author, Strategic Cognition, Sensing, and Sensemaking, and the second section is Strategic Renewal.

Did you want to make a comment here, Daniel, at the roadmap?


SPEAKER_02:
Not yet.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Okay.

So lots of keywords in today's discussion.

So we'll just jump right in and hopefully we put them in an order that aligns with the order in the book and included some commentary and claims from the text as well.

All right.

So Tyler, do you want to read this first part of the abstract?


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

Sense and sense-making form one unitary act, and together can be considered a non-operational cognitive medicate ability or dynamic capability.

There's no sensing without sense-making and vice versa, and there's no organizational sense-making in the absence of a clearly defined, deep, existential corporate purpose.

Generally, the processes of top-down, bottom-up, hypothesis-sensing, prediction-error minimization, rather than top-down juristic simplification, are guiding the path navigating a discontinuous world.

There's neuroscience's predictive coding that allows us to take management researchers' strategic cognition and, more specifically, the nexus of structure and cognition one step further to provide a more complete and practice-relevant framework for applying sensing and sensemaking in the context of strategic renewal.

I'm going to take the next part.


SPEAKER_01:
Sure, thanks.

Daniel, do you want to read this part?

No.

Okay, I'll do it.

Effectively, sensing and sensemaking are empowered by the circular causality of top-down knowledge structures, prediction models, predictions, hypotheses, and guesses.

and bottom-up stimuli data stemming from resource markets by default uncertainty and complexity are subjective concepts but are consistently deployed in management research as objectively determined environmental sensing and sense making are nonsensical in the absence of having set the firm's purpose and context in the first place once we define sensing sense making and strategic renewal in

form of action centric circular causality linking purpose prediction models predictions and prediction error minimization a new logic of strategic renewal emerges dynamically connecting structure hierarchy cognition and capabilities

And so I just really wanted to bring this in here.

We're talking here about top-down and bottom-up, and I know that there's management styles and structures that are associated with top-down and bottom-up management styles.

But I really wanted to bring up this paper, The Information Theory of Individuality, by David Krakauer and colleagues at the Santa Fe Institute.

And I bring this up because really they try to define what is an individual.

So even in a biological system, an individual like we are, we have more or just as many cells inside of our body that are not human as we do cells that are human.

right?

But like, if you were to take all of those non-human cells out of my body, like I would not be the same person.

Like I would not function optimally at all.

So I'm more maybe than just what is my DNA.

Like there's a, I'm a colony, right?

Not, not necessarily like I'm one organism.

I'm many organisms to function appropriately.

And so really these guys tried to define how you like

contain an individual?

What is worthy of this Markov blanket?

We talk about the Markov blanket as the boundary between internal and external, but where do you put that?

Am I drawing it around my human cells, between my human cells and my non-human cells?

That doesn't really make sense, right?

And so they talk in this paper a lot about, and they do it in a hierarchical way, which is why the biological levels of organization are here, because you can define an individual at the level of a cell or a tissue or an organism

population, community, and so forth.

And this even applies to organizations like a company.

So here, what is critical for it to be defined as an individual is this bi-directional information flow.

And I think that this paper is very elegant and great.

So you have to have information flowing top down, and you also have to have information flowing bottom up to be like worthy of a Markov blanket and

considered an individual in this paper.

And so I really just kind of wanted to bring that in because they talk about, Bijan talks a lot about how you need this bottom up and top down and they have to work together.

And he talks about that a lot in the book for a firm to persist.

And so like really it's necessary for anything to persist.

Like you have to have that bi-directional information flow to earn your Markov blanket, so to speak.

So I just wanted to kind of bring that up here before we jump in.

to the additional context talking about top-down and bottom-up in the book.

Did you guys have any comments here?

Daniel?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, but I was going to suggest that the roadmap was a quote from the abstract, Subjective Concepts Pragmatically Applied, which I think deals with a lot of informational concepts.

And then, like you brought up, if you define self,

spatially or genetically you're going to get some boundaries which may be relevant in certain situations but also might give a misleading or partial view of the total system and then the challenge is when we move to this informational or statistical theory of nested selves then organizations and their niches can have many different looking causes and components

so it's very challenging and it's not the org chart it's not the computer access chart it's something that's some how different and I think that'll be relevant to pull out what is being described and what should people's consideration be what do we actually gain by saying that systems are nested which isn't a novel insight


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's great.

And, and then like, also, you know, in talking about that, like, you know, bi-directional information flow, like the, there's a certain amount of salience that has to be there also, like information can be flowing both directions, but if the information is irrelevant, then, then that's going to, you know, not, not be the cause for perseverance.

Right.

Okay, cool.

Okay, so here we are, strategic cognition, sensing, and sense-making, and just an early quote from this chapter.

Do you want to read this, Tyler?

Is that okay?


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Strategy, initiation, and formulation, defined as a complex activity consisting of scanning, sense-making, and strategic decision-making, are at the heart of the firm's collective interpretive power, emphasizing its core capabilities, timely and accurate reading of expected environmental change, and the corresponding need for resource reconfiguration and pursuit of adaptation.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Thank you.

Okay, so strategic cognition, they used the definition presented in this paper, the cognitive perspective in strategy and integrated review, and they referenced this paper quite a bit.

So I just pulled out this diagram of strategic cognition and pulled up the definition that was used in this paper.

So they say strategic cognition is discussed in terms of its constituents.

structure and process.

By structure, we refer to the relatively stable characteristics and repeated patterns of behavior and by process to the cognitive activities taking place in organizations.


SPEAKER_02:
Just to note on that, the focus in this book is on kind of a certain type of corporation with a board of directors, for example, which is an important category.

This, I'm also just imagining someone who is navigating spatially

as part of like working in a taxi service also strategic cognition is coming into play though the wording might be framed a little differently but it's similar questions about sense making and just different implementations of different kinds of organizations


SPEAKER_01:
And I wonder how strategy, in terms of this kind of strategic cognition, is related to the systems engineering approach.

Is it aligned with that or maybe not?

That's something to be interesting to know more about.

Do you have any comments here, Tyler?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's something that, to build on Daniel's point, like how specific what Bijan is talking about is to boards specifically versus other organizational structures.

And just like a comment on that, my initial feelings on so far where we are in the book is that it's really not, I'm not seeing why we need to reduce the scope to just like organizations that have boards, especially since like most companies I've been in, a lot of the important decision making is really happening at the level of

really more of the executives in the C-suite.

And Bhajan might argue like, hey, that's actually a problem.

It should be more coming from an active board.

But it's kind of interesting to see where are the limits of what Bhajan is talking about and how specific is it to a specific kind of organizational structure.


SPEAKER_02:
or another angle is in the body the decisions are being made in a distributed nested way and so that kind of organization i think we'll read on to find will have resonance with this however who should the strategic communication and cutting edge research on the strategy governance upstream decision making

there's a very certain audience i think it makes sense to communicate that too and also this is the threads being linked for a first time in a dissertation style book and i could imagine different kinds of presentations and implementations being presented differently not necessarily like an academic published dissertation


SPEAKER_01:
And that leads me to wonder, perhaps strategic cognition can take place at many levels in a hierarchical system.

Like maybe an individual, like a project or a team is doing strategic cognition on the execution of their goals and tasks.

And that happens at the level of the individual and the team and the project and the department and then the firm and then the board.

So perhaps it occurs in several places.


SPEAKER_00:
So, like, when I've been reading board, when Bajon says board, I read that as, like, counsel, and that's my, like, interpretation of that, and that can happen at many levels as well.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, like, when you say counsel, I think attorney.

Like, why do we have lawyers involved?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, counsel is in, like, high counsel, supreme counsel.


SPEAKER_01:
All right, awesome.

Okay, so sensing, I pulled this out to Tyler's, you know, protests.

I wanted to just maybe talk a little bit about sensing and sensemaking and talk a little bit about them separately, but they are sensing and sensing, sensing and sensing and sensemaking form one unitary act and together can be considered a non-operational cognitive meta capability or dynamic capability.

And this reminds me of the time that I asked Carl about like when I'm sensing, what am I sensing?

Like if I am I sensing like when I look at a red balloon, am I sensing red balloon or am I sensing like 700 nanometer wavelength of light and like round oval shape?

Like what is actually being perceived via the senses?

And so like there is actually and Carl answered me.

He said red balloon, like go away from the red light and go more toward the red balloon.

And so like that, that answer really says like, okay, there actually is not sensing without sensemaking.

Like they are inextricably linked because if I'm actually sensing red balloon, like then I'm actually like, I'm going beyond what like my eyes see or like what my nose smells or whatever.

Okay.

And effectively sensing and sensemaking is a form of organizational learning, action centric hypothesis testing that connects the individual level with that of the firm.

Do you guys have any comments here?

We can move on to sense-making or stay in sense-making maybe.

All right, Tyler, this is yours.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, sense-making.

So purpose-goal-directedness, so the world's models, underlying prediction models, fundamental to sensing and sense-making.

So dissonance is a function of a preset goal generating predictions and submitting those predictions to continuous error minimization.

Sense-making models are constantly adjusted through error and deviation querying feedback loops, coupling top-down predictions and bottom-up stimuli, and circular causality is the sole objective in minimizing prediction errors and surprise, i.e.

free energy.

Fundamentally, sense-making is about designing and noticing systems.

um and so a quote that i really liked from the paper that um is actually from wake i'm not sure if i'm pronouncing that right is sense making is about how people deal with situations where there are too many or too few meanings um and this is something that i've experienced a lot especially in like startup contexts like you can think of it and they're actually kind of the same situation too many or too few meanings like if you're in a startup

and you're trying to figure out what you do next like your strategic directions are like kind of infinite because you haven't really built that many so like there's like all these things directions you can go things you're hearing in the ecosystem like oh look we did this look we did this and like that all could be meaningful but at the same time it all collapses into like what are we actually doing like are we even building anything right now like what's the point of any of this um and so a lot of how that kind of shows up

in your, like in the, for example, in a health context, I would show up in the body as kind of like illness or the feeling of agitation, anxiety, and you kind of have that same embodied feeling both in yourself and in the organization of like, hey, like what we're doing isn't working.

We're having all of these like communication

kind of issues where like the breakdowns where i'm not you're not receiving what i'm telling you that the information i'm telling you about problem isn't being received correctly and acted upon and this like boils up into becoming a bigger issue to where something needs to to happen and some action needs to be taken

and so it's really like this social process not something that's like the ceo being like wow like let me like go in here and like figure out the root issue like a plumber would and then like tell you tell the organization what happened but it's more of this kind of like feeling of agitation that happens throughout the organ uh the organization and through the social process being like what is going on what are we doing people getting increasingly flustered uh something is birthed in that process

and something that i actually had like a personal realization when i was reading uh this chapter because i used to work as a strategy consultant and strategy consultant what i kind of realized about that job is that it's purely about sense making so a lot of times people think of strategy consultants as like oh you're doing like a complicated quantitative analysis you give that to the board of directors they make a decision super top down but

actually where we spent most of our time on was socialization like kind of talking to people like kind of knowing when we went into the organization like roughly what was going on in a certain way we would collect data kept talking to people but even when we like we're pretty sure we had the answer

most of the job was actually framing and communication and like talking to a bunch of people and using the language that they use and making sure that there's a shared narrative between everyone and so like that was where the real work is i was like oh that's interesting like management consultants are professional sense makers and i think a lot of times a lot of organizations are actually embedding management consultants within the organization

as a way of like sense making as like a capability that an organization uh would have and so like an example of something i had as a management consultant where you kind of feel this dissonance

was I worked for a lot of health insurance companies.

And so health insurance companies were having this problem where, well, at least in the US, skyrocketing healthcare costs.

And if you're a health insurance company, you're basically a payment processor.

And so you don't really have any levers to fix that.

And so there's this issue of like, okay, well, we need training costs, but we don't have any levers to do that.

And so what that means is that you have to become more of a care manager to some extent.

and like that is a totally different way of like contextualizing like who you are both on the organization level and on the individual level of like what is my purpose here in this role in this organization was this organization trying to do and getting to the care management side like totally needs to shift that and so that shows up in the organization that's a lot of dissonance a lot of angst and also like a lot of pain um

and it ends up meaning that both the organization needs to change but also this individual needs to change themselves and how they relate to that organization and so that's why i like this cartoon of like i've been restructured it's like a lot of times it's like you are have to recontextualize yourself while so the organization is recontextualizing like what it's trying to do um so yeah i'll leave it there uh daniel and louis you have anything to add on the slide


SPEAKER_02:
Well, that's very insightful.

And it reminds me of the two ways that the entities can reduce free energy by changing their mind and changing the world through action.

And this is an approach where we can describe that process happening at multiple nested and interacted levels.

And even if the niche changed around one.

the world would be different.

The regime of attention would be different.

The action perception loop would be different.

And that would at the very least induce anxiety and uncertainty cognitively.

So it's really interesting what you added.


SPEAKER_01:
And I just love your cartoon that you pulled out.

It's good.

Okay.

So here is a claim from the book, from the chapter.

On a more operational level, sense-making's very effectiveness is shaped by three critical dimensions.

First, the clarity of a timeless corporate purpose.

Second, a dissonance-centric quest for and optimization of filtering anomalies.

As anomalies become shared, sensibleness should become stronger.

and C, an inactivist worldview, i.e.

environment is not exogenously predetermined, but is enacted through the social and action centric construction of shared meaning.

And so like, let's talk about dissonance a little bit.

Going back to this quote, unless you guys have comments here.

No, okay.

So,

Fundamentally, firm-level sensing and sense-making, grounded in dissonance theory, are a social process rather than a singular activity dedicated to detecting anomalies.

And I think that this goes back to what Tyler was actually just talking about.

But I looked up the theory, and this is the citation that Bijan used.

And in this text, Festinger says, in short, I'm proposing the dissonance that is the existence of non-fitting relations among cognitions

is a motivating factor in its own right.

By the term cognition here and in the remainder of the book, I mean any knowledge, opinion, or belief about the environment, oneself, or one's behavior.

Cognitive dissonance can be seen as an antecedent condition, which leads to activity oriented toward dissonance reduction, just as hunger leads to activity oriented toward hunger reduction.

It is a very different motivation from what psychologists are used to dealing with, but as we shall see, nonetheless powerful.

And so when we talk about sensing and sense-making being grounded in dissonance theory, this was something Tyler and I had discussed offline, back channel.

We were talking about dissonance theory, and what we're interpreting this to mean here is that it is this disjoint activity, like a mismatch,

between maybe like individual and firm level cognition or firm level cognition and like societal expectations or anyway, like there's a gap that causes like a kind of discomfort that needs to then be filled.

But I would be excited to hear maybe Bijan talk more about how it's grounded in dissonance theory.

just because it was kind of unclear from the text, like what exactly that might mean.

But if you guys have any comments here, Daniel.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah um in active inference we might think about dissonance as being related to a divergence like a kl divergence and so dissonance isn't a state of exception and kind of a binary switch there's always some non-zero level of divergence between expectations and incoming sensory data

if only because the generative model is coarse grained.

So in the decimal points, the world always is gonna be somewhat surprising or at least evaluatable in terms of surprise.

So again, instead of centering, for example, absolute value attainment, and then seeing uncertainty as a secondary characteristic, we use divergence-based statistics to incorporate this idea of dissonance or divergence-driven


SPEAKER_00:
behavior and put that at the center of the imperative for action yeah i i interpreted uh bijan's bring a dissonance theory as like way of bridging both the individual cognition to like the social cognition and like how the feeling of anxiety manifests in an organization and so like i think dissonance theory at least in this quote might be referring to the individual specifically

um and have that individual but anxiety of like hey I thought I was going to get a promotion this year I didn't get a promotion this year something is wrong or like hey we I worked really hard on this feature it didn't increase conversions in the way I thought it would that feels bad that's not motivating for me right that's like on the individual level but then you can there's another way you can interpret that dissonance on a more of like a social level as a way and like more of a social cognition


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

All right.

Non-uniformity.

Tyler?


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

All right.

It's critical that the environment throughput, listening to what wants to emerge, is neither logic nor goal-trapped, but open to non-uniformity.

In fact, the throughput of non-uniformity is a measure of firm survivability.

Uncertainty and surprise are not to be avoided, but to be minimized through action and hypothesis testing-centric engagement with the world as the underlying world model consequently and generatively gains an informational edge.

And so we talked about this a little bit during the last book stream, but a lot of leaders want to imagine that they're like slowly ironing out non-uniformity and that like you're creating this perfect organizational design.

And it's actually kind of funny, like there's this trap that a lot of leaders get into.

And I've actually gone into this myself where like,

it's kind of like utopia design almost.

Actually, it's exactly the same thing as utopia design, where you're like, I'm going to have this model of where I'm going to, all these problems I perceive in the world, I'm just going to fix by just top down, just god mode figuring it out.

And then everything is going to be better.

And we're not going to have to worry about anything anymore.

It's going to be great.

And then like invariably, like your two weeks, you create a new org design, two weeks, and it works for like a week and people are excited about it.

And then like, you start seeing kind of ripples at the edge, you start like trying to patch things up and then it like all disintegrates.

And then like, I think a lot of leaders are like, oh, like, you know,

people we have the wrong people people aren't you know following process like I want them to right and it gets really frustrating um but I think even when it goes well it's just like you were missing out on kind of like how generative that non-uniformity can be uh and where basically like if people are too rigid in their process you're you're not carving out space for anything new um

And so the way that he talks about non-uniformity in this case is that you minimize it through kind of action oriented hypothesis testing.

You're not wallowing in this uncertainty.

There's a way that you can capture that and take ownership over uncertainty and use it for something that's really beautiful and productive.

um and so like for example you know i've had jobs where i was a product analyst and i worked for this like consumer logistics company where we like go into people's homes and like pack up all of their things so it's like a very very complicated job right and so we would have we would like figure things out like okay wow our um times for this kind of job in the city are going up a lot and we would see that in the data and we're like wow this is really inefficient

And that would manifest itself as some kind of anxiety or dissonance.

And then we would start, we do analysis and we'd be like, oh, it's this kind of job.

It's this kind of job with this kind of furniture.

Then you talk to people, talk to some of these movers and you find out, oh, they don't have the right equipment.

on this uh they don't have like this kind of wrench on these particular jobs they're like that's interesting then you socialize that that information figure out from operations that that wrench isn't consistently being returned and they're actually losing a lot of uh their equipment to be able to do that job then you find out like uh from other operational leaders that they're not being funded appropriately they don't have like discretional spending to be able to like actually pay for those kinds of that kind of equipment

right so it's like through that that anxiety you kind of like are action oriented and can figure out like hey like this is not something that the situation isn't totally screwed like we can actually keep moving forward and like testing figuring out like what's going on and taking action accordingly


SPEAKER_02:
it makes me think of pain and soreness and redness in the body like signals have to propagate in order for things to change and that could be in an allostatic or an anticipatory or in a reactive or in a traumatized way from the organism's perspective but the only way that we're going to find out about it is through this kind of like active perception

individuals or nested levels above them making an action-oriented decision to like sense out different information and control attention which is actually seen as a policy selection over cognitive states


SPEAKER_01:
Sorry, my mouse was sticky.

I am also reminded of biological systems, but maybe for a different reason.

So in biology, non-uniformity is critical to existence.

You have a system at equilibrium in a biological system, that's death.

So this non-uniformity, and I think

He even brings it up as critical.

I don't know if I quoted it here, but he brings it up as critical to survival.

You have to have non-uniformity.

If everything's the same, it's like dull, bored.

It's so important to have variety.

Variety is the spice of life, right?

Okay, cool.

All right, purpose.

So purpose and goal-directedness, i.e.

the world model's underlying prediction model,

is fundamental to sensing and sense-making.

And this is the world model's underlying model.

So I just wanted to point that out that there's some nestedness going on here.

Dissonance is a function of a preset goal, generating predictions and submitting those predictions to continuous error minimization.

Environmental sensing and sense-making are nonsensical in the absence of having set the firm's existential purpose in the first place.

Purpose, not strategy, is the reason an organization exists.

its definition and articulation must be top management's first responsibility.

And this reminds me of our management organization in the Active Inference Institute.

What is the purpose of the institute?

And just trying to kind of outline and highlight these key things.

We can't have a strategy without having a goal.

What is that strategy trying to achieve?

What is the point, right?

If you guys have comments here too, that'd be awesome.


SPEAKER_02:
It's just that, is this meant to be a sentence in one language or another language, even in the same language or a formal language?

It will mean different things to different people.

It'll be associated with different envelopes and portfolios of risk and positive or negative consequences also deemed positive and negative by a different worldview and contingent upon all these unknown unknowns.

So I think amidst that is where we can explore a lot of...

interesting experiences I'm sure and what has worked and what hasn't worked in the applied settings and then also start to synthesize it with the research on cognitive science and organizational cognition and that's I think what this book is about like moving beyond just recognizing that complexity and starting to apply active inference and propose free energy governance as an approach to step in here and be useful as well as grounded


SPEAKER_00:
yeah just to add on that like i think i'm curious if john ever gets to a point in the book where he really gives some guidelines for thinking through how to design purpose more explicitly um because generally this is done extremely poorly even in like major corporations where they're like our purpose is like bringing smiles to our consumers or something like something just like super big and big use that like actually doesn't really help you

at all it's more of actually like a branding exercise um and more like a corporate social responsibility maybe not really anything about like purpose and when purpose is done well it's really more like i mean you guys might disagree with this this definition but like i think it's kind of more like a heuristic it's like a decision rule of like we do this and not this

And it's a way of collapsing information and just being like, let's not think through everything we could possibly be doing right now.

We already decided this.

This is what we're doing.

And it's a way to not think about things too.

And so I found this to be especially important in decentralized context as well.

And I think this is kind of what free energy governance is getting towards is like where you have more bottoms up stimuli that you're processing and changing like these top down models.

And it's really important in that context because you can't be managing everybody like really intensely like this is exactly what you have to do, but rather you have to give a decision rule that a decentralized group of people can use independently.

um so especially as we get into more like a free energy governance kind of world like purpose is super important but like daniel touched on like it's not always totally clear what like a good purpose even looks like and i hope john has a very crisp answer later on for what good purpose is


SPEAKER_01:
So here I am, the non-business person.

And Tyler, you said you don't read business books, but I've read more than I ever wanted to read, just in my own little startup side venture.

But I read Jim Collins' Good to Great book, and he really talks about purpose is really as defining what

you do and what you don't do.

And he really, I mean, it kind of affronted me.

He talks about the fox versus the hedgehog.

The fox does lots of things very well.

He's very clever and can do many things.

And the hedgehog only has one thing.

They do one thing.

That's it.

They roll up into a ball, right?

That's all a hedgehog ever does.

And so like in this Fox hedgehog analogy, like as a company, he says, you want to be a hedgehog.

And I'm like, but, but I want to do so many different things, but, but really that having, especially like when I think about a decentralized thing, like we do one thing, like, I don't know, he talked about like many different companies, but, but like, you know, Wells Fargo as a bank was a good example.

Like we.

are creating the best bank in the United States of America.

We're never banking outside.

And like, maybe it started regionally and expanded a little bit or even Southwest.

We are only going to fly in the Southwest.

Like they just defined one thing that they were good at, that they could just be better than everybody else at and just ran with that.

And that is kind of like one of the defining factors of a great company in his view.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, exactly.

To build on that a little bit, it's been a long time since I read Good to Great.

But Jim Collins is kind of like the prototypical top down or what some would call an orange style of management, where it's very achievement oriented.

It's very much about the CEO as being the hero, forcing their way and telling the organization what to do and focusing everybody really intensely.

and so when you talk about the fox and the hedgehog like it's interesting he says you want to be the hedgehog because usually when i hear people talk about the fox and the hedgehog it's like you don't want to be the hedgehog like forcing everything into your narrow world model um and so i think when he says be the hedgehog it's really coming from this top-down perspective

And it's really not getting into the free energy governance model of where ideally you want to be both the fox and the hedgehog.

Where you really want to have a unified world model that you're like, hey, this world model is not true, by the way.

We all know that this is subject to change and we're going to be actively changing this, but we all have to be on the same page.

And so we're going to have this somewhat arbitrary belief of what our purpose is, that we're going to continuously evolve over time in a fox like manner.

and so it's like that's a really hard thing to communicate uh and it's like very subtle and i've tried to communicate this in the past often and effectively um and so yeah i'm really curious if there's like ways to you know better combine that fox and hedgehog you know model so like totally now we're spinning out on a tangent but i just have to say like i don't know like


SPEAKER_01:
I get the whole fox thing.

I am very much aligned mentally with how a fox type of behavior, because I'm just like, oh, squirrel.

Let me go chase that.

But the hedgehog thing, I was thinking, okay, do you really want to be a fox and a hedgehog, or do you want to be multiple hedgehogs?

I had this vision of dropping water on the hedgehog, like the little gremlins, and you drop the water and then they multiply, and then you have a little field of hedgehogs that are all doing...

many different things in a very great way, but all siloed.

And, you know, they're one little thing.

Okay.

We have to, we have to go on earth.

We can talk about gremlins all day long.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, so for heuristics, I mean, this actually fits into purpose because you could think of purpose like as a heuristic.

And I'm not sure if John would agree with that, but that's how I think about it.

And so Reed, at least a few, his definition was cognitive heuristics are a form of cognitive simplification or rules of thumb and tools that empower the human mind with what the poet John Keats called negative capability, the ability to survive and thrive in uncertainty.

um and so yeah there's just a way of like collapsing information overload and finding a way forward despite like not having the ability to process everything at the same time um but then you know bajan goes on later to say that heuristics are fundamentally anchored in world view of environmental adaptation rather than enactment so resolving uncertainty is rather treated as a matter of adaptation to an exogenously determined game this book rejects

environmental adaptation as a viable survival strategy in a perpetually discontinuous one-shot interactions environment.

And so to just like illustrate this a little bit so that, you know, obviously I think we could all understand like a heuristic may not be very good.

You could use the wrong heuristic and have, you know, but just like to make this more concrete about like how heuristics can be confusing is that here are like two like really common heuristics for financial planning, especially in the context of startups.

So one is called Default Alive, and this was from

Paul Graham is the founder of Y Combinator.

And so he says, okay, a company should cut costs such that if you assume constant revenue growth, the company is going to make it a profitability with the money it has left.

And so that totally makes sense, especially in a startup context for extreme uncertainty.

But then there's like another decision rule, which is more about expected value.

So a company should choose the financial decision with the highest expected value, expected payoff of outcome X, or an outcome times the likelihood of the outcome.

And so these aren't like,

necessarily incompatible um well like they can be complementary to each other but they could tell you to do very different things uh especially if like an expected value of like hey we can crater the business right now is like a 10 likelihood but we can also have or a 90 likelihood but 10 likelihood we make a you know 100 billion dollar company right

um and so like that would lead you to do a different thing than default alive and so a lot of times business leaders are like juggling both of these at the same time and not necessarily like realizing that they are contradictory heuristics and that they are there are limits their heuristics um so yeah i'll leave it there i think actually a couple other things that he says to you are that like you know simple heuristics can outperform more complicated ones as well

And it's like actually not even clear on an organizational level how effective heuristics are, because a lot of times when they do studies on heuristics with individuals where everything is, there are not other intelligent actors who are

making anticipations about your strategy whereas in like a a business setting there are and so to take like a very simple example of this like with design there's for a long time was this movement of like the heuristic for design was like oh everything needs to be super legible and clean um and like you would use like helvetica 16 point font like

really like we want this to be clear and we want information hierarchy and like that matters far and above everything else but then the problem is that everyone was doing that and it got really monotonous and so the actual optimal strategy in that case was to design something totally wacky and insane and so over the last three years there was like this especially with the web3

just like absurd like looked like they were like geocities pages from the 90s where it was like looked awful and it was like not accessible and it was gross but it was really interesting to look at um and they were using fonts that were totally unreadable but it was interesting and it was this competitive situation where like the obvious heuristic but in a competitive situation made the optimal strategy doing the opposite of that heuristic


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, just a few notes.

There's so many great points.

One is the game theory Elferal bar problem where there's a bar and you want to go if it's under half full, but not over half full.

It's not fun.

You can't get a drink.

And it turns out that that's like an unwinnable game because if you go, well, if it was busy yesterday or if it was busy three nights ago, all decision rules, if you just hold to them, get adapted around.

and i think then that's a very interesting light to reject environmental adaptation as a strategy position of the book because i think adapting to the environment sounds like something biological it sounds like something that would be successful organizationally

And then I think that will also lead us to some discussions of how does the free energy minimization imperative transcend the default alive expected value dialectic?


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Vuka?


SPEAKER_00:
all right VUCA so this is an acronym for volatility uncertainty complexity uh and ambiguity start for some background noise right now by the way um so

I'm just going to read a quote.

This is actually a full disclosure from my aunt, who's a leadership and organizational design consultant.

She wrote this post called Intrepid Explorers in VUCA Territory, and I really liked how she framed this, where most of us in the West were trained in the professional model that prized expertise.

Today, being an expert and a specialist is not enough.

And worse, it can make you part of the problem because today we are dealing with the frontiers of humanity, a place where no one has been and no one could possibly be a content expert.

And so what I really like about this is that we're entering this world that is increasingly volatile, increasingly ambiguous.

But at the same time, that really runs up against how we're individually motivated as professionals, where a lot of us really want to get good at a thing and have mastery.

and it really like requires handling this uncertainty complexity that volatility is like a personal discipline as well as an organizational discipline as far as like that personal resilience and handling that uncertainty and complexity is what is going to make the organization uh resilient and that's actually quite hard to build it's a very rare skill set um

And a lot of it's about, you know, one, and I really like how this graph frame this of like, how well can you predict your actions and how much do you know about the situation?

And like on both of those axes, it's becoming increasingly so that you know very little about the situation.

You really can't predict your actions and like the ability for

for expertise to really navigate through that is difficult.

It's much less effective.

It's much more about cross-functional collaboration.

Daniel and Blue, did you want to take anything on that?


UNKNOWN:
Cool.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

I'm going to read this claim from the book.

Generative processes of top-down, bottom-up hypothesis testing, i.e.

prediction error minimization,

rather than top-down rule-based simplification are guiding the path to navigating a discontinuous world.

I'm just going to read these yellow parts.

In fact, rather tame uncertainty.

In fact, heuristics rather tame uncertainty.

Heuristics reinforce dominant logics in the form of pattern recognition and tend to disregard dissonant bottom-up stimuli as noise.

In fact, heuristics may reinforce the phenomenon of deliberate ignorance.

And tame curiosity is information enriching drive as a foundation for prediction error minimization.

I really liked this quote from the book and thought that it kind of maybe sums up like the argument against heuristics and also this top down, bottom up circular causality that we've been discussing through the chapter.

Danielle?


SPEAKER_02:
A little bit uncertain about heuristics for information enrichment and epistemic drive.

Can that be a heuristic?

If so, would that close the loop?


SPEAKER_01:
So that's like the reward function.

I mean, we've had this discussion many times, like, you know, the epistemic and pragmatic value when you knock out one side of the equation, what do you have left?

And so, yeah, can your heuristic merely be info sampling?

I think that that's probably fair, but yeah.

A subtle technical detail, probably.

Tyler, cognitive maps?


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Cognitive maps are closely related to heuristics and can be considered the potent form of visualizing sense-making in form of graphic representations that locate people in relation to their information environments.

Maps provide a frame of reference for what is known and what is believed.

um so you know i've actually made a a lot of cognitive maps myself on various consulting projects and what's kind of funny about cognitive maps is that they're actually really useful to make as like the person who is making them like as you go through the process of making a cognitive map you feel like oh like i understand the complexity of this organization

um pretty well at this point i can actually like hold it all in my mind at one time uh but the problem with that is that oh there's two problems one is that no one has understands your cognitive map at all it's only useful to you uh and then the other problem is that it it basically immediately becomes outdated and does not reflect how the organization actually actually works uh and so even like a month two months later it's like completely useless even to yourself um

John has a good quote of this where he really says that this cognitive map isn't really useful for the purposes of free energy governance.

So he says, cognitive mapping is representative of the deterministic view of the world akin to a physical cause and effect chain, and should be considered rather anti-clocked in the face of discontinuous market environments.

So yeah, it's really not something that you're going to be able to fully map out.

how governance works or how an organization works.

This is actually something that I'm thinking a lot about for the past couple of months in the context of DAOs of like, can you model the flow of value and power completely within an organization as code?

And I think what Dajon would say is probably not.

It's not fully like this deterministic model of cause and effects.

It's really something more of a social process that's a little bit more ambiguous and fluffy and hard to nail down.

Daniel, Louis, do you have anything to add here?


SPEAKER_01:
So like on the one hand, I don't know, like cognitive maps, like when I was taught about them in college, they made no sense to me.

I hated them.

I was like, this is the dumbest thing I've ever heard of.

But then like when you get into process flow, like in writing code and in like system design, they kind of like make sense, like an experimental design chart.

So I don't know, I'm back and forth on the, can you read your own cognitive map?

Sometimes, like if you can't, I would argue that if you can't read your own cognitive map, that it's not a good one.

How about that?

Okay.

Claim.

Okay.

It is neuroscience's predictive coding that allows us to take management research's sensemaking perspective, as well as nexus of structure and cognition, one step further to provide a more complete and relevant framework for applying sensing and sensemaking in the context of strategic renewal.

Effectively, sensing and sensemaking are empowered by the circular causality between top-down knowledge structures, prediction models, predictions, hypotheses, and guesses, and bottom-up stimuli data stemming from resource markets.

I just thought it was important to include this claim here.

I feel like it sums up a lot of what is written in this chapter.

Okay.

So we'll talk a little bit about abductive reasoning.

And this picture on the left shows like inductive reasoning, which is like when you have a specific observation, you come to a general conclusion about that specific observation.

Like if you see, you know, three men wearing white shirts in a room and then you might say like, oh, all the men wear white shirts, but it might just be a coincidence, right?

Um, and then like deductive reasoning, um, where you have a general rule and you come to a specific conclusion, like, you know, all the men have to be wearing white shirts in this situation.

And so you conclude that the men in this room will be wearing white shirts.

So that's a deductive reasoning.

And then you have this abductive reasoning, where you have this incomplete observation, where you see some of the men in the room wearing white shirts, and you don't know anything about the rules.

And so you have this incomplete observation, and you make your best prediction.

Like, oh, I guess some percentage of the men here like to wear white or something like that.

So this incomplete observation coming to this best prediction.

I probably did a horrible job at specific examples, but those were just like, sorry, off the top of my head.

So that's like this reasoning logic.

And a quote from the text, abductive reasoning usually begins with a surprising observation or experience.

This is what shatters our habit and motivates us to create a hypothesis that might resolve the anomaly.

Abduction is an inferential procedure in which we create a conjecture that, if it were, would make the surprising anomaly part of our normal understanding of the world.

So I liked this idea of linking abduction to surprise.

And I just wanted to point out the, the live stream number 47 about active inference and abduction.

And we discussed more than one paper in this live stream.

So just to read a quick quote from this specific paper, this paper it's a,

Piatarnan, I probably butchered that, and Majid Beni.

And I think Majid was on that stream with us.

And this paper says, the focus is on the allegiance between the nomenclatures of active and abductive inferences as the proper place to begin reaching at the wider target.

The paper outlines key conceptual elements involved in a naturalistic rendering of Pierce's late semiotic and logical notion of abductive reasoning.

and targeting a cognitive biological model of abduction, which preserves the functional integrity of an organism and fulfills existential imperative for living beings' evidence of existence.

And this paper was awesome, like totally mind blowing, and I can't do it justice in like, you know, the five minutes or whatever time we have here.

So if you want to learn more about abduction and the relationship to active inference, I suggest go check out this live stream or read this paper.


SPEAKER_00:
unless you guys have comments here we can move on forward yes one comment on that is that like i found it really challenging often to like in an organizational context to toggle between inductive deductive and abductive reasoning where it's like a lot of times people get confused which kind of reasoning you're actually using and if you do something that is kind of more abductive like hey like here's what i'm seeing here's my best guess like throwing things at the wall like then you get trapped into these things like well how do you really know that's

that's true you're like yeah like that's the point like i don't like i don't know that's true but like we're like really just trying to like this is a creative act we're doing together of like trying to come up with some hypothesis um i've just like this is a really specialized skill set and it's like quite hard so yeah and funny in the book i don't think we pulled this quote out i almost did but i was like i'll leave it be but like bajan i don't know if he's quoting someone else or he just says like you know abductive reasoning it's like any hypothesis is good enough


SPEAKER_01:
whatever, like, like, so it's just kind of like, you know, I don't know, shooting arrows in the dark.

It kind of made it sound like that.

But but there actually can be quite a bit of art and science to abductive reasoning.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, cool.

So john lays out a few different frameworks for thinking about collective sensemaking, and specifically, like how you connect different levels of the hierarchy together, like since we get one of the individual and like, you know, leveling that up through organizational sensemaking.

And so

he talks about these like six different models of collective sense making and wasn't necessarily saying like hey i am fully behind each one of these but he's more just talking about like prior work and um how to think about like the gaps and how they line up to free energy governance so let's go through each one of them right the four eye model um

So the four I models, this is the intuiting, interpreting, integrating and institutionalizing.

And so this is really thinking about how sense thinking flows through the individual level and then bubbles up through different levels of socialization up into institutionalization.

uh so crossings for i model including interpreting integrating and institutionalizing as applied to the context of strategic renewal provides a framework for the process of transmorphing individual sensing and sense making cognition to firm level strategic action intuiting and interpreting a hypothesis starts at the individual level and subsequently the interpretation sense making process becomes centralized

integrated and institutionalized at the firm level.

And so this whole process is goal directed.

It's not just taking bombs up stimuli and then somehow magically transforming it into institutional processes.

It is really goal directed and hypothesis driven of really inactive and saying, hey, this is what we believe about the world and seeing it is actually the case.

And I think John has an interesting point about the score model that like a lot of times organizations really don't view themselves as being active creators of their of their world are really especially when in context of like the board views themselves as more passive receptacles of information.

And so this whole process of sense making from the individual level to the organizational level is really like an active process for it, especially driven by the board.

Blue or Daniel, do you have anything to add here?

All right, tension-based view.

So tension-based view, this is another model that is similarly connecting both the individual level of cognition to the institutional level.

It just has like a different spit on it and different emphasis.

And so in this model,

the idea is that you need attention to make decisions right like you need to put some focus and energy to make a decision but individuals and consequently firms have limited attention right so like this is just like this fundamental constraint on your ability to make decisions is that you just don't have the time or energy to devote to every single decision um

and so you know your individual cognition is constrained and because your individual cognition is constrained uh so your social cognition and like that social cognition is shaped by different factors that is like social factors cultural factors economic factors and that social cognition those forces that shape like situational contacts that shape your social social cognition

those manifests and are institutionalized in the organizational cognition and that is like rules the positions the players and the resources so if you guys are familiar with like Eleanor Ostrom's model of like thinking about um kind of how common resource organizations develop it's kind of like the same exact framework that she uses

So this is really, this is very consistent with free energy governance, though it doesn't really capture like that inactive process of reality construction.

It's much more about just like thinking about attention and how that bubbles up through different levels of the hierarchy.

Blue Daniel, anything out here?

All right, dynamic capability view.

So the aim of dynamic capabilities research is ambitious to understand how firms can sustain a competitive advantage by responding to and creating environmental change.

This is from HALPAT, who is one of the main proponents of this type of dynamic capability view.

They also go on to say that dynamic capabilities are the capacity of the organization to purposefully create, extend, and modify.

It's resource-based.

So this is very consistent with how I learned about organizational design and evolution in a business school.

It's much more about, hey, we have these kinds of resources, kind of like a Settlers of Catan model.

We have these resources and these constraints in our environment, and this is how we can extend that resource base and grow over time.

And it has a little more of a deterministic bent to it.

and it's about like how you survive in a quickly changing environment so in that sense it's like similar to free energy governance uh but it's really more about like strategic change it's not really about like the individual cognition like it doesn't really talk much about individual cognition um at all so it's like missing it's like an interesting like theoretical framework but it's not really uh as embodied as free energy governance and as like um is missing that relationship to the individual

Blue, Daniel, want to add here?

All right.

OKRs.

So OKRs are objectives and key results.

So the idea here is that you have a main... So every single level of the hierarchy.

So let's say that your company, top level of the hierarchy is like... I will just use this example on the slide.

You want to... You're the head of the brand.

You want to get 1,000 new signups, right?

That is your objective.

Or your objective is increasing brain activations.

And the key result, like the quantitative way you measure that, is get 1,000 new signups.

So that's at the top level of the organization.

And then in each level of the hierarchy below that, you have the subcomponents that would need to be true to get 1,000 new signups.

so the things that would need to be true to get a thousand new signups are that uh well one you have to on the head of content you have to get your click-through rate above some threshold implement 10 12 new mediums post old or new content on the partnership side you have to get 10 000 event registrants uh by sunday right sorry

So it's basically a way of thinking about like how goals cascade from the top level of the organization and filter down through the other level.

Jesus Christ.

Sorry about that.

Very persistent.

And so this is actually really popular in a tech world.

This is pioneered by John Doerr.

Larry Page wrote this book called Measure What Matters.

It's about a quantitative way of thinking about organizational design and goal setting.

And so I've actually done this a lot at different organizations.

And it can be powerful.

And I think Bhajan really likes it.

He says, OK, ours have proven to be an invaluable and dynamic tool to foster informal exchanges at the field level of resource markets approximating self-organization, because each level of the hierarchy

is has the responsibility for themselves to set their own okr that aligns with the next level of the hierarchy right so it can be like really dynamic that and uh have that self-organ organizing quality however a problem with it and this is not something that jean brought up is something from my own experience is that like especially in a startup context things are moving so quickly that okrs

very, very often become outdated pretty much immediately.

And so you'll set an OKR for a quarter, and then you're a month down the line.

And so much has changed.

The context is so different that this OKR obviously doesn't matter anymore.

And that's a huge problem.

And so you need some way of changing your OKRs dynamically.

But the problem is that OKRs take a lot of work to set up and to socialize and to measure.

And so then you really don't have the resources necessarily to do that.

And that is a huge challenge.

There's also huge issues with doing OKRs in that it's like some version of good arts law where when your measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure, whereas these

different levels of the organization can over optimize for some like arbitrary metric that they need to get a promotion which sometimes that can be aligned with the organization but like in quickly changing environments it can become quickly not aligned with the organization actually needs

so there's like a lot of pushback for okrs right now it's unclear like i think there there's probably some formulation of okrs that's more dynamic and more responsive to bottom-up stimuli um but they they can be really hard to operationalize but theoretically amazing way of connecting different levels of the words jesus christ all right different levels of the organization

All right, let's go to the next one, collaborative intelligence.

All right, so the drive for self-organizing mechanisms gradually moved from employee empowerment and collective intelligence in form of crowdsourcing, deploying the power of information technologies to tap into the collective knowledge base, to collaborative intelligence, CQ, emphasizing the need for a shift in the leadership model from having all the answers to raising the right questions, as digital tools are increasingly deployed to enable goal-directed intelligence deliberations in distributed multi-intelligence systems.

And so to think about what this actually means in practice, oftentimes it's not the case where it's like you have some really huge robust system where every person in the organization is seamlessly sharing their insights and their data.

That's not really how it works.

It much more works that it's like you have specialized sense makers within the organization and consistent ways of processing data and sharing that data.

So for example, you'll have

An IT team, they create, they have like a central data warehouse where they put all the data together, they clean it and sanitize it in a consistent way.

And then you have embedded kind of sense makers, like kind of consultants or analysts at different levels of the organization, processing that data, sharing insights with each other, socializing across the organization.

And that tends to be kind of like how it's generally structured, especially in like a lot of tech companies.

An open strategy is kind of an extension of that.

It's like the extreme extension of collaborative intelligence.

So open strategy is categorically different from traditional top level strategizing and qualitatively different from bottom-up strategizing.

So open strategy is unique in its overall transparency, wide inclusiveness, and central use of social IT to effectively enable mass participation.

In summary, open strategy is rather project-centric rather than a coherent new strategy governance framework.

The very limitations transpiring through the various case studies suggest that open strategy is likely to battle with Schwarmer's three enemies or inner voices of resistance, the voice of judgment, the voice of cynicism, and the voice of fear.

So like open strategy is this kind of idea where it's like, A, the strategy can emerge through this kind of like bottoms up

information processing if we all had the information available to us wouldn't be purely on top-down decision maker for like synthesizing all of this but rather we could all do that together and something more robust will emerge through that process uh and this is like especially a popular concept in like among like teal organizations or Holacracy that that kind of decision making is like the gold standard for how it should happen

um though like he brought some interesting use cases about uh things like ibm i think it's pepsi a few other different use cases where their experience with this is mixed and when he says this is a project centric rather than a coherent new strategy governance framework like

it's easy to do this more in a project setting because you can think about what the relevant pieces of information are and who all the stakeholders are that you want to involve but to do that dynamically means that you're like continuously bringing in new information changing a new stakeholder responding to decision making processes between those stakeholders that's super hard to do like on a continuous basis rather than like a limited scope project basis so it's like a kind of unclear

how to make open strategy work over like a long indefinite period of time.

Yeah.

Blue, Daniel, anything to add here?

Yeah, I mean, just one last point here is that I really like how you brought the inner voices of resistance, the voice of judgment, the voice of cynicism, and the voice of fear.

And that's really been kind of this feeling I've had as I've been reading this book of like, yes, this way of integrating top-down and bottom-up stimuli together sounds great and is totally the right way

to do it but sometimes the reality of being an organization is that you're dealing with people's like personal fear and that really holds you back from being able to um to like dynamically change like people want stability people want mastery um people want things to be the word the way that they were the same in the past and like that's like a very deeply i think human thing i'm not sure if that's something that's you know unique about modern organizations

And you're really going up against that when you're trying to develop these more dynamic systems of thinking about purpose and meaning and sense-making.

And to me, in my mind, that feels like the central challenge of free energy governance.

I'm not sure if John would agree with that, but to me, that feels like the huge hurdle you have to overcome.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

So moving into the second section, which is much smaller, so we'll try to be fast.

Okay.

There's a claim here.

Strategic renewal is an iterative process of belief, action, and learning where periods of incremental adjustment, single loop learning are broken by bursts of revolutionary change, double loop learning.

It is only when we start expressing beliefs as probability distributions and action as a state that precedes perception conditioned by a Markovian boundary, intermediating the internal and external states all dedicated it

all dedicated in circular causality to continuously optimizing the updating of beliefs, i.e.

learning, a mathematically self-consistent model emerges.

So strategic renewal is, he is using, Bijan is using a definition put forward in this article by Schmidt in 2018.

This book adopts a cross-hierarchical, capabilities-driven and action-centric learning perspective in defining strategic renewal

which is best captured by Schmidt.

Strategic renewal involves a transformation of the firm's core capabilities associated with competitive advantage, concerns the entire organization and has implications across organizational levels and is essential to break past dependence and ensure the firm's long-term survival.

And another claim he makes here is to approach strategic renewal

as an upper echelon centric top-down only challenge is nonsense.

Given the importance of social interactions to knowledge development and organizational learning, we believe that renewal can be understood best as a system of relational or social exchanges, which is effectively the essence of reality construction.

Indeed, once strategic renewal is embraced as a system of relational or social exchanges, the need for a cross hierarchical connect emerges.

And I just wanted to bring up this figure.

This is like the action perception loop from thinking through other minds, a variational approach to cognition and culture.

We've had this on the live stream before.

I can't remember and didn't look up which live stream number it was.

But in this paper, they really illustrate how this relational and social exchanges

like interaction with the niche environment helps us come to a mutual consensus in a social kind of way.

And so if you would like more information there, I recommend this paper.

Okay, and then Bijan talks about top-down versus bottom-up strategic renewal.

The more dominant a top-down directed induced rather than bottom-up inspired autonomous strategic renewal process, the more likely that critical intelligence

form resource markets, maybe that should be from resource markets, is ignored and transient and transformation bearing market signals are lost.

In the absence of a circular top down, bottom up organizational learning, the firm may become trapped in top leadership's dominant logics, highly dependent on M&A, joint venture driven innovation, and increasingly disconnected from the very intelligence the firm's field close to resource markets beholds.

Eventually, financial control

M&A and alliancing is likely to squeeze out strategic control, in-house innovation, making the firm potentially rather more than less vulnerable to survival risk as innovation can no longer can be generated from within the firm.

Did you guys have any comments here?

Top down versus bottom up?

Okay.

And financial versus strategic control.

Tyler, do you want to read this one for me?


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

Financial and strategic control, respectively, correlate curvilinearly to firm performance.

Too little or too much of one or the other is potentially entropy bound.

The firm is challenged to find an optimal balance between external and internal innovation to power continuous strategic renewal as a stable foundation for firm performance and survival.

Indeed, the question arises, how does this balance financial and strategic control and whether the board of directors potentially assumes a critical and unique strategic role in the process?

So, yeah, I mean, I think just something to add here to you is, um, like a lot of times it's frames build or buy and the, the startup, the traditional sarcasm of like how you might balance these two decisions of like build versus buy as that, like build is we call that strategic, right?

Like these are the things that are like the core and central to your purpose.

This is like the core, like engine of how you create value in the world.

um and by are the things where and by can mean a couple of different things it doesn't actually mean necessarily it can mean more like partnerships and plugging into the external ecosystem and so that'd be like using someone else's api for something that is not necessarily central to you like stripe payment processing right and so it's this way that you can like both have the sustainable advantage while at the same time um kind of

not using your resources and your energy and your attention for something that's not core to who you are.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, thank you.

OK, I think this is our final claim from the book.

Strategic renewal research is in need of a more comprehensive framework structurally resolving the hierarchical top down, bottom up learning disconnect, cognitively embracing environment as a matter of enactment and in terms of capabilities.

balancing financial and strategic control, as well as exploitation and exploration.

The board of directors should be integrated as a distinct cognitive variable into the community of interactions.

But more importantly, the question arises whether the board possesses the right capabilities to be of strategic relevance in discontinuous market environments.

I think that that's all.

So if you guys have any comments, if not, we can move into some concluding thoughts.


SPEAKER_02:
sure well the book is subtitled reframing the strategy governance conversation so i think we're getting chapter by chapter a clear review of the positioning and the contribution of free energy governance and towards the middle of the book things get really

detailed with respect to the applications of the Active Inference Framework.

So far, we've seen more of a introductory opening salvo and a call for need for integration above and beyond the current existing practices, which I think Tyler did a great job conveying some of the real world's strengths and weaknesses and challenges of all these different strategies.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah and to add to that like i'm really excited for um how we move this into an applied setting because kind of like

combining the fox and the hedgehog model.

This is something I've actually thought about a lot to a little success.

And it's a huge problem, especially things like OKRs, how quickly they become updated.

How do you create a model of the world while simultaneously communicating like, hey, this model is subject to change.

This is a work in progress that we're co-creating together.

And like kind of going against people's individual resistance of not wanting change and wanting things to be stable.

Like I don't have a clue of how you actually really do that.

I'm curious.

I really hope that Sean has a good answer for that.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Well, we'll see you guys next week for chapter three.

Peace and enjoy your rest of your day or night, wherever you might be in your temporal existence.

## rCmq0TVGpW0

SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome everyone.

It's December 27th, 2022.

We're in Act-Inf Bookstream number 001.03.

We're in the third in a series of discussions on governing continuous transformation.

Off to you, Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

So this Bookstream is going to be part of an ongoing series of Bookstreams at the Active Inference Institute.

So please get in touch if you would like to participate either in one of these dot zero contextualization videos or an upcoming discussion over the material.

And these are all of our links here.

This is a participatory online lab.

We are open to interacting with anyone, no matter what your level of expertise is in active inference or governance or other.

So the goal of this book stream is to discuss chapter three.

We're going to go over the book map and roadmap and the keywords of the chapter.

And then there's two sections that kind of fell out of this chapter three.

So we'll split those up.

So we can just maybe introduce ourselves.

So I'm Blue Knight.

I'm an independent research consultant in New Mexico.

And I'll pass to Tyler.


SPEAKER_02:
How's it going?

I'm Tyler.

I'm more of a DAO practitioner out of California.


SPEAKER_01:
i'm daniel i'm a researcher in california and as this is our year closing book stream and this is going to be focusing on some board and strategy related topics i think it'll be interesting to talk about reflection and how do we look back how do we now cast how do we look forward


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Yeah, I'm definitely excited to align the material that is presented in the book with the ongoing development of strategy and governance in Active Inference Institute.

So that's for me what I'm excited about today.

OK, so this chapter is Micro Foundations of Strategic Governance, and the two sections are the role of the board and models of board cognition.

So Tyler, do you want to read this section of the abstract?

Sure.


SPEAKER_02:
All right.

So there is no universal governance model.

The strategic role of the board does vary as a function of culture, laws, governance, orientation, ownership, structure, and firm context.

The period of 1998 to 2001, the time of financial markets, irrational exuberance dominated by governance orientation centered around stock price considerations has given birth to today's compliance-driven governance logic ruling public companies.

Simply put, ever since corporate governance has been estranging the board, that's a uniquely integral part of the strategy process.

Coincidentally, during this very period, management research started complementing their two demographic input-output models with behavioral and cognitive dimensions, opening a new conversation around the cognitive micro-foundations of board effectiveness.

To this day, the study of the board's strategic role remains confined to the boardroom and treats environment as an exogenous variable.

Lou, you want to take the next half?


SPEAKER_00:
The top-down cultivated hierarchical disconnect so characteristic of traditional corporate governance and strategy processes is more likely to fuel prediction error, reinforcing the perception that the world is unpredictable and uncertain.

Indeed, the very limitations of corporate governance research may be an astute reflection of the very real and often self-inflicted limitations of the board's strategic role.

Shareholders are challenged to ensure that the board's full strategic potential is not wasted.

More specifically, there is a need for a new self-organizing governance logic.

Okay.

Tyler, do you want to read this, the role of the board?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, sure.

So the first section here is the role of the board, and then we'll go into really different models of thinking about board cognition.

So we'll start this quote from Sean.

There's no universal governance model.

The strategic role of the board does vary as a function of culture, laws, governance, orientation, ownership, structure, public, private, equity, founder, family led, controlled or combination thereof in firm specific context.

All right, let's go to the next one.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is upper echelon.

So, you know, not being familiar with like a lot of business like vernacular, I just stuck this in there.

So it's the high level of command authority or rank.

And this can be like top level management or the board of directors or both.

It seemed like that there was not like it wasn't specifically defined in the book as we're reading it.

But Tyler, do you have any thoughts on that specifically?

Like, what do you think Bajon means?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, my understanding is that it was a combination of both the board and the top management structure.

So yeah, you left it pretty vague, but that's my understanding.

All right, so we'll start off talking about what a board could be.

And so this is Bijan's definition of what a board could mean and not necessarily what it does mean.

So the board of directors is a unique integral part of a firm's operatulon.

It asks from within and without the firm as a boundary spanner and should encapsulate strategy processes, constructive tension between organization and an active environment, exploitation and expiration, as well as financial and strategic controls.

And so I think even people outside of an active inference

free energy governance context would probably agree with roughly this, this definition is that like, a board should be this collective governing body that use their collective wisdom.

Because that the idea is that is greater than just like one person at the top, making all the decisions and that that collective wisdom, something interesting and unique comes out of that.

That's not necessarily what always happens.

Oftentimes, it's not exactly what happens.

So let's go to the next slide.

we're talking about different, so these are different ways of thinking about how a board like actually functions.

And there's like a lot of different ways, like board, the board's role and like what they actually do, an organization varies considerably across a lot of different dimensions.

So one different way you could look at it is the cultural background of the board.

So this is from a study, I think they did this on Dutch Royal Company, which had branches both in England and then also in the Rhine and like Germany, right?

And so they found that top managers having the Anglo-Saxon corporate governance orientation are more likely to pursue exploitative and external growth strategic renewal trajectories, while those having Orion corporate governance orientation are more likely to pursue exploratory internal growth strategic renewal trajectories.

So I think what they're implicitly saying is that they're facing similar strategic contexts, they're the same company, but for some reason, culturally, they're more oriented to doing certain kinds of actions.

Then you can also think about it just by the context of the business, right?

There might be certain boards that have different roles that are more appropriate for certain kinds of contexts.

So some might be more administrative.

Maybe it's kind of like a legal requirement to have the board and that's kind of why they're there.

They're more of just making sure that everything is running on time.

More of an entrepreneurial where they're actually taking a more strategic role.

There's directing and controlling.

We can imagine that they're more kind of integrated with management.

And then there's supervisor, which might just be, hey, making sure that everything is going okay, that there are no outrageous fraud that's being committed within the company.

Though a very common issue too is that the board often doesn't have much of a role at all.

And so this is a quote from one of the studies that Dijon cites, that managerial hegemony theory argues that boards are legal fiction dominated by management.

So the idea here is that management actually runs the show,

You have a board, they have to check some boxes.

They're often legally mandated, right?

So like for a 501c3 or a C Corp, like you have to have a board.

But they're like, okay, like let's just appease regulators and have this board.

We're not actually giving them anything substantial to do

This is actually a really big problem in nonprofit board management as well, because it's very unclear what nonprofit boards are supposed to do.

And oftentimes, nonprofits will put a lot of donors on their board in a lot of ways just to appease these donors' egos in exchange for getting more funding.

without having a clear sense of like what they're actually supposed to do and this actually matters quite a lot because they don't know what they're supposed to do but they have all the power in the organization like the board runs the organization in a non-profit uh and so

they have like no accountability, unclear responsibilities, but all the power.

And so what that often dissolves into is that the CEO or the executive director is actually running the show and the board is there just kind of like checking boxes and more of a formality, which does not really get as a greater cognition that Dijon is hinting at.

It could be possible by having a board.

So that's unfortunate.

All right, let's go to the next one.

All right.

Okay, so...

This was the first of John's claims.

There's a danger, however, that the compliant board is breathing formalism, groupthink, and risk aversion at the expense of the operational understanding, strategic focus, and independent thinking.

Effectively, the board has been distanced from initiating and directing strategic renewal.

Unless lawmakers evolve corporate governance guidelines in tune with the requirements of a distributed and discontinuous world, the board is either relegated to a strategic irrelevance or increasingly represents a source of inertia, reflective of the struggle with growing complexity.

All right.

So let's just unpack what Jean meant by irrational exuberance from that claim.

So irrational exuberance, this is a famous quote from Alan Greenspan.

And this was from the 1996 when this was like the beginning of the dot-com boom.

Like the dot-com boom still had a couple of years left to go before it really kind of petered out.

But he said, irrational exuberance has unduly escalated

asset values um and so during this period it's like the late 90s yeah all these companies that uh well one there's like wild speculation in these companies but also there wasn't great strategic or financial controls by the by the boards and so you had companies like enron and taiko

that were very much misrepresenting their financials.

And so the end result of this after the dot-com bust was the Sarbanes-Oxleyad.

I always mispronounce this, Sarbanes-Oxleyad.

which what that did was that it created the number of like audit and regulatory controls, especially over the board, making sure the board doesn't have conflicts of interest, that they're actually overseeing the organization effectively, which is all wonderful in many ways.

That can be great.

Those are good things.

But there's also a ton of regulation that imposes on these companies.

And it also imposes a certain model of what a board is supposed to be doing to these corporations.

And so John does not like some aspects of that, some of the way that enforces what a board can and should be.

And so he says, the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the United States has been the most prominent legislative product resulting from irrational exuberance, composing draconian measures on the audit and financial representations of publicly listed companies.

I think what a lot of what Bijan is saying about this period is that before 2002, Four Star Games, obviously, you had a lot of misrepresentations, a lot of rational exuberance.

But something interesting that did happen during that same period was that you also had a lot of experimentation on what a board could and should be.

And so you get a lot of research during the same time, thinking about what managerial cognition, what board cognition actually looks like, what the board's role could be.

And that kind of free and loose culture also created a more expansive view of what a board is.

But then once you get into 2002 and you get all these regulations from Sarbanes-Oxley, that really constrained the idea of what a board could be and put all of these other burdens on top of the board.

And so it really kind of diminished their potential strategic and cognitive role within the company.

Blue, Daniel, do you have anything you just want to add here?

All right, so that was talking about the role of the board.

And that's all just to say, like, the role of the board is often extremely unclear, like any, like, nonprofit or corporation.

And so now Bajon's kind of switched his gears and says, okay, well, let's think about different models of board cognition and different ways that you can think about how a board could operate.

So let's go to the next one.

Luke?


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

So Rendova, 1999, was among the first to link managerial cognition to corporate governance, distilling the board's distinct cognitive contribution to strategy processes.

specifically in terms of environmental scanning and interpretation.

Her contribution can be considered seminal, laying grounds for a stewardship-inspired corporate governance approach that is now widely adopted by leading private equity firms, where top management team and board strategize together, often in highly complementary ways and based upon cash-financed, equity-centric alignment of interests.

as opposed to free call options.

Private equity is more of a governance than a financing model, explaining its public market equivalent outperformance.

According to Rendova, board directors do impact decisions.

And so this, I thought that this idea of managerial cognition was interesting.

It just like speaks to my interest in hierarchical cognition at different levels.

So this is a reference that Bijan gives that is interesting.

the managerial response to changing environments, perspectives on problem sensing from social cognition.

So looking at like what is managerial cognition?

So this paper characterizes managerial problem sensing and necessary precondition for managerial activity directed towards organizational adaptation.

as composed of noticing, interpreting, and incorporating stimuli.

And I liked this like definition of cognition really as like noticing, interpreting, and incorporating stimuli.

Although like in the paper, they don't say managerial cognition directly.

I think that it's attributed largely to this paper as very seminal in the field.

and then environmental scanning and interpretation from the previous claim also.

So this is the Rendova paper that Bijan cited.

And it says, the cognitive perspective in this paper proposes

Proposes suggests that directors contribute to dealing with the complexity and uncertainty associated with strategic decisions.

It argues that directors possess valuable problem solving expertise, which they can apply to a variety of contexts.

Directors make their cognitive contributions to strategic decision making by performing along with the firm's managers a set of cognitive tasks.

scanning, interpretation, and choice.

And I noticed, again, this environmental scanning, interpretation, and choice.

How does this relate to noticing, interpreting, and incorporating stimuli?

I think that maybe you can, it's like a rephrase, scanning, interpretation, and choice.

Okay, and so another claim that Bijan makes in the paper, he says, Rendova appreciates the dynamic nature of strategy process when she postulates that board participation in strategic decision-making rises with increasing environmental complexity and uncertainty.

However, Rendova's approach is rather static as it falls short of connecting the board table to the rest of the organization and interchangeably treats perception as interpretation.

A free energy governance lens instantly exposes the obvious shortcomings.

Maybe Tyler's going to tell us how.


SPEAKER_02:
All right, so let's go through a couple more of these different models of forward cognition.

One of them is called stewardship theory.

So I'll do a little quote here from one of the original papers about stewardship theory, Davis 2007.

So economic approaches to governance, such as agency theory, tend to assume some form of homo economicus, which depicts subordinates as individualistic, opportunistic, and self-serving.

Alternatively, sociological and psychological approaches to governance, such as stewardship theory, depicts subordinates as collectivist, pro-organizational,

and trustworthy um and so like there's i think a couple different lenses you can think about search theory like one is kind of more of this like communist version of a more collectivist world where they actually were not all fully selfish we actually have more uh we also have like collectivist aims and um

people it's like a different way of thinking about like individual motivation.

I think another one too, is that where this is really shine and become, um, actually important in like applied practice has been in private equity.

And so in private equity, like the owners are the same as the management.

Uh, and this actually ends up mattering because what they've seen these states have found, I can find this quote here is that actually impacts, um, performance quite a bit.

So,

I think, sorry, we already read that quote.

But the idea here is that when management and ownership are combined, the management acts as more stewards rather than people who are just paper pushers, but they're actually really taking care of this investment and more aligned with the board interests.

Okay, the next one is absorptive capacity.

So absorptive capacity thinks about the board as like a cognitive, cognizing unit that's informed by the experiences of its members.

So similar to what Blue said earlier, that the board's expertise and the board's cognition is informed by the diverse experiences of its board members.

So the ability of a firm to recognize the value of new external information assimilated and apply it to commercial ends is critical in its innovative capabilities.

We label this capability firm's absorptive capacity to suggest that it's largely a function of the firm's level of prior related knowledge.

It goes on to say, it's from Rendova, director's contribution as a source of requisite varieties to increase the pool of available interpretive frameworks on which decision group

which is the decision group control.

So the idea here is that there's limited information that any individual or any group can process.

You should get more people with more diverse experiences so you could process more information through different models.

And that will lead to more enhanced cognition.


SPEAKER_01:
I could add a note on that previous slide.

the mention of the requisite variety in the rindova quote is from cybernetics and ross ashby's law of requisite variety which is the idea that for a system to be a good regulator

adaptive in a given environment that it needs to have internal states that are of the order of magnitude of external states like if there's 100 positions that the food could be in but you're you can only conceptualize of 10 then you're not going to be able to have a granular or nuanced enough perspective to like find the food so um that ties the managerial and strategic

practice oriented areas which frankly dominate society to some of the more theoretical perspectives and system independent perspectives on cybernetics and cybernetic systems as cognitive systems which is what brings this entire discourse into the active inference area


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and I think that's also another important lens when thinking about board diversity, because a lot of times board diversity is often seen through a more of a political lens when there's also like a computational lens as well.

That's really important.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Okay, so moving on.

Forbes and Milliken's contribution is relevant in three regards.

First, it is impossible to meaningly infer board performance

from demographic variables in the absence of a process model linking demography and output.

Second, the board's role as a group is essentially a cognitive role and is therefore a cognitive rather than behavioral perspective.

It's critical to better understand the essence of board performance.

And third, effort norms, cognitive conflicts, and the use of knowledge and skills are important process variables underlying board performance.

I think Tyler's going to tell us about effort norms and cognitive conflicts.


SPEAKER_02:
All right, so effort norms, i.e., the intensity of cognitive resourcefulness on the task performance behavior, cognitive conflicts, the leveraging of differences in perspective, and the use of knowledge and skills are important process variables underlying board performance.

The dimension of effort norms cannot be stressed enough.

The sheer presence of the collective pool of competencies and experiences is rather meaningless unless actively and purposefully exercised.

So the idea here is that

Even if you have a diverse set of perspectives on your board, even if you have computational firepower, theoretically, if the board isn't actually inclined to acting on that and processing that information, it's just not going to happen and that power you have, that potential power just doesn't really matter.

I think this is important too, because a lot of boards see themselves in a more passive, in a more passive way where like the CEO is feeding them information and kind of giving them things to rubber stamp approve.

And so even if you have people who have that, those capabilities, that capacity, it's not really even being used.

And so you have to have a board that's actually inclined to taking more of an active role to really get that cognitive potential from your board members.


SPEAKER_01:
know blue anything out there yeah one thought by analogy to the brain and the central nervous system is like the usage of resources for cognition and the brain is still using a lot of energy slightly less but a lot during sleep so what exactly are these cognitive conflicts what is the resource in the case of the board

Is it the limited time in a meeting where people can speak?

Is it limited attention to different decisions?

What is it that's actually conflicted?

And how do we gain insights from thinking about the board as a cognitive entity?


SPEAKER_02:
So I think we'll, we'll get some of those soon when we talk about inertia.

Um, but I think you're right in that, like the time, the limited time constraints are a huge factor of that.

We're just like, you're less inclined to actually do a very like high cognitively tasks, you know, a very demanding cognitive tasks.

You have a couple hours every month to really talk about it.

Or in the case of a 501 C three, like board members are unpaid.

And so if you're an unpaid member, there's probably like limited time you're actually willing to put to actually thinking about some of these problems.

So I think that they're all a lot of dimensions to it, but we'll talk about that shortly.


SPEAKER_00:
So I think like this last end of this quote, the competencies and experiences of the collective pool is meaningless unless it's actively and purposefully exercised, really speaks a lot to collective intelligence and how like within a company, a board, a managerial system, there is this collection and you're not like contributing to the,

like emergence of the group intelligence if you're not using all of the different expertises of the different people in the group.

And so I think that it's really limiting.

But I also wonder, you know, like we might have a board that's like a very diverse group of people and we all have different tasks

in management different skills in management but like we also can do things like crochet and bake and like paint and and so like to what extent are these other skills that might be present in the board like relevant or necessary for like management to to thrive and um like really to enhance the collective for for the group i don't know yeah one one last short thought on that


SPEAKER_01:
recalling the earlier quote how there's no universal governance model it's like if we were talking about ant colony strategies is it better to simply have more nest mates or fewer or bigger brain per body size or smaller it's like there isn't a universal answer because there's different strategies in fact multiple strategies that might be adaptive in a given niche but it doesn't really make sense to even talk about one without the other

whether you're talking about chess or ant colonies or the board.

And so that's where the particular partitioning of active inference helps because it reminds us that the cognitive process of perception, cognition, including action selection, and then action and action is happening within the context of a generative process in the niche.

And that can't be just like left for later.

That's an intrinsic part of the particular partitioning.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so here, Bijan makes a claim that essentially, there are three important conclusions to take forward from Golden and Zajac, 2001.

I don't know if I said that right, probably not.

First, demographic and procedural variables impact strategic change rather curve linearly.

Second, power relationships are critical to understanding the impel versus impede debate and strategic renewal.

And third, attentional focus and engagement in terms of

An Ocasoian linkage of cognition and structure, and that's in this reference, Ocasio, 1997, are a promising venue upon which to pursue future research.

And then this linkage of cognition and structure from this paper, it's toward an attention-based view of the firm from William Ocasio, 1998.

Here he says, the central argument is that firm behavior is the result of how firms channel and distribute the attention of their decision makers.

What decision makers do depends on what issues and answers they focus their attention on.

What issues and answers they focus on depends upon the specific situation and on how the firm's rules, resources, and relationships distribute various issues, answers, and decision makers into specific communications and procedures.

And so that, that like pushes salience, I think to the forefront, especially with regard to like, you know, board collective intelligence, like maybe the crocheting and knitting and baking and all those things are not really relevant, or maybe they could be, maybe this is the explore part where active inference comes in.


SPEAKER_01:
Another, another link here with attention and structure and cognition is attention to something that's more dynamic and

but it requires the structural connections like between brain regions or at the synaptic level or APIs that call each other in a computational system.

Those pipes have to be in place for attention to be dynamically allocated.

and so the structural aspects of the firm are more like its morphology and then the attentional and the more rapidly changing aspects are more like perception and fast changing cognition and so that's going to be like a theme that gets built upon

are the faster changing more perceptual and decision-making like components of the firm and the slower changing more structural elements of the firm


SPEAKER_02:
Or just to build on that a little bit, like something I've noticed from fire companies that even if you have a very engaged board, like a board that we say gives a lot of attention within the firm and has a high attentional capacity, like they may not actually be linking that to the structure of the firm.

So for example, something I've often observed is that you'll have like two people putting together the quarterly board deck for a company of like a thousand people.

So everything gets processed through this tiny funnel of two people who have to synthesize everything on behalf of the board, where they're essentially just making the conclusions for the board at that point.

And so if you're not really linking both the attention and the structure, you're really missing out on the potential power of your board.

All right.

Uh, inertia.

So inertia, you can think of that really as just like reluctance to change.

And it's similar to the idea of like bounded rationality, uh, is that there are certain constraints, which you have to reason that board often reasons with them.

So read a couple of quotes from, um, I think it went off presentation mode.

Um,

So I'll read this quote from Hannon in 1977.

He came up with the original idea of organizational inertia, which, again, isn't specific to firms.

It's really an idea that can apply to any collective system.

So there are a number of obvious limitations on the ability of organizations to adapt.

That is, there are a number of processes that generate structural inertia.

And Bajon says that, indeed, corporate governance best practice guidelines may rather fuel governance inertia rather than freeing the board as an impactful variable supporting continuous strategic renewal.

And so to make this a little more concrete, we can kind of go through a couple of different examples of inertia.

And these all come from Hannon's 1977 paper where he kind of defined this idea of organizational inertia.

So I'll list a couple of them.

One was that previously made investments aren't easily transferable.

There are constraints on the information decision makers receive.

There are political constraints.

There are costs of history to allocate tasks and create procedures.

So you've basically done all the work to figure out who's doing what.

It's a lot of work to redo that.

There are legal constraints, perceptions of legitimacy, if you were to change course at this point, unclear how your strategy will succeed in competitive environments.

So if we do this, how will others react?

And so all of this just creates a sense of anxiety that people just don't want to

confront and they feel good and comfortable pursuing something that they already understand.

And so you can think of that as organizational inertia.

And this is particularly a problem with boards, because especially if you have a board with limited attentional capacity, like they're not going to be putting the time to really think through and work through that anxiety.

They're not going to be like actually doing the hard work to overcome that.

And so you end up just defaulting to something that people already understand.

And so there's often something that you hear in organizations where like, okay, well, we could do this really ambitious thing.

And like, there are people who might be actually excited about this more exploratory initiative that you could do.

But like, how are we going to sell that to the board?

Right.

And oftentimes it's the CEO has to put their reputation on the line to sell something that's more exploratory and risky to the board who has limited attentional capacity.

They're anxious about it.

So they just kind of have to trust this one person to say, yes, go for it.

It's okay.

And so again, you're not really unlocking that cognitive power potential of the board.


SPEAKER_01:
One more aspect there on inertia to connect to the Bayesian physics.

Inertia is something that physical objects have in classical mechanics, like whether it's a ball at rest that requires some force to push or whether it's a bicycle in movement whose inertia allows it to stay upright.

inertia is an aspect of physical objects.

And by analogy in the Bayesian physics, the inertia is like the resistance of a prior to be updated to incoming observations.

So a prior distribution with a high inertia, it's like a heavy distribution, it's immovable to new stimuli.

And that corresponds to having low attention.

because it's like as new information comes in the prior has high inertia it doesn't update a lot whereas when there's high attention paid to the incoming stimuli in the extreme the prior just updates to whatever the new stimuli says that's our new best estimate so that's ultra high attention and also very very movable and that's um like a light object

And so there isn't a general answer, but this puts us into a framing where we can think about this structural and attentional inertia as part of the morphological and dynamical cognitive process of the board and the organization more generally.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that I really like that perspective on it.

And it makes me think about how why Bajan is spending so much time thinking about the board, because it's kind of this combination of low attention, high responsibility for updating, like the beliefs of the organization.

And so that's where like a lot of any like continuous change or transformation would have to happen start the board.

So I understand why Bajan is spending so much time thinking about this and time on different models of board cognition.


SPEAKER_00:
Hopman et al.

2019 make an invaluable contribution in moving away from deterministic models that suggest which specific board configurations and leadership concentrations enhance board effectiveness, firm performance, and a firm's overall strategic capability.

Instead, they focus on the board's better capabilities, such as self-evaluation and self-reconfiguration to power continuous strategic renewal.


SPEAKER_02:
All right.

The board's power vis-a-vis management is strongly related to the board chair, initiates self-evaluation and self-reconfiguration, thereby ensuring that the board can still critically evaluate strategic proposals and reconfigure strategies.

So unfortunately, though, Hotman et al.

do not go far enough since strategic renewal remains bottlenecked by the board chair.

We need governance processes that neutralize the over dependencies on the chairman and the CEO.

So oftentimes within an organization that has the board, the chairman is kind of running the show on the board and their counterpart is the CEO.

And they do love the agenda setting for how the board actually operates.

how much attention that they're actually giving on to problems, the kind of information that's to be incoming and available to the board.

And so a lot of responsibility relies on the board of like how cognition can actually happen.

And like I have been in this position myself, I've been a board chair, a lot of responsibility kind of ends up being on you for how well the board and consequently the organization can run.

And so

what's unfortunate and something I've actually tried to do myself is like spread the responsibility of the board chair throughout the board.

So that cognition doesn't rest on like a single person, but it's actually more spread out through that entire, you know, cognizing unit.

And that is difficult to do.

So I'm curious if Dijon later on in the book has some recommendations on how to structure that.

Daniel, do you have anything to add here?


SPEAKER_00:
I'm curious, Tyler, with respect to the DAO world that you live in, what are some governance processes that do neutralize that over-dependence on the chairman and CEO of a company?

Can you maybe say a few words about that?


SPEAKER_02:
yeah so one i mean there's like a lot of different governance processes but like we kind of talked about a couple of them so one is that like if you're doing especially like token or token based voting like the nfts or the rc20s like any generally most people can make a proposal not anyone can make a proposal but like a lot of times the agenda setting can be done in a distributed way so it's not necessarily the board chair and the ceo determining hey these are the things that we're bringing up to a vote

but that can be done more dynamically and oftentimes there's a quorum like a rules about who could propose so it's not like fully decentralized but in a sense like that agenda setting can be done more decentralized

And there's also ways of creating salience as well without having a single person at the top saying what is salient and what matters and what doesn't.

There are ways, there are different governance strategies where salience kind of like bubbles up and you can kind of determine certain governance rules like your quorum, for example, in a more like dynamic way.

And so there's a lot there of how it can work.

Then there's also how it actually works in practice.

And in reality, a lot of times with DAO governance, usually often it is a couple of people making a lot of the proposals.

And so what's interesting is that even if you want to be in a more distributed way, sometimes there's this pull of gravity towards centralized decision making.

And it really just is that there's like limited attention available, even if like you're not saying you're not legally mandating some kind of centralized structure.

There's just like only a couple of people who are really willing to like actually synthesize all this information at any given time, especially within DAOs.

Like DAO proposals are often extremely technical and there's often limited people who can even like do that if they wanted to.

So, like, it's something that I've been personally struggling with is thinking about like, okay, well, there's a world that we want to live in that's maybe more decentralized and less hierarchical and more connected.

But there's also just these constraints on like, human time and attention, effort capabilities, that constrains the kind of structures that you can have.

And

Yeah.

And hopefully later in the book, John will have some good recommendations on how you construct your organization, your board to kind of mitigate that like pull towards centralized processes.

But it's just something I witnessed a lot in like the data world as well.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, thanks.

So I think that that's the end of the material today.

So next week, we have the chapters quite a bit longer.

This one was pretty short.

But yeah, we're looking forward, I think, to what Bajan's going to tell us about free energy governance.

And he's setting the stage now for delineating the problems.

And now, like, how do we go about solving them?

I'm curious to delve into this next section with you guys.


SPEAKER_01:
Can I bring up a few points and questions?


SPEAKER_00:
Of course.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

all right so one of them was it described the board as a spanner earlier on and i wondered whether the board was kind of like at the heart of the onion insulated by more and more layers or whether the board is on the front line interfacing more publicly in the actual position or that person perhaps serving in a different position as well like wearing multiple hats so

Feel free to give any thoughts on that, or we can just raise the point.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

I mean, my understanding of, well, there's like how it actually works out and then how it can work, how it actually works out.

I think it's often more like in the onion,

where they're getting more refined and more refined information that filters through a hierarchy until it finally gets to the board.

And what I think Bajan is hoping for is something that resembles more of like a motherboard, this integrating unit where there's all these connections from other parts of the organization.

There's still that hierarchical structure, but it's not insulated from the rest of the organization.

And I think that's what Bajan is getting at.


SPEAKER_00:
uh but from my understanding of board governance like that is less often the case and it's really hard to build so i think that that's like a really great question um and i'd like to really kind of explore it more in more detail when we get into our discussion section so i think we should add that to the dot one um list so


SPEAKER_01:
right another topic is there was the mention of a compliance board as well as how a board could be like dissonant or impel versus impede and so how to balance between uh simply going with what the body provides

towards totally wishing things were different it's like in the extreme neither's gonna work so there has to be some middle path but there's no universal model so that's just kind of one point um and then uh another one was the market centrism of a for-profit company means that in some sense but please suggest if otherwise

the financial success on the broader market will define the persistence and the growth of the company.

So that is kind of like projecting this very high dimensional space of strategy and composition and attention.

projecting down onto a number line like did the stock price go up or down and so to what extent do um for-profit and not-for-profit organizations or components of organizations have clearer or more alignable measures

Because it's just like if the only criterion of cognition was this one test, then you kind of get the Goodhart's Law situation where other measures can fall by the wayside.

So how does that get prevented or ameliorated in for-profit endeavors?

And then on the other side, how does that not get ignored when there are very real material constraints in nonprofits as well?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

And I forgot to mention this point earlier, but it's a really important one that like a lot of our model of like shareholder governance is often very like culturally specific to America.

So there are other ways you could think about, uh, board governance, corporate governance.

So for example, in, uh, especially like in Germany, there's like a stakeholder governance model where, for example, you're legally required to have a board member in Germany who is a representative of the workers.

Right.

And so this is more aligned with like, and you could think of that, you could expand that model too, of like stakeholder governance, but that can mean, so that's just Germany's model where they're like, Hey, workers' rights need to also be important in addition to profit.

Right.

But you could also expand that to think of, okay, well, what if we had an advocate for the consumer on the board?

Right.

Like you could expand that idea of what a for-profit

the company's stakeholder governance model can look like.

In Japan, for example, there's a lot of for-profit companies that are also family run.

So there's these family considerations on top of the for-profit incentives as well.

So then between a C corp, like for-profit company, and then a nonprofit, there are different legal structures that kind of bridge the distance between the two.

So one of the famous ones is called a B corp.

And so a B Corp, it's essentially the same thing as a C Corp.

It can make money.

It's a for profit company.

But in the bylaws, they are not legally mandated to only maximize for profit.

They can also maximize for other they call it like double bottom line initiatives.

So there's other things that this for profit company can try to do aside from just

get money.

And then there's like, a lot of different permutations of that, like a lot of different legal structures can have that.

And same with a nonprofit to even a nonprofit couldn't have ways that is trying to get revenue, and think in a more for profit way.

Even though there are people who are shareholders who are going to profit from it, but they can, they can act in a similar way.

So I think often, like the

the distinction between nonprofit and for-profit can actually become quite fuzzy in the way that we think about for-profit governance is often very like culturally centric on how we've done things in the U S and in England, not necessarily on like how it can be done.


SPEAKER_00:
And as to your first point, Daniel, I think like what, I'm curious to know, like what goes into defining or creating a compliant board or like a dissonant board?

Like, I mean, I would think that it's like not structured to be a compliant board.

I mean, maybe they write it into the bylaws that the board just agrees with everything that everyone does, but I think it's more of like an emergent property of the board.

And like, does the entire board need to be replaced?

If like you say you have a compliant board and you want more of like a strategy driven governing board, like, do you have to,

completely interrupt like the the norms right like we were you know it like bijan had said the norms if the norm is to be compliant like you have to just erase everyone to bring in like a whole new crew to develop new norms otherwise like that one person who's like oh let's just go along with whatever everybody says like they'll keep that culture alive right


SPEAKER_02:
To clarify that, I think what Bijan meant was compliance board, which is more like if you're a nuclear power plant, for example, you want to have a compliance-centered board who's making sure that you're following all the rules and regulations.

But I think to your point, Blue, a compliant board is also important.

A lot of boards function as compliant boards.

They're just rubber-stamping approvals, and that is not super useful.

So yes, I think that's also a good point.


SPEAKER_01:
and one fun topic I think to do a little research into is how did we even get here with a board I mean isn't a board or the table that was also mentioned those are just like rectangles how did we get to this point where the meeting table architecturally and the people gathered around it

have become legally required and then even sub-constrained from there.

And so really just thinking broadly, as I think in the DAO and other spaces people are, thinking broadly about what organizational morphologies and what developmental trajectories and ecosystems of shared intelligence facilitate adaptive cognition.

and what boards do and how they both build on the legacy and stay within that lane of what may be legally required for compliance, as well as innovate and move beyond some of these, um, like shortcomings and fallacies that boards can fall into.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

I've actually looked into this a little bit about like how, like why boards are a thing.

And like, for example, in nonprofit boards, like they were just designed for like a different time.

When a lot of times you were just getting, you're like basically foundations that had a bunch of money that they were going to allocate.

And they were like top down driven models, not necessarily like dynamically responding to the world around them and dynamically changing.

And I think a lot of for profit corporations, it was kind of like a similar idea is like, we are going to try this boat and we're going to go to this other country and we're going to do trade there.

And we're going to like come back.

Right.

It was a more simple and like linear model of thinking about planning.

And so they're just made for a different world.

And like, I think now there's a lot of legal infrastructure that has built up around them.

So like actually innovating around that's really difficult.

So for example, one thing I've been working on a nonprofit recently, we were like, well, we don't want to have a board.

We want to be more community driven.

We want to be a co-op.

And so then we looked into being co-op and actually the legal infrastructure for setting it up is actually just like not developed at all.

You basically have to have a lawyer spend thousands and thousands of dollars to actually figure out how that's going to work.

And it's also very precarious, even though if this thing is even going to work.

So it's just really this well-trodden path has just been beaten down over and over again because it's the path of least resistance, but not necessarily the optimal one for cognition within a company or a nonprofit.


SPEAKER_00:
I was going to say earlier, like, how did we get here to this board?

Right.

And it's a script that like it's a script that has become solidified into law.

And it's the same thing, like when you have a compliant board, like the rubber stampers.

And that's just also a script that they have followed.

So that's why they're all compliant.

So and not really kind of leveraging the type of governance that would be maybe optimal for the strategy of the company.


SPEAKER_01:
okay cool yeah any other final final thoughts or we can hold it table it for the upcoming discussion rhythms of cognition rhythms of the year the agenda setting the agenda communicating with the board board communicating with the organization organization communicating outside the organization it's great topics and i think we're um

deep into the series and we're just going to continue to see how the scholarship and the legacy of a lot of conventional and even heterodox thinking and management is taking the next step with this book and the contribution that takes it into the free energy governance space


SPEAKER_00:
Well, thanks, guys.

And we'll see you next week for getting into the free energy principle.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Thank you.

## BPzwSTalH5E

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome everyone it's January 3rd 2023 we're in active book stream number 001.04 on governing continuous transformation off to you blue


SPEAKER_02:
So we are the Active Inference Institute, and this discussion is over governing continuous transformation.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve upon our work.

We are a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can reach us on social media at all of these different links here.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome to discuss and contribute to this work, and we will be following good video etiquette for live streams.

If you would like to get in touch to participate in a future dot zero live stream or one of the upcoming discussions, please reach out to us via social media or email.

And again, our links.

So today we are going to cover section 1.4.

So we're just going to go kind of over where we are in the book, the keywords, and then the different subjects and things that we've pulled out of this section.

So just to start off, we will maybe just introduce ourselves.

I am Blue.

I am a longtime Institute participant and an independent researcher in New Mexico.

and I'll pass it to Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher and institute participant.

I'll pass to Tyler.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm Tyler.

I'm a DAO researcher and practitioner in California.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

Is there any introductory comments or do you guys just want to jump right into it?

Jump in?

Okay, here we go.

So this is the section that covers the free energy principle.

And that's also the title of this chapter.

And I think the first keyword on our keyword slides.

So we pulled out a lot of these keywords.

I mean, we pulled them out.

They weren't highlighted by Bijan or selected by him at all.

And this is just kind of the topics that we thought that would be better to dive deeper into for a more thorough understanding of the material presented in this chapter.

And we will, this is not like a final word.

This is maybe just an introductory perspective and our take on what's maybe happening in this, in this chapter, not a review.

So we're definitely open to correction and updating our model of this model.

All right.

So abstract, Tyler, do you want to read this first section for us?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

So the free energy principle is the first-order principle of police action empowering self-organization.

FEP commands the generative process of active inference dedicated to minimizing the information theoretical mathematical difference between top-down predictions and action-generated bottom-up stimuli in pursuit of minimizing error, surprise, and entropy.

The power of Rustonian active inference is fundamentally fourfold.

It is the pure belief-setting in dynamic and non-stationary environments.

The active inference agent carries out epistemic exploration to account for uncertainty by making inferences in Bayes' optimal fashion.

The reward signal is so characteristic that reinforcement learning is removed.

And finally, active inference sets the collaborative human-machine AI potential so integral to the multi-intelligence firm as the mathematical expression of beliefs in the form of probabilities provides the very common denominator to align humans with machines.


SPEAKER_02:
Wow, big if true.

Okay, and the author goes on to say, there are only two distinctions that matter, what is known and unknown, and what is in our control and what is not.

There are four states, active, action, internal, firm resources, sensory, perception, and external, unknown and hidden behind the Markov blanket.

According to free energy governance, free energy principle powered AI, which he uses here this capital A and lowercase I to mean active inference.

So free energy principle powered active inference is the future site of organizational becoming.

So we can unpack that, I guess, starting with this claim, which was in the abstract itself.

So

Maybe we don't need to read it.

Or was it exactly stated there?

Maybe not.

Oh, yeah, fourfold.

So the four claims, we'll just start off this first one.

The power of Fristonian actance is fundamentally fourfold.

It is a pure belief based setting in dynamic and non stationary environments.

So

What does that mean?

What is Fristonian active inference?

So maybe we want to just step back a little bit and talk about the FEP.

And the definition or explanation that Bijan picked out for this chapter is the free energy principle stems from the idea that living systems can be distinguished from other self-organizing systems because they actively avoid deleterious phase transitions

by bounding the entropy of their sensory and physical states.

Under the FEP, to be alive simply means to revisit a bounded set of states with a high probability.

And that's from this 2019 Badcock et al paper.

And this image is from Kirchhoff et al, 2018.

And I always like this when I think about life and self-organizing systems.

it kind of this picture just really like speaks to what it is to kind of be self-organizing like a hierarchical um scale so and this like revisiting a bounded set of states with a high probability kind of speaks to the non-equilibrium steady state density that um is like a constraint of life we kind of have to live within you know like a certain temperature

range, a certain, you know, glucose range, and all life has like an optimal range of states that they stay in.

But like, if your fever gets too high, like if your temperature goes too high or too low, like you will dissipate.

So you revisit this bounded set of states with a high probability, and that's kind of your non equilibrium steady state density.

Do you guys have any comments here on the FPP and self organizing maybe?


SPEAKER_00:
I'll give one comment.

This is a via positiva.

It's describing what the FEP is, but we could look back to those four claims and think about what this is not, the via negativa.

So rather than being belief-based in dynamic settings and adaptive autonomous agents, it might be a framework oriented around some sort of static or perennial understanding of the world.

The second point, rather than being centered around epistemic exploration and the value of reducing uncertainty and gaining information, hearing new perspectives, it could be oriented around pragmatic or utility value, which ties very closely to the third point, which is that

A framework contrary to active inference might center a reward function that maps different states of the agent or the organization or the world to some sort of reward function, which is the heart of reward learning.

And then the fourth point also kind of ties in that rather than thinking about ecosystem of shared intelligence, intermediated by composable frameworks like active inference, we might be looking for like the one framework to simply rule them all, and therefore not think about the human machine or human human relationships as collaborative and emergent, but rather just be looking for the one computer, we're just going to turn it on, the business is going to run.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

So getting into active inference a little bit more.

So we're kind of unpacking here.

We're going to unpack slowly these like four claims.

And so for Estonian active inference or FEP powered active.

So in active inference, there are four states.

This is what Bijan claims.

Active, action, internal, firm resources, sensory, perception, and external, which is unknown and hidden behind the markup blanket.

And Bijan quotes Frist in here and says, in active inference, the agent makes choices based on its belief about states of the world and not based on the value of the states.

And so that speaks to what Daniel was maybe just mentioning about reinforcement learning.

And we'll start to unravel reinforcement learning a little bit more.

But where reinforcement learning is really kind of driven by that pragmatic value function,

active inference is driven by your beliefs about the world.

So not how much value can you gain out of moving left or moving right.

But like, I fundamentally believe that I should move right because that's my policy that I've, you know, that I operate on.

So, um, yeah.

All right.

And, um, in this, where, where these claims start to be unpacked in the paper,

Bijan says, one could argue that nearly all physical sciences can be reduced to a metrology in service of confirming a variant of the principle of least action.

This is important because

it means that physics does not offer any ground truth.

It is just a search for measurements that endorse an appropriately formulated prediction based upon a variational principle.

And this quotes a first in 2019 paper.

I don't know that paper off the top of my head, but as funny as I said, Bijan says, and then I started reading it, I'm like, no, Carl said this.

It's like a very, this sounds very much like something that would come out of a Carl paper.

Okay.

And so what is this principle of least action?

We've talked about this a lot before in many different live streams, but I looked it up just for like, what is like a really easy, simple way that I could explain it in a minute or less.

And I found this definition on Scholarpedia that says, a true dynamical trajectory of a system between an initial and final configuration in a specified time

is found by imagining all possible trajectories that the system could conceivably take, computing the action, which is a functional of the trajectory.

And just as a reminder, a functional is like a function of a function.

So computing the action, a functional of the trajectory for each of these trajectories and selecting one that makes the action locally stationary, traditionally called least.

True trajectories are those that have the least action.

And so this is like the laziness, the lazy society.

Everybody makes the lazy choice, right?

So like the true trajectory is the one where you kind of just stay put.

Daniel, do you have a comment here?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, although on the previous slide we looked at the particular partition where action states are the outgoing dependencies.

And here we see action again with a principle of least action.

But importantly, to abide by a principle of least action isn't simply to take the lowest energy action or the least movement.

It's more akin to a conservation law

like the total energy is conserved of potential plus kinetic when the ball falls off the platform so that means that there's a path of least action with the ball dropping now that is not the path of least movement but it's a path of least action given an initial setup because the total energy is conserved and so we're interested in paths of least action

over the particular partitioned states internal external and blanket states and so it's a little bit like um not just simply confusing but least action can include the selection of very energetic or risky behaviors


SPEAKER_02:
That's cool.

So, and just to kind of like maybe tie that to a real world example, I think about like the principle of least action.

Like I prefer my body temperature to be like 75 degrees all the time, right?

Like do I live in the tropics?

No, because there's like a lot of things about living on a tropical island that are like not optimal for me.

So like I live in New Mexico cause that's like my optimal like place.

but I wear a jacket in the winter and like in the summertime, I, you know, wear less clothes or like drive around in my air conditioned car and live in my air conditioned house.

So even though like I'm still expending energy to maintain my physical temperature, like that is the path of least like action for me.

Like I, I, I compensate for the change in my equilibrium state through my actions.

Okay.

And we will,

talk more about energy in a minute.

So unpacking this second part of the claim, the active agent carries out epistemic exploration to account for uncertainty by making inferences in Bayes optimal fashion.

Okay.

So

like, I know what Bayes optimal is, or like, I think I know what Bayes optimal is, but just to kind of like, what is Bayes optimal fashion and how do you make inference in Bayes optimal fashion?

And it's cool.

Cause like in a quick Google search, like I always like to search these fundamental like things just to see kind of what pops up.

Like, I think I know what Bayes optimal is.

And I pulled out this 2019 paper, like

what is optimal in optimal inference?

And it's interesting because like going into Bayes optimal, I mean, I think about Bayes optimal as like minimizing prediction error, or it says here classically optimal Bayesian inference balances prior knowledge and ongoing observations to identify the model with maximum posterior probability.

And so these authors actually take this a step further and I really enjoyed their,

But like thought process here, so they said concretely, we might say that an inference procedures optimal if it maximizes benefit per unit cost in which the benefit is some monotonically increasing function of accuracy.

But they propose the generalization of this approach that that kind of splits this cost benefit curve into two components.

where the first component describes the benefit, perhaps the reward obtained as a function of accuracy.

But then the second component, so that's the minimizing prediction error that I was speaking to earlier, right?

Like in terms of accuracy.

And then the second component describes accuracy as a function of costs, which can include time,

memory and computational resources needed to process information.

And I think that this is like a fundamental thing that, I mean, I might overlook, like I might be able to get like a way more accurate answer.

Like, you know, just so say, for example, like what is the number pi?

And I could just say like 3.14, I could actually go through, I could say like 3.14159, like off the top of my head, like that's like the whatever number of digits of pi that I have memorized to like some accurate point.

But like I could come to a far more accurate answer of that if I sat there with a pencil and a piece of paper for the entire rest of my life doing long division.

So I could come to some infinite number of units past the decimal point.

And I could go on and on and on forever.

But is it worth it?

Is it worth it in terms of memory, effort to calculate that increasing accuracy?

Or is 3.14 good enough?

And so that is kind of the thing that they're... The functions that they're describing here, like this benefit, this two...

Dual component.

Yes, we want accuracy, but we also want it to be fast.

We want to get the maximum benefit for the minimum resource expenditure.

I like that they are describing accuracy as a function of the costs, the effort that goes into it.

Do you guys have any comments here?

Okay.

Okay, so why am I going into this?

Okay, so Tyler and I got into this long talk about energy.

And we got into, so I can't remember, I guess it's not maybe in this claim, but it was somewhere in the paper.

Maybe I should look and try to pull it up.

But we really got into discussing energy, like what is free energy?

What is like kinetic and potential energy?

And what is free energy like?

in FEP and we've gone to many live streams that, that like dive way deeper into this.

Um, and I think it's live stream 17.

That is the one I pointed you to Tyler that, that is, um,

Alex Kiefer does a great unpacking, unraveling of free energy in that way.

But I think it's important here to point out, maybe Tyler, you can pull that quote out of the paper while I'm talking about this, but I think it's important to point out that information theoretic entropy is different than thermodynamic entropy.

And so in information theory,

And there are many times in the paper where, like, the author specifically says, like, we're talking about information theoretic entropy.

But then it seems like that the other kind of entropy is hinted at.

And so I kind of wanted to just, like, draw a line between, like, information theoretic entropy and the other kind of entropy, like the second law of thermodynamics entropy, thermodynamic entropy.

And these two are distinct but not entirely unrelated.

So information theoretic entropy is defined as if you have a function x or some event x, the negative log of the probability of x is equal to the information.

So here you can see the probability versus the information is this graph on the left.

So where there's a high probability of an event, there's low information.

There's a high probability that I will

take a breath in my in the next 30 seconds so like me taking a breath in the next 30 seconds like doesn't contain any information but like the you guys can predict that i will talk about

the FEP and free energy governance in the next minute.

If I start talking about like my dead dog, there's like low probability of that like happening.

And so there's like maybe a much higher level of information, like, whoa, where did this come from?

This is way out of left field.

So there's more information in like an unexpected claim.

And so you can see like a probability distribution versus entropy that that relates like the Shannon entropy where the entropy, like if it's, if there's,

high probability it's low entropy right but if they're like so so i look at this in a coin flip so if we know that the coin is always going to come out heads there's not any entropy in that like say it's a two-sided head coin so like it's always going to come out heads there's no other option the coin always flips heads but where in a fair coin it's 50 50 right so like at the um

right end of the second graph, it's a probability of 0.5, 0.5, like half of probability that it's heads and half of a probability that it's tails.

This has the highest entropy because it's random, like we don't know what's going to come out.

And so that is what is meant here by information theoretic entropy.

In contrast to thermodynamic entropy, where that is like what we think about when we think about physics and the second law of thermodynamics,

Entropy, we think entropy in the universe is always increasing.

There's a lot of disorder, the disorder in the universe.

If you clean your house and you go away for 20 years and you come back and your house is a mess, you're not going to be surprised at all.

But if your house is a mess...

and you go away for 20 years, and you come back, and your house is perfectly spotless, that would be weird, right?

That's like you're scheduled for someone to come in and clean it.

But the disorder in the universe is always increasing.

And that is what is meant by entropy in terms of the second law.

And we also think about this kind of entropy as energy.

This is where Tyler and I got into talking about energy.

But entropy is the energy that is not available to do work, right?

So in...

In a system, there's some amount of energy.

I consume so many calories in a day, and this is very simplified, but of those calories, say I consume 2,000 calories in a day, I can use only 1,500 of them for work because some energy is always lost in heat, in the conversion, in any energy conversion process.

Converting energy to work, you will always lose some energy as heat.

And so that is kind of another way to think about this thermodynamic entropy.

Tyler, were you able to find that quote where we talked about this or no?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I was.

The quote is fairly subtle in that he goes right between information theory and thermodynamic theory kind of seamlessly.

And he doesn't make it clear that these are like two very different things.

different things that there's a potential tenuous connection between so he says fep hence has no purpose of its own it powers the generally the general the process of active inactive inference is dedicated to minimizing the information theoretical maximal difference between the top-down predictions and action generated bottom-up stimuli in pursuit of minimizing errors of present entropy

variational free energy and thermodynamic free energy are inversely related if variational free energy is high then thermodynamic entropy will be high and thermodynamic free energy the energy available for doing productive work will be low so i think what he did there was like subtle he like just goes between informational and thermodynamic energy kind of interchangeably


SPEAKER_00:
and they were like wait a minute there's like actually a difference between these two concepts and the connection between them is something that you know actually the community doesn't have a great handle on at this point very cool uh daniel do you have any comments there on that it's a pretty complex and developing area how the informational entropy is related to the actual physics and biology it's kind of like the connection between

Friston free energy and Gibbs free energy.

How does reducing divergences on informational spaces translate to the amount of available energy?

And there's situations where survival could be secured one way or the other.

There just isn't at this point a general answer to how they're connected.


SPEAKER_02:
So when Tyler asked me how they're connected, what is the relationship?

My answer is Maxwell's demon is the connection really between thermodynamic and informational free energy.

And there's actually like, I think a 2018 or 2019 paper

that quantifies like this relationship between thermodynamic and informational entropy at the quantum level.

So I don't know if that applies to all scales, but it's at least cool that, and I don't remember the paper offhand, but if you search it, Maxwell's demon quantum information, you'll find it.

And it's pretty recent.

So it's neat that people are thinking about like concrete and direct ways

to transform and translate information theoretic and thermodynamic entropy and so we just kind of wanted to unpack that because in that claim it was like whoa there's a lot of a lot of things happening here that it might be more useful for the audience to have a deeper understanding of like what is known and what is unknown and how how deep does this rabbit hole really go and right so so it gets pretty uh pretty hairy

Okay, cool, all right, so back to reality, but back to things that we can concretely talk about.

So the reward signal so characteristic of reinforcement learning is removed and replaced with one sole purpose, surprise minimization.

Effectively, the agent is empowered to minimize surprise by way of a generative model of the partially observable world, only perceiving itself and the world via outcomes.

And so like just for people who might not be familiar with reinforcement learning,

Hold on just a second, sorry.

am getting over getting over sickness sometimes i didn't want to cough it to the microphone all right um so in reinforcement learning there's like a couple required components so you have a policy which maps the state of the environment to an action um and that's like for an agent right so this we're always talking about agentive systems here so an agent has a policy like if the environment is in this state i will take this action and policies can change and update

And then there's a reward signal, which is given at like each step.

So we're talking about like a time step type of thing.

Second one, I take this action.

My reward is two carrots, right?

So say my policy is to turn right unless I see immediate danger on my left.

So I turn right and I turn right and I get two carrots.

I turn left and like I can't turn left because there's immediate danger over there.

It's against my policy, whatever, right?

So the reward signal is the number of carrots that I receive right there at that first step.

And then there's a value function, which actually tracks the reward over time.

And the objective in reinforcement learning is not to maximize the reward signal at each instance, but it's to maximize the value function over time.

And so in a circumstance like where I turn right to get two carrots,

But I could have gone down and then right and gotten 50 carats.

So maybe I should have gone down and right.

And so this is kind of how an agent will learn in a reinforcement learning environment to maximize the value as opposed to just maximizing incrementally the reward.

So after every action that the agent takes, the environment sends a single number.

That's the reward.

The reward that the agent receives depends on the agent's action and the state.

And so the agent's only goal is to maximize the total reward, which is the value function over the long term.

Any comments here?

All right.

So precision.

Tyler, do you want to read the quote at the top of this?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure, so the Bayesian brain has optimized not just its expectations, it also has to optimize precision.

This means that one has to predict how much precision is afforded to various sources of sensory evidence relative to prior beliefs.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

And so this is like a definition from Wikipedia talking about like classifier systems and precision and recall in a classifier system, which is like a predictive system or it can be Bayesian classification

So there are retrieved items.

Like, so we're going to say, you know, of this field of images, the ones in the circle are cats, right?

So we're identifying these circles, the data points within the larger circle as all these things that the classifier says, these are all cats.

The precision is of all of the things that the classifier says are cats, how many are actually cats?

So it's the true positives that are in, um,

in the system and then the recall is like how many total how many relevant items are returned so that's that's the the precision here um that's referenced by first um do you want to read this one too for us tyler


SPEAKER_01:
Sure alright, so when dynamics change salience should be prevented from potentially increasing free energy in the context of corporate governance, one may think of time recognition as a one form of salience.

The more senior and experienced board members are the more likely, and they feel comfortable with mental shortcuts so just pattern recognition built through prior experience.


SPEAKER_02:
And when I searched for salience, I just randomly searched for pictures of salience to make this pretty red apple picture appear here.

But when I searched salience and I looked at images, a lot of them were like,

stakeholder salience and so I like couldn't even start to try to unpack this like it was some corporate definition of salience and some corporate model of salience that I don't know if um Bijan is referring here to more indirectly or Tyler if you know anything about like stakeholder the stakeholder salience model but maybe we could ask Bijan if he um

is referencing that or if he's just talking about salience the way that we talk about it as in like things that we attune our attention to because they're relevant for the task at hand or like things that stick out or things that are memorable or relevant right yeah i don't think there's like a corporate difference like technical definition from it i think it's just like you have limited attention there are things that the board was more likely to focus on and they have to constrain their attention on limited information

Yeah, but I was intrigued by the fact that there is like a corporate salience model.

Like, oh, is Bijan talking about corporate salience?

What's that?

Because it's just something that I've never heard of before.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, it's something we've seen with many active inference ontology terms, that there's a broad, everyday, qualitative sense, like salience is something that you pay attention to.

And then there's also a more technical, usually Bayesian sense, such as salience is actually referring to the precision in terms of a variance estimator that we place on incoming sensory data.

Whereas low attention means that data points coming in are not salient.

They're not used to update the model.

High attention is...

coming together with high attention to incoming data that does update the prior a lot into the posterior.

And so which patterns are salient is itself learnt.

And we can think about that as the regime of attention with all the strengths and weaknesses that expertise and heuristics bring along with.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and I think,

They go on to say, I think Bichon impacts that more in the book about salience and pattern recognition.

OK, so single and double loop learning.

Tyler, do you want to take this?


SPEAKER_01:
Single-loop learning occurs when errors are detected and corrected without altering the governing values of the master program.

Double-loop learning occurs when, nor the correct and error is necessary to alter the governing values of the master programs.

Most governance models are at best single-loop, rule-based learning systems, but struggle to activate double-loop learning.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

And I found this little, like,

loop this loop diagram which is like you know actions and consequences actions and consequences and that's like the single loop but um this double loop learning goes into understanding governing very variables and like this is kind of like i think about like meta some kind of meta analysis um where you can you know it's zoomed out more in the double loop learning


SPEAKER_00:
yeah with our favorite example of the temperature in the room if the single loop is just the knob that we're controlling on the heater or the air conditioning the double loop would be taking a step back and thinking well could we also open or close a window and so if we only stay within the single loop maybe our heater or cooler has limited capacity and so there's times where the environmental challenges

are going to take us outside of the range of what can be learned or accommodated with a single loop and it's those times especially when opening up into a double loop space or like a hyper prior space is what is actually required to get the generative model operating in a way that's survivable


SPEAKER_02:
So like I would never open the window with the heater on, but boy, like I changed the weather stripping on my back door this year and it made such a huge difference.

So that's like a more realistic, like a governing variable, like you have a leaky house or poor insulation or something like that.

All right.

Deliberate ignorance.

So that is choosing not to know.

So Bijan talks about this and says,

The more senior and experienced board members are, the more likely that they feel comfortable with mental shortcuts, such as pattern recognition built through prior experience.

That's what I was gonna say earlier about this.

Again, I thought it was this next slide, but when they talked about here pattern recognition as one form of salience, but in this deliberate ignorance, it says, it is a form of prior based heuristics,

too often simply deliberate ignorance.

However, in a discontinuously non-repeat game environment, pattern recognition without maintaining sensitivity for small but nonetheless transformative variations puts survival at risk.

Therefore, we need a process and a measure of error that optimizes survival, hence action-centric free energy minimization powering inactive AI.

And so I thought about this, like, okay, we're talking about like corporate strategy.

So in pattern recognition, that's super useful for something like a game of chess, right?

Like, so chess has like, these are the pieces, these are the rules.

There's only so many like ways that a piece can move.

And yes, it's super complicated, but like over time, a master chess player can start to recognize patterns in the game or like certain sequences of moves that result in, you know,

And so if you know those sequences of moves that results in success, that's pattern recognition, but, but in a non-repeat game, like where the rules are always changing and the pieces can move in a different way.

Like imagine now we're playing 4D chess, like where we could go also like X, Y, but we can also move in the Z direction, jump over pieces and so forth.

Like if you add an extra dimension, those prior sequences,

patterns that you knew for, you know, X, Y chess now doesn't happen, right?

Like they're not, they don't even apply or aren't even relevant here.

So failing to update like your, your prior pattern recognition is going to not lead to successful strategies.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just to make this a little bit more concrete.

So a very common example of this I've experienced is that sometimes when you're doing business strategy and the business is still running and you might have customer service claims incoming while you're doing this core business strategy.

Generally, you want to ignore all of these customer service claims because that's just like noise and you don't want to pay attention to it.

It's going to overwhelm you.

Though occasionally, you'll sometimes hear some very unusual customer experience claims.

That kind of implies something much bigger and much more serious is going on systemically within the organization.

and you need to have this like spidey sense and this is where there's often used in business settings like the spidey sense of knowing like oh wait like something bigger is going on i need to switch gears into being super micro rather than being macro um so i think it's a good example when you have to kind of like switch your your model of like how the organization is working really dynamically and go from deliberate ignorance choosing what information will be selling to you


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, and then sophistication, which I thought this was relevant.

I can't remember the quote that said this again.

Oh, Bijan actually started to unpack this in figure four.

And he said, we alluded to sophistication back in chapter one.

And this also applies to this like double loop learning.

So sophisticated inference is where you have

like many potential steps that can unfold.

And this also applies to the principle of least action, which we're talking about, which is like a decision tree search, right?

Like if you're standing here at step one, you can go, you know, which is like the top level here, you can go to any of these four points, you know, you one, you two, you three, you four.

So if you're here at the very beginning step, and then each one of these points has their own branch choices that you can make.

And then each one of those choices has their own choices.

And so this is, you know, this sophisticated inference, which is unpacked in this paper, sophisticated inference.

And then we've done on different live streams here before.

Also, we didn't do this paper, but we did deep, effective inference.

I think that was maybe also 17, 13.

I can't remember.

But a long time ago, it was like a 2020 early live stream with Ryan Smith.

So in this sophisticated model, it's unfolding temporarily through time.

And this applies to both like the trajectory when we're talking about least action trajectories and also to double loop learning where you're looking at like maybe governing variables over time.

So he starts to unpack that here in this chapter.

It goes a little bit more into it than in chapter one.

All right, so now we're on the fourth part of this claim.

We made it all the way to the end.

Active inference should provide the basis to set free the collaborative human-machine artificial intelligence potential so integral to the multi-intelligence firm.

And note those two separate AI abbreviations.

All right, so Bajan makes the claim, social fields are not as real time as electrically charged and chemically powered neural responsiveness.

But the underlying logic and principles nonetheless determine firm performance and survival.

All living self-organizing systems, as is true for organizations,

strive to reduce entropy in pursuit of minimizing surprise.

But organizations, other than living systems, are too often trapped in what Aguirre's 1995 termed skilled incompetence, meaning that organizations are programmed to deal with error and threat in ways that are counterproductive to their own intentions, not least because organizations struggle with unlearning and deliberately suppress subtlety.

That maybe refers back to that deliberate ignorance that we talked about earlier.

Do you want to talk here, Tyler, about organizational becoming?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, sure.

So just on that last slide, a couple thoughts on that.

I think one part that was interesting about this was explicitly connecting free energy to the firm, which I guess that's the whole point of this book.

But I think that's actually quite a large claim to say that firms also exhibit free energy.

And so I just wanted to point that out.

But then also, I think a really brilliant aspect of free energy governance is the lag between stimuli and action and action and stimuli.

where that is a lot larger in an organizational space rather than something kind of like a neuron for example and that makes i think a lot harder to like operationalize and really understand free energy in like a firm context as well

So the next slide that goes into organizational becoming is this is a term he doesn't really define explicitly throughout the book, but he does mention it quite a number of times.

So I think it's worth calling out.

So he says strategic renewal as organizational becoming categorical imperative of being in the game.

And so, again, he doesn't explicitly define this, but I think what he's implying is this idea of becoming, it's like this deeper philosophical term that goes back thousands of years, where the organization isn't a static thing, or it's not something that becomes something into an end state, but rather it is like a dynamic process, and it is always a dynamic process.

And so, yeah, Blue, Daniel, do you have anything you want to add to this?


SPEAKER_00:
You have the Heraclitus river quote, which is a statement of the dynamic nature of becoming.

And then in contrast, we have being.

And so people often talk about being and becoming as a noun centric and a verb centric way to describe something is something that

is that's like being or is it becoming which is more of a process-based focus and so he refers to it as the site of organizational becoming not some sort of ready-made tool that's going to be but rather a process that will be applied or is already being applied as a distributed site of becoming


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Do you want to read this one too, Tyler?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

So FFP is not simplicity craving, but empowers a system to exploit uncertainty and complexity in pursuit of performance and survival by way of curiosity-driven epistemic forging and exploration.

Correspondingly, free energy governance is a next-generation learning system designed for a discontinuous world, de-chaining the firm from dominant top-down logics and

empowering continuous strategic renewal through purpose-directed generative inferential and cross-hierarchical prediction error minimization.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

And so I wonder here if organizational becoming and like strategic renewal, I wonder if those are maybe being used interchangeably.

We've talked about like strategic renewal or like maybe strategic renewal is like a fundamental, like an organizational becoming or organizational becoming includes strategic renewal and other things.

I don't know.

That's a good question for Bijan who we will get to ask lots of questions of next week.

Do you have any additional comments here, Daniel or Tyler?

Okay.

Free energy governance.

I'll let you take this one too.


SPEAKER_01:
All right, so energy governance effectively transposes the active inference framework to the firm and adopts FEP as a first-order principle underlying a new logic of organizing built around three core dimensions.

So structure, hierarchy, cognition, environmental enactment, capabilities, sensing, and sensemaking principles.

The framework is centered around cross-hierarchical journal processes of sensing and sense-making to institutionalize continuous strategic renewal as a matter of inactive inference in pursuit of firm outperformance and survival.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

So here we are at the end of the free energy principle chapter, the end of the first section.

on the FEP in the free energy governance textbook.

Looking forward to having a good discussion with the author next week.

Do you guys have any final thoughts on this section or chapter or anything overall?


SPEAKER_00:
I think a question to unpack is going to be, how does a descriptive theory of everything in free energy principle help us make normative or even adaptive decisions for ourselves and for our organizations?

Every single information architecture or strategy that a given group implements is

will be describable in terms of the particular partitioning into internal external and blanket states they're all going to be describable in terms of Bayes optimal inference given some generative model and incoming stream of data so how do we take something that is kind of like the number line it just is and it is neutral and then proactively apply it

up to and including the last mile do people need to actually know about information entropy to be part of a system that's designed with these strategies in mind or is there going to be some other way to communicate and apply it so how we actually move it to the space of proactive decision making today and what that looks like in different sectors and for different organizations is really exciting


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

Well, I'm also looking forward to reading the next sections of the book and kind of going beyond like the background section into like, what's next?

What is the application?

And looking forward to Bijan's comments next week.

Tyler, any comments?

Are you good?


SPEAKER_01:
No, all good for me.

Looking forward to next week.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, me too.

So if anybody has questions, please go ahead and submit them.

You're welcome to email them to us or submit them here in the comments.

But do it before the 11th, which is when our meeting with Bijan will be.

And if you want to participate on the live stream and have read the chapters in the book and watch the live streams or one or the other, get in touch.

Okay.

Thanks, guys.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

## 0P_6ME2LpCw

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome.

This is ACT-INF Bookstream number 001.06 on Governing Continuous Transformation.

It's January 17th, 2023.

Off to you, Blue.


SPEAKER_01:
Good morning, everyone, or good whatever time of day it is for you.

We are the Active Inference Institute, a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

These are all of our social media links where you can find us if you're looking for us outside of the stream.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we will be trying to follow good video etiquette for livestreams, other than my cat who feels free to interrupt whenever she sees fit.

You can reach out to us if you would like to get involved with any of our ongoing projects or live streams or propose a new project.

And today we are going to discuss, this is book stream number 001.06.

So this is our sixth contextualization video or the contextualization video over chapter six.

And we are going to study governing continuous transformation, reframing the strategy governance conversation by Bijan Kesri, who was nice enough to join us and discuss some of his ideas with us last week.

This video is just an introduction to some of the ideas presented in the book.

It's not in a review or a final word in any way.

So we're just going to jump right in and introduce ourselves.

So I am Blue.

I am a researcher in New Mexico, and I will pass it off to Danielle.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and looking forward to the continuation of the series.

Tyler.


SPEAKER_02:
Hey, my name is Tyler.

I'm a practitioner, not a researcher.

So I lead product and protocol design at 4K Protocol.

And I also do governance on the limits of DAO tooling with MediGov.

All right, Blue.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

So today we're going to get into part two of the book, so Free Energy Governance, and we're going to discuss the first chapter in part two.

Okay.

So part two, Free Energy Governance, and we're discussing chapter six, and there's kind of two sections, and actually Bijan broke chapter six for us.

So there's two sections of chapter six, the upper echelon view and the predictive processing framework.

And here, just a little intro to part 2 free energy governance, free energy governance introduces a novel cross hierarchical generative framework that uniquely applies the triplet of structure cognition and capabilities as the building blocks of the firm's generative model specifically in the context of continuous strategic renewal in distributed and discontinuous market environments.

Essentially, six core theoretical perspectives together lay the foundation for this new conversation.

Structure, upper echelon view, and prediction processing framework.

So that's what we're going to discuss today.

And then I'm assuming that the next chapters going forward are going to focus on cognition, which encompasses attention-based view and an activist approach, and capabilities encompassing dynamic capability view and antagonistic neural networks perspectives.

Structure, cognition, and capabilities form one integrated system under free energy governance.

Failure in any one domain is likely to challenge firm survival.

The framework's core propositions, outlined at the end of this chapter, summarize free energy governance's ambition for a practice-relevant theoretical contribution as both the generative logic of organizational governance as well as an early warning system predicting corporate decay.

So, Tyler, do you want to jump in and read the abstract here?


SPEAKER_02:
The upper echelon view and prediction processing framework address free energy governance structural dimension.

Indeed, upper echelon is the site of strategic decision making.

However, UEV suffers from several limitations.

There is no explicit consideration for the board of directors and the linkage between the upper echelon and the rest of the organization, i.e., the coupling of governance and operational challenges, is unidirectionally top-down and therefore, at best, incomplete.

How the field data can systematically talk to upper echelon and influence their values, perception, and attention remains a black box.

Prediction processing framework embraces structure more holistically, addressing the hierarchical disconnect, and more importantly, the circular causality between top-down predictions and bottoms-up stimuli.


SPEAKER_01:
I'll just read the second part here.

Dissonance-bearing messages...

Sorry.

Dissonance-bearing messages occur at the firm's stimuli level, bottom, close to its resource markets, long before top leadership has any sense of a looming challenge.

Prediction processing framework is determined by three categorical imperatives.

First, upper echelons prediction models and predictions must be explainable.

Second, each of the hierarchical layers must have formal and informal interpretation.

Faces coupling each layer to the next layer and 3rd, the firm's generative model is the firm's eco niche prediction processing framework provides an entirely new perspective and language embracing strategic renewal as a matter of bottom up top down prediction error minimization.

Not least setting 3, the full potential of the human machine interface.

Um, and it's interesting here, like.

I wonder what he means by human machine interface, like humans as a functioning machine, like as an organism, maybe, or as like a, I don't know, or like directly like the human computer interaction, like how we interface with our technology.

So I was curious, like this, I found this human machine interface clause kind of like threw me for a loop a little bit.

You guys know any comments?


SPEAKER_02:
I've kind of been inferring that Bajan imagines a world where you're very tied in with the AI.

And I personally haven't witnessed this myself, being embedded in an organization where that is a seamless integration, where you might use a machine learning framework, but rather that it is a dialogue between the ML model and then the human.

I think that's what he's kind of imagining.


SPEAKER_01:
um but i think it's a little bit unclear i think you're right blue so like i've i've like studied and taken like courses in intelligence with people who study like their course of study is like human computer interaction like the interface between humans and machines and like it's always like um you know that their topics of study are very different than

um like thinking about themselves as a firm right right like they they think about like their their topic of study like interacting with like a wellness robot like you've seen like the health like little robot you know for elderly people that like checks up on them and it you know it's like the how how do elderly people best interact with computers and children and they have a very different level of interaction both like the older generation and kids

they have different ways to interact and interface with computers and like they do it best in an embodied kind of machine which I found super interesting like where you know in the mid-range we can just talk to we have no problem talking to Alexa and it could just be like a microchip like speaker in the wall and it wouldn't be a big deal but like they want something in a teddy bear or some kind of like machine that that like looks has a face

or something like that.

And they interact with it in a much different way, much more efficiently, actually.

So I found that super interesting.

But this is what I think about when I think about the human-machine interface is the actual Markov boundary between humans and machines.

And so what is the potential of a Markov boundary?

I don't know.

Anyway, so sorry, I'm rambling.

OK, so just a few keywords here.

Upper echelon view, prediction processing framework.

We'll go back and revisit double-loop learning, look into optimization, organizational sense-making,

And I think the biggest chunk of new information that Bijan brought into this chapter, what were these habits of mind?

Okay, so do you want to read this for me, Tyler, Upper Echelon View?


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

So UEV defines the organization as a reflection of its upper echelon, i.e., its top management team.

UEV's central premise is that executives' experiences, values, and personalities affect their field of vision.

Their one field of vision, the directors, they look and listen.

Selective perception, what they actually see and hear.

And three, interpretation, how they attach meaning to what they see and hear.

So essentially, UEV embraces sensing and sensemaking, not only as an essential leadership qualities, but as a foundation for strategic choices and firm performance.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

And so there are a couple of claims kind of associated with this upper echelon view.

Bijan says, however, upper echelon view suffers from several limitations.

In particular, there is no explicit consideration for the board of directors as part of the upper echelon.

The many dimensions by which a non-executive chairman relates to the CEO, for example, are likely to determine strategic choices.

He goes on to say, while upper echelon view has neglected the board of directors, free energy governance emphasizes the importance of the board as part of a firm's upper echelon.

Top management tier and the board of directors, here jointly labeled as the upper echelon, are together the locus of strategic decision making.

More importantly, the board of directors can potentially assume a unique cognitive role in strategy process in the form of dynamic board capabilities that is highly complementary to that of senior executive leadership's strategic capacity.

And I was wondering, Tyler, maybe if you have any comments here on like, you know, normally the board is not included as the upper echelon and Bajan is like making the case for their inclusion.

Is that typical in like organizations or what do you think here?


SPEAKER_02:
Uh, no, that, that's not common.

And I think Bajon like touched on this in our last call with him.

The last discussion is that like, usually you see the board as more of like a sounding board as that there are a, they give a final sign off a rubber stamp.

They make sure you're not doing anything totally illegal and irresponsible.

Uh, but they're not really there to like really be in the weeds with you.

Uh, whereas what Bajon is arguing is like, no, actually like they have the

by virtue of being kind of separate from the day to day work, they can give you a more unbiased view of like what you should be doing strategically, like the capabilities you should be building and that they actually are like a really integral part of your whole strategic process.

And so it's unusual to think of them as like these two really critical halves.

Usually people think of the board as it's like nuisance that they have to appease, not as like a real thing that can actually add value to the organization.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome, thank you for that input.

Okay, so a couple more things to say about UEV, and we just kind of excerpted from the text.

Upper echelon view is far too restrictive and one-sided, top-down.

to explain through the lens of leadership qualities, the anatomy of success and failure of strategic renewal.

This book invites to a new stream of upper echelon view centric research that operationalize upper echelon views impact on performance, not so much in terms of antecedents and consequences of team diversity, but as a function of structure, cognitively coupling governance and operational channels in the form of top down, bottom up circular prediction error minimization.

second cognition embracing environment as a matter of action-centric enactment and third capabilities developing duality management as a dynamic board capability to rewire the plane while flying it he goes on to say the prediction processing framework allows us to embrace structure more holistically i don't know if you guys have any comments here


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Let's just say that we're in a tripartite firm with the upper echelon consisting of the higher management and or the board of directors, middle management, and then the front lines, as Bijan mentioned last week.

overly emphasizing in a given eco niche any one of those three sections is going to lead to maladaptive decision making and implementation so the question that i see these repeated structure cognition capabilities returning to is about striking an adaptive balance amongst

the upper echelon, the middle management implementational layers, and the frontline day-to-day experience, just like the body and the organism strike a balance between the primary perceptual organs, the intermediate processing, and then the central processing.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, thank you.

Alright, so moving on to the prediction processing framework.

Tyler, do you want to read this for us?

Do you mind?


SPEAKER_02:
All right, so neither governance or strategic renewal research have addressed the hierarchical disconnect of the top-down, bottom-up, circular causality.

Certain exceptional contributions aside, PPF opens the processual black box of how shared meaning and expectations are constructed and optimized in pursuit of optimizing the performance, sustainability, and strategic renewal.

In management science, PPF's epistemological origins can be traced to Argus

Agares' theory of action perspective, specifically the concept of double-loop learning, defined as a form of learning that challenges the existing routines and status quo.

Action-centric learning is at the heart of the cross-harchical prediction processing framework.

There is a need for a fundamentally new organizing framework.

The system's preparedness to unlearn powers the receptivity of the corrective feedback of the decision-making unit, and hence is critical to PPF's top-down, bottom-up learning prediction error minimization challenge.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Daniel, do you have any comments here?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

In Bayesian learning, learning really is unlearning.

You have to move the distribution around.

And so Bayesian learning isn't just throwing more papers onto a stack or onto a knowledge pile.

But when we have to update how likely we think things are,

that is an unlearning so it's interesting to see how it's connected here to like openness to the unknown negative capabilities and the way in which in the single loop which i know we'll get to you can implement and do local maximization and maybe be locally adaptive but if we really want to pull back and amidst these discontinuities continue to find success then we need to engage in that kind of double loop learning


SPEAKER_01:
You totally took the words out of my mouth and actually just said it so much better.

So I also was really reminded of Bayesian learning here with unlearning because for all the reasons you just stated.

Okay, so double-loop learning, just to revisit, I think we talked about this maybe not last week with Bijanba, just a couple weeks ago.

So double-loop learning occurs when, in order to correct an error, it's necessary to alter the governing values of the master programs.

So in this little figure, it's just like single-loop learning is actions assess the consequences, actions assess the consequences, actions assess the consequences, where the double-loop learning zooms out to kind of see like what

Governing variables influence the actions that are being taken.

So it's kind of like the setback in a hierarchical control model.

And Bijan says that we need error feedback loops to adjust predictions and, more importantly, to eventually update prediction models, aka double loop learning.

Okay, so Bijan goes on to make the claim.

He says, upper echelon remains the centralized purveyor of predictions, as well as trustee of prediction models.

Hence, the prediction processing powered free energy governance framework is distributed at the bottom, but centralized at the top.

However, for prediction error minimization to work, each hierarchical layer must be dedicated to one simple first order principle, minimize free energy to minimize error and surprise.

consequently prediction models will generatively evolve by way of self-learning this is the essence of unsupervised self-organization any comments here


SPEAKER_00:
sure so in terms of communication what are these different parts of the um what are the different parts of the organization or organism sharing with each other so they might just be representing what they're perceiving like everyone is just filling others in on what they're getting so that's one imperative it's just unbiased pass through a communication um another

imperative might be give the other person what they expect so here the management is saying we expect that you're gonna sell 10 cars and then the front line says yes we sold 10 cars um

where free energy minimization as a way to minimize or bound error and surprise comes in is that says actually the communication imperative shouldn't be simple pass-through and it also shouldn't be conformist but rather what is communicated should provide information about to what extent

the expectations of your communicating partner are being violated.

So if they say, we expect 10 cars, the minimum communication might just be yes, if that's true.

And then maybe there's a dial that can be turned depending on whether it's fewer than that or more than that.

And so that puts communication into an interesting setting where we're explicit about what the, in this case, top-down predictions are.

And then we situate the bottom-up communication as reflecting the adequacy of those expectations rather than just being plain pass-through or conformist.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, just to build on that a little bit, because in my experience, like there's like, like you said, only two kinds of communication.

There's one of like very clear, like, hey, this is what we're expecting.

Did you meet that like a very clear prediction?

And there's another one that's more just like dissonance, like things just like aren't working well and people don't fully understand why.

And it's in my experience, like really trying to communicate in a very clear linear way, like through each stack of the hierarchy.

uh about like trying to warn someone of a of an issue for example or communicate like the new world or new like how you should update your generative model that tends to not work nearly as well as just things not working well and people bumping up against uh discontinuities and dissonance themselves and people really like oh there's like a problem in the system this is a signal that we need to fix it and usually that's in my experience like how communication happens between the hierarchies

And it feels really bad and it feels very chaotic.

But at the end of the day, I think that's how the organism of the firm processes information.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah it's asking too much for the skin cell to provide a situational report on the wound all it can and must do is report a difference from expectation that gets clustered with other incoming sensory modalities and integrated by the upper echelon to make a decision about okay now we're going to get a band-aid so understanding that the skin cell is not going to tell you to get a band-aid

but also the Band-Aid decision-making unit isn't going to have direct access to the skin, can that be implemented at the firm level?


SPEAKER_01:
So I also am reminded of communication here and how that coupling between different layers of the hierarchy.

Man, can I talk today?

The coupling between the different layers of the hierarchy, how should that work?

So just for example, the skin cell doesn't necessarily need to know what is happening in the liver, right?

It's not like a direct coupling there.

um and so how how do you selectively choose like it as like a management like what to communicate down the chain like if i'm in the upper echelon like what does the board communicate to the top management tier what is the top management tier then communicate like downstream and how do you filter that information so that it's like like how do you like prioritize salience here and just

um not like open up a fire hose like here's all the information because that's not like effective for communicating but it also like like that disconnect like any kind of filtering can lead to like a level of disconnect that's maybe unwanted so how do you like prioritize that information flow um down layers of the hierarchy and like i um always am interested in this so like whether it's biological or organizational


SPEAKER_02:
I have a couple of examples to illustrate that.

So for example, I worked at a company called, actually I won't name any names here, but it was a tech company and it was probably like 400 people and it was structured very hierarchically.

And so basically from the bottom rungs to the top, you would have each person would report up to their unit and have like, hey, this is what we did.

These are risks you should be aware of.

And this would happen on a weekly basis.

And then that would get bubbled up into the next

of the hierarchy, which would be, it keeps getting synthesized and refined at each level of the hierarchy until you get up to like the CEO.

Right.

Which is presumed like ostensibly like, uh, condensing all of this information from 400 people up to like one report that the CEO gets of like five bullets of takeaways.

Right.

And so what happens, and Bijan even talks about this in the chapter, is that it gets so filtered by that point.

And also each rung in the hierarchy has their own incentives and things that they're trying to politically maximize for that becomes not even that useful.

What's a lot more useful, though, is when things... Well, I guess two things.

One is if things go wrong, like say there's a bug in the app and a fire needs to be put out right away, that's information that skips all the wrongs and goes straight to the CEO.

Another one is when people would... A lot of times executives would schedule meetings with just random people in the organization.

So you'd have an executive...

who's like the CFO would schedule a meeting with some engineer and just to like basically cross the chasm of all the different levels of the hierarchy, just be like, Hey, like what's going on?

Like, tell me like what you perceive the problems to be in your subunit.

And that's a way for them to kind of get like this unfiltered view of like random people by sampling random people across the organization.

So I think there are like ways you can do this, but yeah, it's really, it's really difficult.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Okay.

So moving on, we'll talk a little bit about optimization.

And I just put up here the distributed versus hierarchical

levels the networks um okay so bijan says the challenge is not only one of building intra-firm connections between upper echelons top-down predictions and field management's bottom-up stimuli but optimizing the top-down bottom-up process within each and every layer of the hierarchy

Why do I keep saying that?

Of the hierarchy in form of feedback connections.

Optimization is central to prediction processing framework.

This optimization makes every level in the hierarchy accountable to others.

While the generative sense-making processes and capabilities are a critical performance element at every level of the hierarchy, the efficacy of such capabilities is determined by top-down belief propagation and bottom-up message passing within and across organizational layers or business units.

Yeah, so I think like that optimization for like, maybe information or I don't know, like, what are you optimizing, optimizing the connection, optimizing the flow of information, optimizing the link between up and down, like, like, what are we really optimizing for?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it's a little bit vague in how he talks about it.

It's honestly something I got kind of a little bit frustrated with because like actually building that top down, bottoms up kind of connective tissue is like a huge area of research.

And there's like all of these like different approaches for it.

So like a really famous one is Holacracy.

I'm not sure you guys are familiar with Holacracy.

Holacracy got famous because it was implemented by Zappos to like mixed results.

potentially but what a cool way that they do it is that it's not like a very traditional pyramid hierarchical structure but each like subunit will kind of dynamically form bonds with other levels of the hierarchy kind of arbitrarily depending on needs as they arise so like but they have a whole system for how those uh those bonds can form and how you generate links across different levels of the hierarchy and so that's just to say like

This is a huge area of research and experimentation that no one really has a great answer for.

This is a huge open-ended question.


SPEAKER_00:
There's no general strategy for a bug.

It doesn't seem like there's going to be a general organization chart or communications platform

and technology is changing so rapidly and intelligence augmentation this is helping us like sketch the first lines on our notebook

that takes us into a discussion and an adaptive process.

And that is the reframing of the strategy governance conversation.

It's not, this is the strategy playbook.

It's not the homework problems, but it's bringing some ideas to the table that are mixing it up.


SPEAKER_01:
So like, I don't know, I think about optimizing like sense-making at each level because of like the quote that's stated here.

And so like, how do you like,

optimize sense-making across layers.

It definitely has to do with information prioritization, I think.

But it's how to selectively choose.

I guess it's a very open-ended question, but I don't know.

I would like some concrete examples.

It's something I would like to drill Bajan on.

Have you ever seen this done and what worked and what didn't as far as optimizing this hierarchy flow?


SPEAKER_00:
as to what is being optimized one sort of capital maximalist approach is like profit is to be maximized or risk discounted profit or a triple bottom line like there are imperatives for the organization to optimize but that doesn't mean that that becomes the imperative at every communication step

And kind of the dream or direction of informational free energy minimization would be you'll be doing as good as you can in the niche from like a energetics and metabolism perspective when you're informationally optimizing.

If you're a bear making the best possible decisions, you will survive in the niche.

And so it's kind of like recognizing the difference between the ecological success of an organization or organism, recognizing that that embodied success and death isn't the informational imperative, but for things that work and not things that don't,

Fulfilling the informational imperative should lead to the embodied success because it's defined in that way.


SPEAKER_01:
So it's easy to turn to maximizing profit as a firm objective, but I think that that is short-sighted.

I definitely think that there's many other things.

If you're making the most possible money producing light bulbs, so say I'm making a light bulb and I'm maximizing profit on the light bulb, and I'm producing a million of them for pennies, and they're selling for $10 each or whatever.

um but i'm like polluting a river because i'm making the light bulbs so cheap like i'm not like adequately disposing of waste or whatever then like that's gonna have blowback like later either through like epa or through like customers saying i don't want that because it's not sustainable or whatever so like if you're just exploitative or exploitative um then it's

not gonna work out in the long run so like maximizing profit is a very like delicate thing like especially in terms of like company persistence and sustainability like sustainability not like an eco-friendly way but like sustainability of the company itself yeah i mean this oh sorry


SPEAKER_00:
I was thinking of fermenting bacteria.

Initially, certain strategies work, but then that can lead to the production of metabolites that that strategy will no longer be optimal in.

So one has to consider like externalities in the niche.

And of course, all of this is just a statistical framework that's way before we get into ethical imperatives or preferences.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, so this is something I think we covered in the third live stream, but it's like, okay, how do you...

how do you herd cats basically and get all of these different levels of the organization to move in the same direction and kind of balance that these different things you might want to optimize for that in the longterm, maybe it goes for profit, but you might have like sub problems that you need to solve that are not strictly profit.

And so one of the most famous ways of doing this is OKR.

So like objective key results.

And so like at your top level of the organization, maybe it is profit or maybe it is like some kind of double bottom line.

But then as you go into like sub units of the organization, like say you have customer service,

Your customer service team is not optimizing for profit.

They're optimizing for a customer experience score, like CSAT, for example.

And your legal team is not optimizing for profit.

They have their own measure that they're optimizing for the number of cases they win or legal risk avoided.

I don't know how you quantify that.

But there are ways that you can kind of break the bigger the problem of profit into sub problems.

And rather than having, you know, everyone going towards profit at the same time.

Cool.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Oh, so perfectly perfect segue into organizational sensemakings.

I'll read this.

Organizational sensemaking is not about optimally approximating an objectively defined external reality, but developing and enacting models of reality by way of top-down, bottom-up predictive coding.

Effectively, the future arrives in the present and becomes the past.

Time moves at different rates in the brain's hierarchy.

as is true for the firm.

While time has strictly no speed, humans project speed onto time as relations and interactions increase in intensity and complexity.

A firm's very existence is determined by its curiosity-fueled interaction with its external environment, fast at the reflex low level, i.e.

resource markets, and more slowly at higher cognitive levels, i.e.

strategic decision-making.

um and this you know reminds me of um like a paper that uh daniel and i have been working on um and just how how um temporally active inference and the fep operates at different um fast and slow speeds


SPEAKER_02:
It kind of reminds me of how in pretty much every company I think I've ever worked at, there's always this tendency for the bottom rung of the organization to think that the top rung are just like a bunch of like slow bumbling idiots.

There's like this temporal disconnect of like the bottom rung of the organization is getting feedback immediately.

And like they're running little tiny experiments every single day where they're getting immediate feedback.

Whereas like the top rung is like the board, maybe they're meeting quarterly and then they have like some mandate and they don't really get feedback synthesized to them until like another three months.

And so like there's always this tendency for like there's always this temporal disconnect and it always creates this kind of like boundary or disconnect between the bottom and top of the organization.


SPEAKER_00:
this point of time having no speed is quite interesting we talk about oh it's the food is taking it's too slow or slower time scales faster time scales longer distances

like it feels natural to talk about the rate of speed but even without going into too much uh reconceptualizations of speed it just isn't necessarily that way and then in the brain as to like time moves at different rates in the brain's hierarchy

we could think about a neural firing pattern that takes place over some number of milliseconds and then there's slower waves and rhythms they compose and they influence each other they're all happening at once technically it's all happening in the same way at the same place the same exact input outputs

but still it makes sense to talk about some of these slower or larger waves and some faster waves like in the EEG rhythms so striking a balance between the everything all at once real time unfolding and then these day week month year decade nested time scales is a big part of sense making


SPEAKER_01:
Definitely.

Okay.

Habits of mind.

So I liked this because I've read Good to Great, the Jim Collins book.

And when Tyler and I were first starting out the series, we talked about how that's very leader centric and very top down, like the ideas that are presented in that book.

And so I was excited to see this book, Good to Great to Gone by Alan Wurzel.

I have not read it, but he talks about companies like, I think specifically like Circuit City is the company, right?

Oh yeah, it's here on the cover of the book.

But Circuit City was like one of the companies that Jim Collins went through and good to great.

And then now like there is no more Circuit City.

And so he, I guess, kind of outlines like the failings of like what makes a good company a great company.

And now like they're obsolete and maybe why they're obsolete.

And so he outlines these habits of mind.

And I don't, I haven't read the book and I don't know enough, but they're listed here if you want to read them and maybe read the book.

But these habits of mind that are like necessary to stay relevant, maybe.

So Bijan says that habits of mind may equally explain why upper echelon is generally resisting strategy process as a matter of top down, bottom up prediction error minimization.

And he goes on to make the claim that five out of Wurzel's 12 habits of mind are foundational to prediction processing framework, fostering success of strategic renewal.

And he briefly summarizes these habits.

Tyler, do you want to read these for us?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So first one, be humble, run scared.

So continuously doubt your understanding of things.

Business success contains the seeds of its own destruction.

Two, curiosity sustains the cat.

The world is constantly changing.

Be open and curious and strive to learn from others.

Three, evidence trumps ideology.

In business as in politics, decisions are too often based on unproven assumptions about what works and what doesn't.

We all need operating assumptions about human nature, the economy, and the like.

But when things do not work out as planned, we need to determine whether our assumptions were based on evidence or ideology.

Four, confront the brutal facts.

The worst person you can fool is yourself.

Ignoring or denying reality does not help it go away.

Five, chasing possible dream.

Do not be limited by the tyranny of the or.


SPEAKER_01:
So I thought this was cool.

I think a lot of these habits of mine speak to the ability to rewire the plane while flying it.

I don't know what Bajan stressed earlier in the chapter.

Do you guys have any additional comments here?

All right.

Okay, so another claim, and this might be who it might be.

Oh yeah, getting close to the end.

Okay, Bijan says, it is the circular causality of belief propagation message passing where prediction processing frameworks effectiveness in the organizational context most likely breaks down.

Neither the bottom-up message passing nor the top-down belief propagation are unobstructed.

We fail to appreciate how organizational friction, which he defines as high levels of free energy,

compromised firm performance due to, first, top-down enforced predictions and prediction models that are not receptive to bottom-up challenge.

Second, weak top-down bottom-up lateral generative sensing and sense-weaking capabilities in the form of error signaling and processing.

And third, poor communication and absence of a language that is suitable to leverage prediction processing framework for strategic renewal.

So I thought that that was kind of neat.

Like, how, how the, these are the faults, right?

And then he goes on to say in the organizational context, prediction processing framework is determined by 3 categorical imperatives.

And I've abbreviated these kind of just shortening them so that they fit on the side.

1st, upper echelons prediction models and corresponding predictions must be explainable and explicitly articulated and.

Yeah, so that goes into the communication salience prioritization.

He says the language and communications layers are critical to resource configuration, firm performance, and eventually firm survival.

He also says, each of the hierarchical layers must have formal and informal interfaces that couple each layer to the next layer.

For a given hierarchical structure of a firm to have any legitimacy, generative top-down, bottom-up sensing and sensemaking at every hierarchical level should equally make sense before an error message travels to the next level.

There should not and cannot be any bypassing of hierarchical layers.

I guess that's like, don't go over someone's head.

But also, yeah, I wonder about the bypassing, about the information flow and the throughput, and how big does that channel have to be?

And lastly, he says, the firm's generative model is the firm's eco-niche.

When we perceive the world as uncertain and unpredictable, it is a mere reflection of the inadequacy of our generative reality model.

So I think that that's how to avoid the errors mentioned in the previous slide.

Do you guys have any comments here?

Final thoughts on the material?


SPEAKER_02:
One thought is I like number one, where it's talking about how you have to articulate and communicate top down what your actual model is so it can be challenged.

And something that I've noticed is that oftentimes people will communicate their predictions, but not necessarily how those predictions were generated or the components of that, like the components of the assumptions that went into that prediction.

And that makes it really hard for other levels of the hierarchy to like even know what was going on and what they should be challenging at all.

And a lot of times you'll just assume like, okay, like they probably know what they're talking about.

Like they're the experts.

So like, let's just hope for the best.

But I really liked that.

He said like, no, you have to explicitly say what your model is.

So it can be challenged.


SPEAKER_00:
To the going over someone's head.

On a previous slide, it said organizational friction is high free energy.

We might want to finesse that by saying relatively high free energy, because in general, we're not interested in the absolute value of a free energy calculation, but rather the gradients and the direction at which we could act to improve or increase it.

so it's not about the total amount it's about the relative amount so let's just say it turned out that somebody from an org chart perspective did go over their head that could be understood as a policy selection authorized or not to structurally rewire the communications architecture of the firm now that rewiring

in a situation may be associated with a decrease in organizational friction and therefore a decrease in the free energy.

So it may be an adaptive decision because no org chart is the final word.

But that doesn't mean that every time somebody tries to rewire the communications architecture, it would decrease friction.

if people were just getting all these side messages and there would be so many issues as well so it's it's not to say to do or not to do it's giving the areas of consideration the structure cognitive and capacity oriented aspects that we can have that ongoing conversation and some principles that help us

take selection and still do things in an uncertain world with this little fun caveat that the perception of the world as uncertain and unpredictable is actually an inadequacy of our generative reality.


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, even skipping different levels of hierarchy could be something that you explicitly plan for as well and build processes around.

So for example, I worked at a company that they call it like the big red button.

Whereas if you were at the bottom rung of the organization and you saw something was going terribly wrong, you could basically push this big red button and it would file this report directly to the C-suite.

and would skip all the levels, and then they would follow up with you directly.

And so they explicitly said, hey, we know that there are going to be things that are shielded from our view, and we want to know about it.

And they built a process explicitly around it.


SPEAKER_01:
So in terms of, sorry, go ahead, Damian.


SPEAKER_00:
that reminds me of cells signaling and then the ultimate red button is like when the cellular contents are spilling out.

It's like my only message to share is that I am no longer and all my insides are like spilling onto you.

So it's like, if there's a protein that's usually internal and you're being bathed in it, that's the red button that you needed.

So yes, that kind of emergency or a conditional rewiring

maybe there's many patterns and motifs where we might want to embed that kind of flexibility into the communications architecture so even though it is a dynamic communications architecture at a higher level it's actually not changing in its dynamics like different people are going to be in different video calls but that doesn't mean that the communications architectural plan is changing it just means that different individuals are connected differently


SPEAKER_01:
So in terms of sharing the model, Tyler, when you were talking about sharing how the top level will share their predictions, but not necessarily how those predictions were generated, I'm really reminded of academic research in which it's like,

i feel like everyone is so like shielded from what's going on like you have the principal investigator they like write a grant the grant has like three specific games it's just an example so then like those three specific games they'll each grad student will be working on one of the aims right or maybe they'll have a team working on achieving one of the three specific aims right

And like these teams are doing totally like work that they think is totally unrelated.

Like they have no idea, like the overarching process of the grant.

Like, I wonder how often like the PI shares like the entire grant with every student.

Like, I mean, that's not something that I typically see.

And I think like that there's a lot of shielding going on and I don't, I don't really know why.

Like, is it, is it like.

because it's just too much information or because like they just want the focus on to be on that one thing like they want this the students to have this myopic view or and i just wonder daniel like what is your experience there like do you think that like pis generally share the entire model or they just share a piece of it like what is your experience and do you think that that makes research dysfunctional


SPEAKER_00:
interesting i've seen some investigators who shared the grants or other ongoing strategy documents or not it reminds me of a computer program like if you could perfectly isolate every variable and for loop and you can really clearly say this is the scope of this script and all of that

that may work in a computer system but humans are always curious about the context and the past and the future and alternate futures so that kind of strict information encapsulation approach might increase overhead decrease context have to spend a lot of time re-explaining things

It's not that one strategy is going to be in general better than the other, but it seems like it could be a better professional conversation if the lab strategy governance were framed in a way that accounting for people's differences in like familiarity with grant writing or with experiment design, at least giving lab level awareness doesn't seem like it'd be a bad thing.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, there's an analogous problem within a business organization.

And so remember we talked about OKRs, where you take this big goal you have, let's say it's growth, and you split it up into subcomponent parts.

So one problem I've had in one organization, actually multiple organizations, is on the growth funnel.

So how you get leads and then how you convert them into actual conversions and sales, right?

And so what often happens is that there's a trade off between getting more leads and the quality of those leads.

And so what you'll do is you'll have a top level growth initiative.

We have to grow by 10%.

And then you're like, cool, marketing people, increase your leads.

And then product people, increase the conversion on this funnel.

But what actually happens, though, is if the marketing team increases their leads, they often get more poor quality leads.

You're dipping into lower quality leads to increase your leads.

And so that actually reduces the conversion of the next step of the funnel.

And so they're both narrowly optimized on their one little piece of the puzzle, but they actually really directly impact each other.

And then you get into these really painful conversations between your marketing team and your growth product team, which is really like if they just had this more holistic view to begin with, like, no, we're just trying to grow, guys.

That's what we're trying to do.

We don't care about your little piece of the puzzle.

And so there's often this time where by breaking things off too narrowly, you really miss the bigger picture.

And this is super, super common.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah alas well having having the um the a priori partitioning means that you are saying like uh not even the structure of the problem is going to change again if you only have to partition the problem one time then maybe it can be cut and dry but those kinds of dependencies

are why we need these kinds of composable partitioning strategies so that different parts of a Bayes graph can be identified because we're looking at a lot of text, but all of these notions of a generative model, generative process, we can also see that kind of a Bayes graph representation in the background, especially as these types of perspectives move closer to application.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Well, that's the end of the content here for Chapter 6.

We will delve into Chapter 7 next week, unless you guys have any final things to say.

That's it for me.

So thanks for being here, and I'm looking forward to carrying on, pushing forward, learning more about free energy governance and future discussions with the author.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Thank you.

Till next time.


SPEAKER_02:
Bye.

## 0_yvUA0lsdI

SPEAKER_03:
Hello and welcome.

It's January 24th, 2023.

We're in ACT-IMP bookstream number 001.07 on Governing Continuous Transformation.

Off to you, Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

So we are the Active Inference Institute, a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can reach us at all of these social media links.

This is a recorded and archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve upon our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we will be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Again, if you'd like to participate, ActiveInference.org is our main website, and there's a link to get involved and join many of the ongoing collaborative projects or live streams or both.

This is, as Daniel said, Bookstream 1.07.

So it's our seventh contextualization video on this book, Governing Continuous Transformation by Bijan Kesri.

So we will just jump right into it.

I'm Blue.

I'm an independent researcher in New Mexico, and I will pass it off to Daniel.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and just happy to see this series continue.

Tyler?


SPEAKER_02:
And I'm Tyler.

I'm a protocol designer and DAO researcher in California.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

So we are in part two, free energy governance of this textbook.

And the name of this chapter is cognition from superposition to reality.

And so I think that that kind of hints to some quantum stuff that might be elaborated more towards the end of this chapter and in the next chapter.

And just a few keywords for this chapter, but still quite a bit of content here.

So Tyler, do you want to read the start of the abstract?

Do you mind?


SPEAKER_02:
Sounds good.

Can you guys hear me okay?

Great.

All right.

Attention-based view and an activist approach address FEG's cognition dimension.

To this day, strategy management research is not entirely de-chained from its very path dependency of putting perception ahead of action, i.e., putting environment ahead of strategy.

While ABV's structured cognition nexus is FEG's critical building block, ABV erroneously treats action as a consequence of perception.

Once we embrace attention as action-generated, we start understanding that clever analysis and form of belief updating follows action-generated stimuli, not the other way around.

ABV is trapped in the old-school limitations imposed by bounded rationality.

In the discontinuous and distributed quantum world, agents' bounded rationality is meaningless as enacted inference empowers the world to deliver a supervisory signal.

Effectively, agents offload the burden of cognition to the environment.

Boundary rationality is replaced by extended cognition.

The badness of human cognition is effectively neutralized.

Blue, do you want to take the next one?

Sure.


SPEAKER_00:
There are at least as many reality models as there are economic actors.

Every organization chooses, akin to holding, acting upon a light torch in the darkness.

which environmental significance to attend to.

Whatever the torch highlights is equivalent to breaking a quantum wave of probabilities, moving from superposition to reality, intermediated by the Markov blanket.

Environmental enactment is essentially a purpose-directed, interactive, inferential, and social learning sense-making process.

Alright, so there are two sections to this chapter.

The first is attention based view and the second is an activist approach.

So Tyler, do you want to take this slide?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

All right.

So attention-based view.

So we actually touched on this a couple of streams ago in the context of when we introduced this was that Bijan was going through different models of thinking about firm cognition, and they're all limited in their own sense, including attention-based view.

And we'll go deeper into why attention-based view is limited, but also has important ways of thinking about how firm cognition works.

And so the general idea of it is that attention is a limited resource.

And that permeates through all levels of the hierarchy of an organization.

So at the individual level, you have limited attention that bounds your condition of what you're able to understand and perceive and decisions you're able to make.

And the boundedness of your individual cognition bubbles up into a social context, which bubbles the kind of decisions a group of people can make.

And then that finally bubbles up into your organizational cognition, which manifests through different rules, positions, players, and resources.

So this is just to say like, hey, we only have so many things that we can spend our time and energy on.

And that manifests at larger levels in the kinds of rules that we make within an organization.

Blue, Daniel, anything you'd add here?


SPEAKER_00:
So I can read this claim.

While attention-based views structure cognition nexus is a critical building block of free energy governance, fundamentally attention-based view suffers from severe shortcomings that weaken its relevance to practice.

By highlighting some of attention-based views' most fundamental weaknesses, we should further cement the case for free energy governance as a meta-theory connecting in circular causality structure, cognition, and capabilities.

Once we understand how the Bayesian brain is building a model of its world, we start seeing how anachronistic and full of friction our deep-rooted conceptions of organizational attention are.

Do you guys have anything to add here?

Okay, cool.

All right.

So bounded rationality.

So this was a concept that Bijan brought up here in this chapter, and it was introduced by Herbert Simon, the term, in like 1957.

And I pulled this from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

So his introduction of this term was a shorthand for his position against neoclassical economics.

and his call to replace the perfect rationality assumptions of homo economicus with the conception of rationality tailored to cognitively limited agents.

And so this little figure here shows the cognitive limitations and imperfect information and time constraints that we're faced with when we have to make a decision.

So we always are limited by what we can hold in our brain and the view of the information that we have.

Like, we were talking about, like, complexity, like, computing pi.

Like, we could get a more accurate, you know, numerical digit of pi, but we're limited, like, by time.

Like, if we go on and on and on, we could get more and more accurate.

But, like, why?

Like, is 3.14 good enough?

Because I could pull it up in, like, a split second from memory.

And so all of this, like, configures our bounded rationality and complexity.

we use a process that Herbert Simon introduced as satisficing to make a suboptimal decision or our best possible decision with the bounded rationality that we're faced with.

A quote from Herbert Simon says, broadly stated,

The task is to replace the global rationality of economic man with the kind of rational behavior that is compatible with the access to information and the computational capacities that are actually possessed by organisms, including man, in the kind of environments in which such organisms exist.

Tyler, do you want to read where this founded rationality concept is introduced in the chapter?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

Yeah.

So I think the context here is that he's trying to connect ABV to bound rationality by saying, all right, well, you have limited attention.

How does a firm decide where its attention is spent, right?

Like, how do you make that decision collectively?

So he says, in ABV, top leadership's attention to the right issues and solutions consider the source, the firm's competitive advantage.

Essentially, it's content rather than process-centric, and the firm's performance bottleneck remains upper echelon's attention.

i.e.

bounded rationality.

The critical question then is how, in the first place, context is selected to determine attention, or how bottom-up market signals connect with top-down upper echelon expectations and predictions to determine attention.

And so what he's saying is like, ABV doesn't really explain how that attention gets directed in the first place.

ABV is trapped in the old-school limitations imposed by bounded rationality.

and discontinuous and distributed quantum world agents bounded rationality is meaningless as perceptual content is given in our predictions and this is precisely what allows the world to deliver the supervisory signal effectively the firm is off loading the brilliant condition to its environment so bound rationality is extended is replaced by extended cognition the badness of human cognition is effectively neutralized uh blue Daniel anything to add there

We'll go to the next slide where we could explain more about extended cognition.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So extended cognition, I took this from this article by Mark Spivak.

Extended cognition takes the idea that your mind is on your smartphone, literally.

So it says that human cognitive states and processes sometimes spill outside of our heads into objects in our environment.

And this is something that we've looked at and talked about before.

In many ways, like, even with, I'm not sure if you guys talked about it yesterday on the stream, but in the thinking, like a state live stream that we did, we talked quite a bit about extended cognition and.

cumulative cultural evolution and how like a lot of our cognition is like out there embedded in our environment so that we don't have to think about it.

Like when I grew up, there was no internet.

So we would have to like, you know, I mean, Colton, like my son in the car the other day asked me some question and I was like, you're gonna have to ask Alexa or Google.

And he was like, will you ask your phone for me?

And it was like some fact question, like how many bones are in the body or something that I couldn't remember off the top of my head.

And I said, well, wait till we get to school and then I'll ask my phone because my phone was like, whatever, playing music or doing and I'm driving.

Right.

And he was like, that was so long.

Like, you can't wait 15 minutes to get to school to answer the question.

And I was like, man, when I was a kid, if I wanted to know the answer to this question, I would have to go to the library, look in the card catalog, find a book or encyclopedia or something.

Oh, it's a Guinness Book of World Records.

That's what it was.

It was like the world's smallest pancake or something like that.

And so we would have to find the book and then look it up in the book.

And it would take days if we could even remember the question for that long.

And he was like, oh, my God, where would you live?

So like this kind of extended cognition, like we could just know everything with a click of a few buttons is amazing.

Do you guys have anything to add here at extended cognition?

Sorry, I rambled.

All right.

Then maybe Tyler wants to talk about channeling attention.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool, so yeah, I mean, your extended cognition is not just you as this single known organization, and it actually encompasses both your environment, the firm around it, and also maybe the environment around the firm.

How does the attention of that cognition get channeled?

How do you decide what matters, what doesn't matter?

And so what Bajon says is, well, ABV views organizations as systems of structurally distributed attention, where structure-channeled attention, ABV, treats the process of channeling as a black box.

So it's like a framework for thinking about how cognition is limited in organizational context, but it doesn't really tell you what's going on.

For that reason, it doesn't end up being super practical, at least in Bajon's telling.

So he goes on to say, neither UEV nor ABV

both fundamentally top-down oriented frameworks have given due consideration to the dynamic interplay between top management team tmt and the board of directors more specifically there's no transparent structural link between the upper echelon level and field intelligence for example the very process that governs the two layers interaction determining affirms attention and actions

remains opaque.

And so I think broadly, what Bijan is saying is that, especially like the inactivist approach of thinking that how your actions in the environment determine your perception, that's missing in ABV, and that's a critical aspect of understanding how cognition happens in an organization, but specifically the interplay between the board and the management team, which in previous streams, he spent a lot of time describing why that's a really critical and important relationship for firm cognition.

Blue Dale, anything you got here?


SPEAKER_00:
So I would just add that like or maybe emphasize the point that we talk about a lot about top management here and the board and that interaction and then like the interactions between different levels of the hierarchy, like from the top all the way to the bottom.

And I think that that we emphasize the importance of like the the feeding forward and feeding back and like the interaction between the layers and how information is transmitted between them.

But there's no real concrete

um examples of how to to best do that um and I think that this is like like for me like not just in a firm but also like in the body like how is that information like transmitted like how does like my big toe prioritize like what goes to my brain like obviously if I kick something really hard and hurt my toe or like if I get like a hangnail or like a like ingrown toenail or something it really hurts

But, like, otherwise, my toe, like, I don't even know it's ever talking to my brain.

So it has to, like, provide salience somehow.

And how this is done and, I don't know, that's so critical for me.

I think that that's, like, really at the heart of all of the active inference hierarchical structuring stuff.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Attentional coherence.


SPEAKER_00:
So here, Bichon quotes Ocasio, and this is like a 2011 paper, I guess, or maybe book.

But he puts a lot of emphasis on Ocasio as like one of like the people that like his work really rests strongly upon.

So I encourage you to read the chapter if you want to learn more or go straight to Ocasio itself.

So he says, the interaction of top-down and bottom-up attentional processes is also implicit in the Wick and Sutcliffe concept of the quality of organizational attention and in the rerope analysis of attentional triangulation, combining attentional stability, top-down, attentional vividness, bottom-up, and attentional coherence, combining both.

And he goes on to say that attention-based view cannot explain attentional coherence.

And so getting at what I just was saying about the interaction between the top-down and bottom-up and how that works can be explained in attention-based view.

Maybe it can be explained in free energy governance, or we can maybe get some guidance on how to best do that.

Hopefully, in the coming chapters, we'll learn more.

Do you guys have any comments here?

Okay.

Do you want to read these claims for me, Tyler?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So, APV erroneously treats action as a consequence of attention and perception.

According to PPF, Prediction Processing Framework, action is determined in circular causality to stimuli that dictate attention and sense-making.

While ABV is laying a critical foundation in looking cognition structure, the question arises whether ABV's attention will need to be redefined as something more granular and practical.

So attention not only is too diffused as a cognitive concept, but also is hard to meaningfully operationalize in the context of continuous strategic renewal.

So exactly what Blue was saying on the previous slide, ABV explains like, okay, I understand why

attention being limited shapes a firm's cognition.

But like, what do I even do with that information?

Like, how is that going to be impactful?

How can I model that?

And Bajon is kind of like, well, it's not that useful right now, but he's teasing that maybe it could be with active inference or free energy governance.


SPEAKER_00:
What is that something more granular and practical?

How do we focus attention?

How do we break attention up into sub-components that are more granular and practical?

What is in our field of view or what should be in our field of view?

What we're looking at, what we're prioritizing, and do those things line up?

I don't know.

I could speculate all day, but it's hard to know really what that more granular and practical thing might be.


SPEAKER_03:
One other quick note on that is there's the question of coherence and adaptivity.

For example, that student answering their cell phone in the classroom on the previous cartoon that may have certain dimensions of adaptivity or fulfill certain preferences.

of one agent but not another and then there's this question of action orientation and so if we're always in the business of asking about the environment doing the market research not thinking about the strategy taking this sort of perception first mindset there still is the question of attentional coherence are we paying attention and sense making putting all the pieces together from what we're perceiving

And also there is this inactive shift, which is incomplete, but it's part of the puzzle, which is we want to be having attention, regimes of attention on our action.

And that brings together the embodiment and the inactive view with the attentional view, which as brought up, doesn't really describe what attention is and still can be mobilized in a passive setting.

But together we have this active attention and that flowers in active inference where attention is internal action.


SPEAKER_00:
So isn't it like pay attention to what you're paying attention to?

Is that like a nested little hint there?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, in Livestream 28, we saw a three-layer model of attention, and there is no single one way to model any cognitive phenomena.

It's going to be up to people in different settings to understand what treatments of attention are insightful or useful or applicable.


SPEAKER_00:
I don't know.

I think that that, like, paying attention to what you're paying attention to kind of gets...

like a lot of attention in like the business context or like even in like prioritizing like your to-do lists, right?

Like, are you just like fighting fires all the time or are you like making progress to do like things going forward, making progress on your own goals?

So I think like, I don't know, that might be a critical like governing variable, right?

All right.

So let me read this claim.

In that regard, predictive processing framework in the form of inactive inference is potentially a critical complement to and possibly substitute for the attention-based view.

Predictive processing framework provides the concepts and logics that give new meaning to the linkage of structure and cognition.

According to predictive processing framework, prediction models and predictions self-optimize as a matter of pursuing surprise minimization by way of free energy minimization.

It is strictly a priori not an attention challenge, but a purpose-directed prediction challenge.

The evolution of self-driving vehicles provides an exemplary illustration of this point.

Once the challenge was conceived as a prediction rather than attention challenge, the road to perfection is simply a matter of continuous and purpose-directed prediction error minimization.

And I don't know, like, what is really meant by this?

Like, like, the challenge of self driving was conceived as a prediction, like once people predicted that it would happen.

I'm not really sure, like what Bajan means here.


SPEAKER_02:
I could maybe take a stab at that one.

Because I think what he's saying is that for a self-driving car, that's the kind of thing that if you were using purely linear thinking, only using the things you know already about the world, a self-driving car wouldn't be an obvious next step.

You have to take this leap of faith, an action-oriented leap of faith, into saying, no, we're going to build a self-driving car.

And then once you've decided that that's your path you're going to go down, now it's just optimization on that path.

And so I think he was illustrating the inactivist approach of like, hey, a self-driving vehicle, there's nothing obvious or self-evident about that needing to happen.

But once you decide it's going to happen, then it's a prediction problem.


SPEAKER_03:
Agreed, there's different readings one way, also not knowing the self-driving car game.

If we were in this passive game,

perception-first world, then there would be the main issue to resolve would be understand from noisy sensor readings where is the location of a person and produce our uncertainty about where the person is or what that object is.

However, once we see it in terms of this continuous purpose-directed prediction error minimization, we're going to center the role of action, gas break, and turning, and a few other affordances that cars have.

So instead of going for all the decimal points on whether that's a person or a mailbox or a cone,

what does it look like to take this unfolding action-oriented view where you're aligning with your preferences, for example, not to cause harm to people and then lesser priority not to cause harm to objects.

Maybe steering away from that object, you can have a good policy posterior on.

It's a good and likely action without having all the decimals of precision about the environment.

once we understand how essential action is to the self-driving car it reframes what we have to do with the sensor data and it centralizes the relevance of the strategy yeah i do remember something about like um some change in self-driving like in the sensor system so maybe that like


SPEAKER_00:
references the um like attention versus prediction problem or maybe that's like being referred to internally in there i'm not sure okay so that sums up um the attention based view section and we're moving in now to um the inactivist approach um so this is like at the start of the chapter um bijan quotes thompson 2007

and says the organism's environment is the sense it makes of the world.

The environment is a place of significance and valence as a result of the global action of the organism.

So again, taking this like action-centric perspective.

And he quotes Bramsted et al.

2020 by saying active inference is an active inference.

And he says, indeed, the essential question is how the firm brings forth significance and valence that does not pre-exist, but is the result of action-centric and socially constructed engagement with the outer world, equivalent to internally assigning probabilities to the external hidden unknown states in the form of a Markov blanket.

This revealing of significance and valence then lays the foundation for generating shared meaning and shared expectations in the form of unique interpretation models, belief systems, underlying firm performance and survival.

Yeah, so we can go on to see what else he says.

So he makes the claim.

dafton week 1984 differentiate between environment driven and interpretation driven approaches to strategy making and in this big quote they say in environment driven frames top managers experience environments as concrete hard measurable and determinant on the other hand top managers of firms confronting more unstable or unanalyzable environments

are thought to construct, coerce, or enact a reasonable interpretation that makes previous action sensible.

Thus, they attempt to construct their environments through their strategies rather than developing strategies in response to environments, resulting in strategy, environment beliefs, or proactive logics.

And he also says, despite work's strong influence on strategic management research to this day, the environment driven approach remains dominant.

So I think that this is like one of the central themes that's emerging in the book is that that like the environment is somewhere out there.

It's some very real thing.

It's taken to be like it is this way.

It's always going to be this way.

And it's like, and kind of something that Daniel and I have talked about at length, like the niche as responding to the organism.

The niche responds to the organism just as much as the organism responds to the niche.

And whether or not the niche includes other organisms in the environment or not is kind of irrelevant when we have things like books and smartphones.

So this environment is changing and it's changing maybe so fast and so much that this environment driven

framework is perhaps not effective so unstable or unanalyzable environments is maybe like this discontinuous environment that Bijan speaks of because the environment's changing fast like maybe faster than it's ever changed before because of like our global connectivity and many other reasons so now maybe all environments are unstable or unanalyzable or more unpredictable than they've been before so that this

constant update or attempting to construct the niche rather than viewing it as something stable is maybe more important for firm persistence.

Do you guys have any comments here?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I just think on the second half of that, of very unstable and unanalyzable environments, that really resonates in a startup context where a lot of times startup founders will have no pretense of knowing anything that's going on in the environment.

like they're very clear about their ignorance of the world.

Instead, they run small experiments to kind of gauge what's going on in the external world and then kind of construct a worldview from there rather than saying, hey, we have this great business idea.

Let's scale this thing.

It's more like, hey, let's discover who our users are, which I think really corresponds well with that second half of the word.


SPEAKER_03:
also with our classical temperature example let's just say that we were in a house and there was a heating element if we think that over the time scale of days things aren't going to change that much we might look towards a strategy of turning on and off the heater so dealing with the environmental variability in the niche we're in whereas if

we're in an open space so there's no point in having any strategy of trying to heat the local air because it's just going to get blown away in the next second then you might center decision making around like finding a warmer location and so when there's a more stable environment then it puts us into a mode of like understanding the variability patterns the circadian patterns in temperature and responding with what we have or maybe inventing something new to respond to those regularities

But when there's the discontinuous and complex environmental settings that this work is focused on, it centers this kind of creating one's own niche through action, not just modifying it more locally to do the best one can.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Tyler, do you want to read this claim?

Do you mind?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So every organization chooses, akin to holding a light torch in the darkness, which environmental significance to act upon and to attend to.

Whatever the torch highlights is equivalent to breaking a quantum wave of probabilities, moving from superposition to reality, intermediated by the markup blanket.

In this regard, strategy research is challenged to be less mechanistically determined environmental strategy, but more quantum strategy to environment.

quantum world is more tenuous than the one I imagine and this is actually a quote from Revelli and this is not Sean uh the quantum world is more tenuous than the one imagined by old physics it is made up of happenings get discontinuous events without permanence there's a world of fine texture intricate and fragile as Venetian lace every interaction is an event and it is these light and ephemeral events that weave reality not the heavy objects charged with absolute properties that are philosophy positive in support of these events


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, thanks.

So Bishan goes on to say, and I think we'll come back to this quantum, because I have some questions here.

So we'll come back to this at the closer to the end of this section.

But right now, let's read this claim.

Bijan says the critical consideration is how an organism, organism, sorry, too much biology, how an organization transmorphs the sensing and sensemaking activity at the individual level into a firm's institutionalized environmental enactment as a basis for continuous strategic renewal.

Enactment is essentially an interactive and generative social learning sense-making process, hence inactive inference.

Dong et al.

elegantly address this micro-macro dichotomy.

They say, while hypothesis setting is an individual activity, hypothesis testing is an organizational activity.

According to Smircich and Stubber, organization members actively form, enact their environments through social interaction.

A pattern of enactment establishes the foundation of organizational reality and in turn has effects in shaping future enactments.

The task of strategic management in this view is organization making, to create and maintain systems of shared meaning that facilitate organized action.

Do you guys have any comments here?


SPEAKER_03:
one thought i'm imagining a fleet of boats the upper echelon view and the board of directors specifically they may not need to be concerned with the minutiae of move the wheel left move the wheel right on this boat at that time

But they are, as it says here, the task of strategic management in this view is organization making.

So that justifies some of this upper echelon focus.

It's not coming, I don't think, from a place of elitism or chauvinism about those upper management groups, but it's especially targeting to those who are in a position to be involved in organization making, which isn't steering the boat.

But allowing the agency and enactment to happen in the front line requires those not in the front line to take the view that is being promoted here.

Rather than just imagine if we had enough sensors on enough boats, we could have all of them viewed up in front of us and then we could call out who should turn left and who should turn right.

with the three to eight board meetings per year, it's not going to happen.

So what is the organization making that responds to that look like?


SPEAKER_02:
Something that I'm kind of curious about what you just said, because something I've been wondering about through this whole book is whether a board is really necessary for that meaning making or whether that can be done in a more distributed way.

And I think Bijan touched on this a little bit in our last call with him saying that like, well, this is their job is to be, the board's job specifically is to be able to distinct from the operation.

So like they're in this unique position to really build meaning and create sense making and facilitate that process.

But I'm wondering if it's,

like actually necessary for that to happen because it does strike me as like very top down like imposing a sense making framework on an organization is a ton of power and it does very much constrain the cognitive abilities of the larger organization and it strikes me just on this simple reading of it that like maybe something is missing from that or maybe a potential other way forward that is less top down as possible but I'm probably misunderstanding Bijan as well so I'm curious what y'all think


SPEAKER_03:
It'll be so fun to explore, but let's just say that the task of strategic management is organization making.

Maybe this is a saddle point view that everybody can get on board with, but then we go, great, upper management's role and function was organization making, and now everyone has access to the tools and at least view or comment access to the process of organization making.

So, transmorphing

the understanding of what the upper echelon does in terms of organization making.

So just double checking, you're not involved in steering the ship, you're involved in organization making and action orientation.

And then perhaps that function could be taken on by another organizational structure

with that as its focus, or that could be an emergent functionality of other organizational units.

But it's really hard to go from vision coming from the top to simply a vision that's coherent arising from the bottom and from the outside.

And so there's an intermediate view that qualifies the conversation differently.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think that makes sense though.

I think we have observed

that sense making happening both in the bottom and the top and especially in tech companies um where like you will have a board and they are making bit like you know top-down decisions but you will also have like consultants almost embedded at each level of the hierarchy who do that sense making at every level of the hierarchy uh and bubble that up also to the top so i think it does exist where you kind of have it's not purely sense making happening at the board or tmt level


SPEAKER_00:
So I just want to point out the first sentence here, and it really resonates with what you just said, Tyler, like the way that I've been reading this.

He says, the critical consideration is how an organization transmorphs the sensing and sense-making activity at the individual level into a firm's institutionalized

environmental enactment as a basis for continuous strategic renewal like what i took that like individual level as a very like bottom-up thing um because it's like you know each like little worker ant right in the colony like i i took that as like a very bottom-up and distributed thing like how do you take that and turn it into like some kind of collective sense making but really that could also be like there's an individual um

like level at the top, like each board of directors is selected for their different expertise, right?

So like you have a variety, I mean, ideally you have a variety of different views and perspectives at the board level.

And then how do those individuals like translate their sense-making into like something that the institution can then act upon?

So I think that that is a very, like, it rings very true that like this individual sensing and sense-making is happening at like the top and at the bottom.

I think that that rings true.


SPEAKER_02:
I just want to draw one distinction based on some experience of doing the top-down sensemaking.

I was a strategy consultant for a while.

A lot of times you would do the top-down sensemaking where you would talk to all levels of the hierarchy and you would act as the board in that situation and kind of

bubble up all of this information into like a top level um idea about like what's happening in the organization what the narrative is and what actions they should take it's just like very top-down structured but there's like other models of doing this where each node in the organization is more or less operating independently and sense making independently whereas like the top-down structure isn't as important and maybe you're saying the same thing but it strikes me as like a little bit different

Whereas sensemaking isn't happening through a bubble up process through a pyramid, but rather happening in like a web, like in a mesh.

And that strikes me as like an important difference, but maybe Bijan is saying the same thing.

I'm not sure.


SPEAKER_00:
It's hard to know.

And it's hard to also know like how, you know, when you have like, even at like a single layer of the hierarchy, like you have, you know, 25 people and like, you know, 12 of them think one thing and 13 of them think another thing.

Like, how do you, like, make sense of that?

Like, where there's this, like, opposing viewpoint, how do you collectively, like, get buy-in to proceed with, like, either strategy A or strategy B, like, even at a single level, and then pass that information up or down without, like, well, I wanted it to be this way, or I wanted, like, the people going...

um that like the opposing view like whatever wins right like in a vote the the 13 would win if that's the way that it's run or maybe there's weighted voting or who knows right like however a firm would structure itself but it's like really important i think to get strategy buy-in like from everyone at least like hear all of the points in order to proceed and and um

have like the viewpoint adopted widely and like get people to get behind it so it's i don't know it's a hard like weird thing to think about how that information is passed up or down in the hierarchy all right tyler do you have something to add well i was just going to add that this is a really important point like i don't think i'm not just trying to be like pedantic about it like it actually a lot of


SPEAKER_02:
organizational strategy debates hinge on this of whether really you can do sense making in a like hierarchical way, like truly like a pyramid or like a more mesh network.

So like the mesh networks are more like teal organizations or holocracies.

And like, this is a very contentious point.

And I was hoping that we could like figure it out head on or understand the John's like perspective on it.

And I think he thinks both are possible because I think he's hinted at that in the previous live streams, but he hasn't said it like,


SPEAKER_00:
uh super clearly so far um but something i've been like very eagerly waiting for him to like spell out clearly so maybe he'll get to it in the next chapters so tyler like i have a request like in the next live stream you have to put in like a slide on holacracy and like explain that to us like in a very like break it all down break down all these different like strategies for us because like you have that expertise and i'm lost so that there's there's my special request


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Awesome.

I mean, I've just been in like lots of debates with, even within, especially in DAOs where they try to do the mesh network version of things, not the, the pyramid.

And a lot of times just like a total disaster and it doesn't work, but there's always this dream, especially in DAOs like, Oh, could this be possible?

Like, do you actually need the hierarchy at all?

Can this work more like a spider web or rather than the pyramid?

Um, and I've been, this whole book, I've been like waiting for the answer to that.

So I'm excited to ask for Sean.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, and also just getting these dimensions sketched.

Because what if it's like, well, yeah, we can have a slime mold, but then we may split a lot and not all the things that split off may survive.

If that is tolerable or preferable to you, slime mold it is.

But if we all want to...

ride or die together, then this kind of a structure is what we want.

So making sure that there's like consent and transparency around what people are wanting to be in, because also in sort of emergent online 2020s eras teams in DAOs, it's like, are we hanging out in the group chat?

Are we building a product that's going to change the information environment?

Are we learning about other projects?

Are we learning about other early projects to invest in?

It can move very rapidly amongst those spaces and at the risk of trying to capture four birds and getting none.

there's all these other failure modes but maybe again that's what those people wanted to do in that blanket at that time but when you have shareholders in a board and there are some responsibilities that come into play and these sort of okay to fail or okay to Sunset experiments in online organization hopefully can reveal empirical patterns that we use to carry forward organizational technique


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, my read so far on what Bhajan's doing is that he's saying like, yeah, sure, a slide mold organization is a thing you could conceive of.

And that's a valid way for thinking about an organization.

But he's specifically thinking about the legal context that a lot of organizations live in today and making active inference or free energy governance work for those organizations in the world that we live in.

So I'm not sure if that resonates with you guys.


SPEAKER_00:
okay nice nice uh debate it's tangential I don't know information dive all right uh so um Bijan makes this point and he says organizations are challenged to better distinguish how their actions differ from those of others as they construct eco niches and he um really kind of gives this like

A lot of background information, but I just pulled these two quotes about distinguishing self from other.

How do you distinguish what is me and what is you?

And also about how do you sense make, help others see what's in your head?

And in talking about these things, he gives two examples, which I thought were really cool from biology, so I wanted to read them.

He quotes Godfrey Smith, 2016, and says, whenever a fish emits a pulse, it also sends a copy of the command around to the sensing system, enabling that system to counteract the effect of the pulse it has produced.

The fish is tracking and registering the distinction between self and other, between the effects on its senses of its own actions and the effects of events going on around it.

And then he also goes on to say, to use the example of sharks, he says sharks, he quotes Lanza et al, this 2020 paper.

He says sharks have organs called Lorenzini blisters, which sense electrical fields.

Dolphins and toothed whales, for example, benefit from echolocation abilities.

whose sound pulses can penetrate soft tissue to provide them with an x-ray-like mental image of the object of interest.

In order to tell the other dolphins what they have discovered, they actually create a visual picture of what they just saw in the minds of other dolphins.

So I didn't put a full explanation of echolocation because it gets complicated, but here's this dolphin, and it sends out these echolocation rays, and if something is in its

echolocation sight because it's not really sight right but if something it sees it then the rays that are reflected back like give like a or like molded around so you can imagine like ripple ripples through like water right like so they mold around like a rock or a stream and so what comes back is actually like a physical like ripple picture of the rock or whatever it's seeing

And so it can actually then modify its own echolocation sounds to give a picture of the rock to someone else, which I think is so cool, right?

Like to a dolphin friend, not like someone else, because I couldn't see a rickle picture of a rock, but maybe its dolphin friends could.

Anyway, I think that that is a neat idea of how to like really, you know, we always ask people like, do you understand me?

Do you know what I mean?

Do you really know?

But like, it's really hard to know perceptually what someone else's is what's behind their Markov blanket, right?

Do you guys have anything to add here?

Sorry, I'm just the one fascinated by biological sensing and sense making.

Okay.

Tyler, do you want to read this claim for us?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So more specifically, optimization is essential across the constituent elements determining the circular causality of the underlying inactive inference.

One, actions generating reliable sensory input precision.

Two, the ability to express beliefs about beliefs, consequences, sophistication, to enact only a bounded set of external states.

Three, leveraging salience without missing the very air signaling value that non-salient stimuli may nonetheless behold.

And four, force that to anticipatorily develop and strengthen the internal states, i.e.

from resources in form of capabilities critical to resource recombination.

So sensing, sense-making, and duality management.


SPEAKER_03:
I find it interesting here that one, two, and three are within the life cycle of an organization or an organism.

They refer to the reliability of action, the

Ability to have an appropriately expanded vocabulary in terms of sophistication to describe relevant action.

And then three, essentially attention, which is to make sure that you're not just falling victim to hyper skewed or hyper normal stimuli, but rather you're using your attention to enrich

incoming stimuli and also not ignoring what you're not totally paying attention to that might be on the margins of relevance but then four is framed here as an anticipatory question in the long run whether the capabilities are successful to manage resource recombination that's the question of life and death

So one, two, and three are like the behavioral imperatives.

And then four is kind of like the organism looking to the horizon.

Maybe it makes it, or maybe its offspring does, or maybe none of the above.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

And then just this final quote from the paper or from the book.

He says duality is an essential quantum concept that underpins the mastery of managing the distributed and discontinuous nature of today's market realities.

And like I'm curious as to like what Bajan is referring to as duality, like in the quantum context, I always think about like wave particle duality.

But I think he has talked here a lot about superposition.

and maybe he's referring to superposition um maybe he means superposition like you can exist in two different states you know until until for a long time like you can be both black and white one and zero um so i'm not i'm not really sure what he's referring to as duality but i think maybe we'll get into it in the next um


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I was curious whether the connection he's making here is like one of analogies saying like, hey, in the same way, you don't know what was out there in the quantum world.

Do you only you observe something and you kind of collapse all of these waves into an electron?

Is it an analogy in the active inference free energy governance world with through the inactivist approach?

Or is he saying that this is actually like the same thing, that is the same principle underlying?

And I wasn't totally sure which way, what he meant there.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, we should explore.

There's the wave-particle duality, famous.

There's the observer-observed duality or the experimenter-environment duality.

There's multiple dualities.

And then if we think back to Bayesian physics, what does this help us with?

Let's go into it more in the next chapter and then see how it actually connects back.

Otherwise, I believe it puts us squarely into the quantum business advice genre.

But I know there's more to it.


SPEAKER_00:
That would be like a very sellable, like quantum business advice, quantum business strategy manager.

That's my new job.

I'd be like a heck of a consultant title.


SPEAKER_03:
Am I working?

Am I not working?

You could check.

You still might not find out.


SPEAKER_00:
Am I here?

Am I there?

Where am I actually?

You can't measure my position and my momentum at the same time.

That's too funny.

Okay.

All right.

I think we've reached the end of our set of slides.

I'm looking forward to exploring the quantum in more detail as I find the quantum concepts fascinating.

I guess Bijan also does.

Do you guys have anything else to add before we say goodbye?

That's it?

No.

Okay.

Thanks, Tyler.

Thanks, Blue.

We'll see you next week.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, y'all.

Farewell.

## yNZg5b63hb8

SPEAKER_06:
Hello and welcome.

It is January 31st, 2023.

We're here in Active Bookstream number 1.08.

Off to you, Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
So we will be discussing this book, continuing our discussion of this book, Governing Continuous Transformation by Rajan Kesari.

We are the Active Inference Institute Governing

Participatory Online Institute that is communicating, learning and practicing applied active inference.

You can reach us at all of our social media links.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we will be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Again, if you would like to participate in this project or any activities that are ongoing in the Active Interference Institute, please reach out to us.

There are plenty of ways to get connected and involved.

Okay, so the goal of today's book stream is to continue our discussion of this book, and we will just be going through it as usual.

Just as always, this is not a review or a final word over this material.

It's just an introduction to some of the ideas.

Okay, so just quick introductions for those of you who don't know us.

I am Blue Knight.

I've been involved in the Active Inference Institute for quite a while.

I'm an independent researcher in New Mexico, and I'll pass it off to Daniel.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi, Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California.

I'll pass to Tyler.


SPEAKER_04:
My name is Tyler.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm a critical designer and researcher in California.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.


SPEAKER_00:
So today we're moving on to chapter eight of the book.

The title of this chapter, it's in part two, the free energy governance section.

And the title of this chapter is Capabilities, Duality Management.

And we'll talk more as we go on as to what duality management kind of means.

Okay, so there are two sections outlined by Bijan here in this chapter, the dynamic capability view and antagonistic neural networks perspective.

There's a whole bunch of keywords, and we'll just jump right into it.

Tyler, do you want to read this part of the abstract for us?


SPEAKER_04:
Sure.

All right, so abstract dynamic capability view, DCV, and antagonistic neural networks perspective, ANMP, address free energy governance capabilities dimension.

The board's cognitive capabilities in terms of meta-managing interdependently opposing logics as unity are increasingly relevant to continuous strategic renewal.

Duality management, such as the vacillation between exploitation versus exploration, and balancing financial and strategic control is established as a dynamic board capability.

Effectively, FEG extends DCV to the board level.

More importantly, by adopting a free energy principle power perspective, i.e.

redefining the firm as an inactive inference machine, DCV is tripled sensing, seizing, and reconfiguring assets as operationalized such that the firm is engaged as a whole.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

So antagonistic neural network perspective is established and applied as the neuroscientific basis for duality management, managing the existing while contradicting the present to develop the future.

This task positive network slash, what is the other one?

GMN, dynamic mode network.

I can't remember.

Antagonism.

What is it?

default mode network.

There it is.

Default mode network antagonism between exploitative task execution and explorative, explorative, abductive thinking is a neurological representation of the contradictory demands that challenges company sustainable outperformance and survival.

The board's traditional monitoring and advisory roles must be explicitly complemented with a duality management mandate.

managing both of these networks.

More specifically, the board's dynamic capability of duality management lays the foundation for the board's newly established governance purpose in discontinuous and distributed markets, quote, duality stewardship.

Yeah, and so we'll get into these task positive and default mode networks as we get in later to this presentation.

right um so this is a dynamic capability view i looked it up i found this cool image um so bijan says sensing strategic opportunities in dynamic market environments seizing the opportunity and reconfiguring a firm's resource base accordingly are dynamic capability views three central pillars and he cites this reference um so here we see these

sensing, seizing and managing, or I guess that's reconfiguring.

These are the three pillars.

And then they give some micro foundations, like what is this sensing, seizing, reconfiguration or managing threats?

So I don't know, Tyler, do you have any like thing to add here or maybe like specific examples?

I mean, I see like, to me, this is a very abstract like diagram and I'm like, what's going on here?


SPEAKER_04:
yeah i mean i think this makes it more seem more difficult and complicated than it really is where a lot of times it's sensing a lot that's where that's like that abducted reasoning we're saying like hey there's something here what could be true here like how do i explain kind of this like these disparate signals i'm getting from the environment how do i make sense of this and we're seizing is like actually building the thing and managing threats and performing is like managing that thing you built over time and i think actually in the next slide it gives a really good example with um

Amazon Kindle.

And then actually, maybe if you could just go to the next slide, I think it explains it well.

So for example, it says, for example, Amazon's launch of the Kindle 2006 involves sensing the impending threat of its core bookselling business, seizing the opportunity through rapid development of the first generation ebook reader, and gradually reconfiguring its internal activities to ensure that the Kindle became an integrated part of its overall market offering.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice, thank you.

Bijan goes on to say, in a similar manner to that in which organizational learning research distinguishes between single-loop and double-loop learning, capability research also distinguishes between operational capabilities and dynamic capabilities.

And so in the text, he gives some examples of operational capabilities, like mergers and acquisitions and other things that are outside the scope of this dynamic capability view.

Um, okay, so start reading these claims.

So he says there has lately been a shift in dynamic capability view from behavioral to cognitive interpretations, explicating the cognitive micro foundations, underpinning thesis 2007, 3 core pillars of dynamic capabilities, sensing perception, seizing sense, making and.

asset configuration, language, communication, and social cognition.

So this is like reframing again, those three pillars kind of more towards the active inference or free energy governance perspective.

He goes on to say,

With respect to dynamic managerial capabilities for seizing and reconfiguring in particular, we have emphasized ways in which top management can shape aspects of the organizational context, such as by encouraging cooperation, lowering resistance to change, designing a business model for a new venture,

and investing in new skills and assets this suggests that managerial cognitive capabilities may function as mediators of the relationship between changes and organizational context and strategic change which in turn can affect firm performance do either of you guys have any comments here should we move to the next one okay

All right.

So I had to look this up because the term industrial vertical was like brought up and I was like, what is industrial vertical?

And I think like it's more commonly called an industry vertical.

You can have it like in the industrial field and then it's like something different.

But an industry vertical is also known as a vertical market.

And it's like a unique business niche that serves a specific set of consumers or customers and their particular needs.

And there's like tons of examples of that, like

I don't know, organic food and I don't know, like solutions for a biology lab or like there's, you know, all these like niche markets.

And it's like if you're trying to sell chemicals to a biology lab, like, you know, you're selling them like HPLC purified acetic acid.

And you're not selling that acetic acid to someone to use in their kitchen for a salad dressing.

It's a totally different, even though you're selling acetic acid, those are two totally different markets of people.

So you don't want to make a product that's bought by everyone because then it actually is not useful for anyone.

That was kind of my understanding.

Do you have anything to add, Tyler?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, it could give like a little more color of examples here.

So like an example of an industry vertical could be like movie making business where like on the top end, you might have like where the movies are consumed.

It's a movie theater.

And then you have how it's produced.

So you have studios, you have screenwriters, you have the people who are actually creating the equipment and making the film, right?

So it's basically like this big kind of almost supply chain or these interrelated businesses that are all supporting each other to one final product.

So one thing I would add here too that

I think Bijan would probably agree with is that in a more discontinuous world, the idea of an industry vertical is becoming a little bit more fuzzy.

And so for example, like in the past, you might say like, well, I have this, I make research, I make chemicals for biology research, right?

But it could be the case that you also make chemicals that are used for like hair products.

And so like your verticals are increasingly becoming more fuzzy and intertwined.

And it becomes harder to think about like, like, where do I actually like, what niche do I actually serve?

Like,

what is the market I'm in, right?

And it can be really hard to think that.

And that's where sensing really comes in handy is because you could be like, oh, well, I thought I was making biology research chemicals, but it turns out, because I'm sensing and using my abductive reasoning and my best FEG perspective I can, that I'm actually in the haircare market.

And that's where I really should be.

And so it's kind of the idea of a vertical becomes harder to define over time.


SPEAKER_00:
This website actually gave a lot of examples about how industry verticals allow companies that would sometimes be competitors to collaborate with each other.

They talked about how the Samsung Glass is used by the Apple iPhone, or maybe it's the other way around.

But either way, the Samsung phones and the Apple phones are normally competitors in a market.

um i don't even know that they compete anymore like either you're a mac person or you're an android person like i don't i don't think that there's any competition there but maybe um so but how that you know they're collaborating with the use of the glass and making it accessible to everyone just because everybody needs glass right

um okay so they also bishan also brought up um oh yeah here is the industrial vertical so let me read this from the from the book it says indeed independently of industrial vertical the increasingly distributed and discontinuous nature of market transforming forces cannot be overestimated however market velocity velocity is too generic of a concept and so like i was trying to understand um

like how he was using this term market velocity like here and like so market velocity like when you google it it's like it indicates the level of market activity in individual nasdaq stocks by measuring the frequency and share volume in aggressively priced orders it can indicate changes in market direction momentum or liquidity in each stock enabling users

to imply future price movements and trades so like that's how like fast the market's moving i guess um and then like it's also a company that recycles and like velocity is a measure of two dimensions right the speed of change and the change in direction so i don't know um like the concept of market velocity here like he can he goes on to compare it to um environmental scarcity he says a more suitable

dynamic capability concept is environmental scarcity, inspired by Cameron and Zmudo in 1983, meaningfully relating sensing and sense-making as meta-capabilities, respectively, to eco-niche dynamics and strategic renewal.

So I don't know how environmental scarcity and market velocity, how those two relate to each other.

I don't know if you guys can offer any insight here, but this is something that I would hold out and ask Vijan about.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think with, with market velocity, like a lot of times when people talk about discontinuities and like, like people who are not coming from an FEG background, I'm talking about, Hey, like things are moving really quickly.

It's more uncertain than ever.

They talk about market velocity, right?

Like things are just changing all the time.

And I think what Bijan is saying is like, just saying that things are changing very quickly.

Isn't very helpful to you.

Cause you're like, okay, cool.

Like life is hard.

I get it.

Like now what do I do with that information?

Where when you present environmental scarcity, it's becoming a little bit more specific in like how you can actually be more action oriented with it.

Cause you're like, okay, well like what's my niche and what are the meta capabilities I have to create to manage this uncertainty and create my own niche.

Whereas market velocity is just kind of like being overwhelmed by uncertainty and being like, I don't know, things are hard.

Like this is scary.

That's at least my take.


SPEAKER_00:
So he goes on to, oh, sorry, go ahead, Danny.


SPEAKER_06:
One related angle to connect back to what we've discussed elsewhere is this concept of generalized coordinates, which is the value that something is at, and then the first derivative, which is the velocity, and then the acceleration, higher derivatives, and so on.

And so that allows you to track one variable, like the temperature or the salinity of the water or the funds in the bank account.

and look at it not just where it is but how fast it's moving and how fast it's changing how fast it's moving and then you can learn certain things like oh the third derivative is always within this range so that puts certain bounds on timelines that the primary indicator might change by a certain amount or not and we see some of those things like um

The gradual decline, sudden decline, those are differentiated not by their starting point, but by the rate of their decline.

So velocity is something that we can talk about in Bayesian physics actually as a speed.


SPEAKER_00:
And then he goes on to outline this environmental scarcity from this Schmidt et al.

2016 reference, which says combining the type and rate of decline allows us to distinguish four environmental scarcity situations.

Environmental dissolution, which is the gradual decline in shape, environmental erosion, gradual decline in size, environmental collapse, sudden decline in shape, and environmental contraction.

sudden decline in size and so like i was trying to like picture this as like a like a um i don't know maybe like a market right like and so like the market um changes shape like what would it mean for a market to change shape really um i get like the market changes size like all of a sudden you know there's not a market for cds anymore because everybody's listening to mp3s so like that's like a um well i guess like that's a change in shape and size

I'm not sure how to really think about that.


SPEAKER_04:
So to use that example, like that would be a change in shape or like, for example, imagine the same number of people were listening to music, but the format changed.

So it's like the market is music, people who listen to music, but the shape is a little bit different of like how they're consuming it.

Whereas it could be a change of size and shape as if like you move to MP3s.

Now, because it's MP3s, more people can access the music, the market grows, and that'd be a change of size and shape.


SPEAKER_00:
Or like the market totally disappears because we can just stream whatever we want on YouTube now.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, exactly.


SPEAKER_00:
That's also a change in size and shape, I guess.

But yeah.

Okay, cool.

All right.

So environmental scarcity is more suitable than market velocity.

And I guess I can see why that that is because it's more nuanced as to like what is actually changing.

Is it just like...

up or down and how fast or like the shape and the size um and like the rate i guess all of that is taken into this environmental scarcity concept um okay uh do you want to read these claims tyler


SPEAKER_04:
Sure.

So while slow and gradual market changes tests in particular our sense of capability, more sudden changes challenge a firm's sense-making capability.

There really is no objectively uncertain market environment and certainty is an actor-dependent mental experience facing one's very limitations of the dynamic interplay between sensing and sense-making.

Therefore, independent of the degree of market velocity, dynamic capabilities are critical.

He goes on to say, the stronger and sudden the impact of environmental scarcity, the higher the urgency to act and hence the stronger the tendency for strategic renewal to be rather financial control centric, i.e.

M&A and other forms of alliancing, precisely for two reasons.

One, the existing resource base is too trapped in the past to unlearn advanced renewal from within and without.

Or two, the opportunity for market consolidation is too irresistible, as JP Morgan had demonstrated during the 2007-2008 financial crisis.

And time to action is critical.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So yeah, I guess that kind of sheds more light on the environmental scarcity concept here.

OK, so just I wanted to define this.

We kind of talked about the tyranny of the or last time, but we didn't really elaborate on it.

And so we last time we talked about this good to great to gone book, Circuit City and the tyranny of the or is actually Bichon keeps quoting this Wurzel book about the tyranny of the or.

But I had to look it up.

It's actually from the not good to great Jim Collins book, but like another Jim Collins book that I haven't read.

built to last.

And so here the tyranny of the or is the rational view that cannot easily accept paradox, that cannot live with two seemingly contradictory forces or ideas at the same time.

The tyranny of the or pushes people to believe that things must be either A or B, but not both.

And so I think that this concept kind of goes like is like a light introduction and we'll dive deeper into it about like duality and duality management, like being able to hold two simultaneously opposing or maybe seemingly opposing or necessarily contradictory opinions or views.

OK, and here we go right into duality management.

um so vision says in fact at any point in time a firm is challenged to balance strategic organic r d driven innovation and growth with financial control external growth and innovation by way of forms of strategic partnering there is no tyranny of ore it is the duality a continuous balancing act that is mutually reinforcing and with perspective in time and space

forms a unity.

Free energy governance establishes duality management as a dynamic capability, specifically as a dynamic board capability.

Duality management, such as vacillation of exploitation versus exploration, and balancing financial and strategic control, is established as a dynamic board capability.

The goal-directed, action-centric, and generative circular causality of top-down, bottom-up, and lateral sense-making processes, prediction error minimization,

forms the basis for leveraging opposing logics in the form of duality.

And duality management in contrast with strategy management.

Do you want to read this one, Tyler?


SPEAKER_04:
Sure.

So indeed, strategy management has traditionally embraced one, environmental co-creation versus co-alignment, two, exploitation versus exploration, and three, financial versus strategic control as dualism or paradox rather than as duality.

gets the background of a world that is increasingly distributed, discontinuous, and inescapably interdependent.

Persistency in contradiction of interdependent elements, which is the defining core paradox, is potentially nonsense and therefore severely limits the theoretical as well as practical relevance of a strategic paradox lens.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So I think that this is like, you know, the old way and as opposed to duality management, which is the new way.


SPEAKER_06:
do you guys have anything to add here this is kind of like paradox is attention to balance unity is plural and at minimum two rather than paradox is something that must be resolved one way or the other so it's really compatible with a lot of qualitative things people say about wisdom and balance and i think the question will be how is that enacted in organizations and how does that connect to active


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

I mean, one thing that's interesting about duality management is that there's also like a strong cultural tendency to be decisive or a bias to be decisive.

And that like the perception of kind of going, not wanting to make a choice can be seen as weak.

Whereas like you haven't really, so like there's even if, I think a lot of people would recognize the duality and say like, yeah, like, I don't know, it's kind of both.

Like you want to exploit or you want to exploit.

Like I think a lot of people would,

would recognize that, but when you're in a meeting and you're not like really committing to something where you're not like really, a lot of people feel like they're not really offering like a new perspective.

Like they're not putting their stake in the ground saying like, this is how I feel about it.

And this is where I'm gonna like, you know, push behind.

And so I feel like a lot of people feel this pull to make a call.

And so that's one, even in an executive level, you can feel that, especially too when you're on the executive level.

And even if you recognize this duality and you're communicating what you want to do to the broader organization, duality is a really hard thing to communicate and say, yeah, we don't really know what's going on.

It could be one of these multiple things.

Let's figure it out together.

I have done this.

I have communicated this before.

It's a hard road.

to go down, right?

We were like, Hey, yeah, we're all just figuring it out.

Like it's going to be like, let's just kind of be fluid about it.

A lot of people don't like to hear that because it sounds like, well, this person doesn't know what they're doing.

And I don't even like know where we're going.

This is really scary.

Um, and so I do want to touch on this later, but like, it's one thing recognizing duality in yourself and on a small management team, how you talk about duality in a broader organization is like a whole different animal.


SPEAKER_03:
And so I hope we can talk about that more a little bit later.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thanks for that.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so we talked last time also about the quantum duality and what does Bijan mean, and we knew that he would really kind of unwrap it here in this chapter.

I guess like we've seen duality like we are able to like hold simultaneously.

It's simultaneously a one and a zero.

And so we were wondering if what was really meant by duality like in the quantum sense was more like this superposition

um angle and so it it seems like yes um uh based on even this quote from the book so bajan says it is important to appreciate that many dichotomies that have divine defined the science and practice of strategy management such as firm versus environment executive leadership versus non-executive board

individual versus firm, exploitation versus exploration, financial control versus strategic control, formal versus informal channels, and flexibility versus stability, for example, are less and less dichotomous in a distributed and discontinuous world, but coexist in superposition as duality or synchronicity.

So I think that this kind of maybe answers that question for us from last week.

Do you guys have any comments here?

Okay, so, oh, Daniel.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, some of those dualities are raised as a partition, like firm from environment or organism versus environment.

It's a partition that is an integrated whole.

And so that is part of this framing question, seeing it as an integrated unit, but also containing separate aspects.

and then also quantum carries a lot of baggage whether somebody's familiar with what it technically means or not dualities in the quantum space could refer to wave particle it could refer to observer observed and so i think it needs a lot more operationalism to have utility beyond a sort of like evocative quantum management and then again to come back to tyler's point which i want to hear more about um

If you say, well, we're actually doing all the strategies.

It's like a wave.

You thought we were going to go to one strategy or the other.

We're going to be probabilistic across all of them.

How does that work?


SPEAKER_01:
Tyler, I'm waiting for your comeback.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, well, I mean, honestly, like.

I have actually a strategy of how I do this.

And I just don't necessarily communicate broadly that we're doing all of the strategies probabilistically.

Like, like, I might know that and maybe a couple other people know that we're like, kind of like, keeping our options open for a bunch of different avenues.

But you communicate something that's much more clear.

You can't, I don't think you get to do both.

You don't get to communicate that broadly.

it's just not consumable by other people and it doesn't give them like, it's not really actionable by them.

So you can't say we're doing all the strategies because they're like, cool, but how do I fit into this?

You have to say like, well, this is broadly what we're doing and this is how you're going to fit into it.

And so, yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
Also, action helps cut this knot.

So for any given search space, it's not possible to have one parameter value that is maximizing exploitation and exploration.

That gets into the sort of like, I'm everywhere on the number line at once type thinking, but action allows us to say, well, our strategy is we're going to move quick, but as soon as criteria one, two, and three are met, then we're going to lock in.

So that's actually a plan that you can have precision about that embodies in another variable space, explore, exploit.

But where we have precision about is about action, which is what his whole emphasis is on.


SPEAKER_04:
Actually, and that reminds me, another strategy I use too is that you explicitly frame it around exploration and that you're waiting for something to exploit.

So you're saying like, hey, all right, we're going to build this thing and we're not sure like who's going to even use this, right?

But we're going to build this thing.

We have a hypothesis that these kinds of people might use it and then we're going to see who uses it.

And that's like the experiment we're running together as a company is this like defined scope explore stage.

And then once we run that experiment, then we move to exploit.

And so you can kind of clearly do that within an organization of how you're switching between these different modes.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

OK.

Bichon says, therefore, to effectively operationalize dynamic capabilities triplet of sensing, seizing and reconfiguring, we need a model that dynamically links dynamic capabilities triplet with the environment.

This is free energy governance's underlying and active inference.

One, active states.

acting sensing two sensory states perception sensing sense making and seizing the opportunity and three internal states firm resources resource configuration and four external states unknown hidden

are all linked in circular causality conditioned by the internal external Markov blanket and governed by free energy minimization.

And so I just thought it was interesting here.

Like we can go back and look here at the three pillars, like the sensing, seizing and like reconfiguring.

And like for me, like the sensing part

like goes here, like in this action sensing or sensing is like in sensory states, but like seizing the opportunity as a sensory state, like totally threw me off.

Like, is it just me, like a sensory, like sensing the opportunity is like one thing, but like leveraging an opportunity as like a sensory state, like that seems more like an action state.

I don't know if it's just me or like what you guys think about that.

Because I was kind of like, whoa, seizing the opportunity is a sensory state.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, for example, in seizing, he included like creating your business model.

And so that is, I think, part of sense-making because you're like, this is how we relate to the ecosystem.

So it's like action, like it is action-centric, but this is also sensory or something.

Well, this is the kind of like information that we're going to collect from the environment as well.

And so I think you're kind of doing both the action and perception when you're doing season.

Can you say like, this is how I'm going to relate to my environment?

I'm not sure if that's exactly what you're saying.


SPEAKER_06:
I think this is an attempt to coerce, for better and for worse, a triplet

into the particular partition where blankets are defined as graph bayesian graph where there are nodes that make two other sets of nodes conditionally independent and i think we've seen in the philosophical and application settings a lot of challenges with people simply coercing a naturalistic understanding of how things are in the world with this bayesian graph formulation like here we have active states action slash sensing

action states are the outgoing statistical dependencies of an entity.

So yeah, they are action.

And if you think about active sensing, then they're sort of elusively related to sensing, but it's not a sense state.

And so how much are we going to have both feet in the technical formalism of the particular partition

And to what extent are we kind of leaving one foot on the formalism and then pivoting around and trying to draw in some other frameworks and draw concordances?


SPEAKER_00:
So I agree that it's like a coerced, like moving the triplet into this particular partition.

But I just don't know if seizing the opportunity is something that I would include as a sensory state.

I think that that's something that I would put, like even in constructing a business plan, like that's still an action that you take on the world.

So that's something that's outgoing, not something that's necessarily incoming.

And that's just how I would frame it.

or like the way that made more sense to me.

So I just found this a particularly curious area to put it.

But yeah, we can move on and talk about, we can ask Bijan why he put it there, hopefully.

And then we can talk about this antagonistic neural networks perspective.

So Bajan says, antagonistic neural network perspectives is established and applied as the neuroscientific basis for duality management, managing the existing while contradicting the present to develop the future.

It is the form of organizational learning that strategic management literature has labeled ambidexterity, co-managing exploitation and exploration.

In neuroscientific terms, the antagonistic relationship is between two large-scale cortical networks, the task-positive network, TPN, and the default mode network, DMN, which, simply put, are neuroanatomical representations of top management's day-to-day task-specific focus on exploitation, the task-positive network on the one side, and the rather non-routine divergent and creative thinking that initiates exploration and strategic renewal, the default mode network.

And so I thought this was super interesting and took like a deeper dive into like looking up the reference for that quote.

And so here in this paper, Antagonistic Neural Networks Underlying Differentiated Leadership Roles by Boyatzis and Rochford and Jack.

They say the antagonistic relationship between the task positive network and the default mode network creates a fundamental neural constraint on cognition that is highly relevant to the different roles and capabilities that effective leaders must astutely juggle and deploy.

An important consequence of this constraint is that an overemphasis on task-oriented leadership can prove deleterious to an organization.

in particular when openness to new ideas people emotions and ethical concerns are important to success on the other hand the over emphasis on relationship oriented leadership may prove deleterious to focus and the execution of clearly defined goals um and i thought that this was really cool um i i just have never like

thought about leadership like this but but it's definitely there's like the people component and like the gsd component like getting stuff done um and and like leadership requires both and like you can't like you need to have both and i also thought like that the ambidexterity here like where bishan talks about is like interesting because like you think about like organizations and you always hear like the phrase like the left hand doesn't know what the right hand is doing and i wonder if like

That's why this different management role or dichotomy is labeled ambidexterity.

Which came first, the chicken or the egg here?

I don't know.

Do you guys have any comments here?


SPEAKER_04:
One thing I thought was interesting here is on one level, there's this analogy between the default mode network and the test positive network with what you might find in an organization.

But I thought what was interesting too is thinking about how the individual relates to the organization and that like, you know, the creativity that an individual or leader can exercise is kind of constrained by the antagonistic relationship between their own task positive and default mode network, right?

And

You know, it's one thing for people to say like, yes, like you need to have this antagonistic relationship and there needs to be this balance.

But the people that's the ability for the organization to do that is constrained by the people within that organization, their own individual abilities to kind of switch between these two these two systems.

And, you know, it's it's kind of a lot.

I guess you're basically like the organization's ability to do this runs up against the biology of like the individuals and their own ability to switch between these different modes.

And I think that ability to kind of run in these two modes in parallel is quite rare.

And it's one thing to ask your leaders to have it, but to ask your entire organization to have it, it's like a whole much different and much bigger ask.

And so one of my things I keep thinking about when I'm going through this book is like, to what extent does the full organization need to have internalized like duality management, or is it really just the leaders?

Or I think what Bajon would say is like the board.

But that doesn't seem to connect each level of the hierarchy.

It seems like each level of the hierarchy should be able to manage these two different modes of processing, but it's a rarer skill.

So how is that even possible to do?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, few more.

One is the switching, which is sometimes even potentially faster than a second.

of our own behavior or neurophysiology from task oriented to mind wandering and to what extent we sometimes just zone out thinking daydreaming reflecting integrating looking at our schedule looking at our inbox like it's not task driven but that is like a space that can then

transition into a task not always the task we want but it can transition to a task so that's kind of cool and antagonistic is one way to frame it you could also call them synergistic or synergetic because they're part of that unity is plural and at minimum two angle where no single neural network could be tuned to be able to be both diffusive and task oriented

So why not have some type of oscillatory process that enables those two modes, like having a forward and a reverse in a car instead of trying to make one gear that can do two things that are contradictory.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's a super good point.

And in this paper, they really talked about, they went in greater detail about the task positive network and the default mode network.

And they said that the task positive network is activated during a broad range of non-social tasks.

and is thought to be important for problem solving, focusing attention, making decisions and control of action.

In other words, for getting things done.

However, activation of the task positive network also has a deleterious effect on other cognitive functions that are essential to leadership.

It suppresses activity in the default mode network.

And similarly, the default mode network plays a role in emotional self-awareness, social cognition, and ethical decision-making.

It is also strongly linked to creativity and insightful problem solving.

And then the activation of the default mode network, they said elsewhere, inhibits the task positive network.

So I thought that there's like this like need, and it is like, you know, unity, you need both.

You can't constantly be focused on a task.

You guys know how that feels, right?

To just be like, ugh, I'm out of it.

You have to have that.

You need to have work and play in order for some kind of balance.

It is unifying to be balanced, I think.


SPEAKER_04:
Just one thing that's made me remember, I think I've actually mentioned this in a previous stream, but in regards to switching between the two gears of the car rather than trying to run them both at the same time, one way that this was phrased to me by one of my previous CEOs was,

you have like art projects and you have science projects.

And so like your art being your default mode projects, your science being your task positive projects.

And like explicitly saying like, we are in art mode right now.

Like don't hold us accountable to any metrics.

Like this is an art project we're exploring versus science, which is like, hold me accountable.

And that means hold me accountable to metrics.

Like I'm going to set a number and I'm going to hit that number.

And like, that's how I should be evaluated.

And so I think there are ways you could probably like frame,


SPEAKER_06:
switching between these modes in an organization yeah thank you tyler and one biological angle on this sometimes this type of oscillation is called a winnerless competition and it's modeled using predator prey type dynamics uh latke volterra is the name of the dynamical formalism and in the spm

textbook and package from Carl Friston and colleagues earlier work.

There's a lot of examples of winnerless competition, Laka-Volterra models being used to model activity amongst different brain regions.

And this winnerless competition is an interesting framing on everything from attention to sleep.

It's like sleep is not trying to be 100% of the time.

Wakefulness is not trying to be 100% of the time.

They inhibit each other

until there's a phase transition and then it's like a dwell in one state and then that inhibition shifts and one oscillates back and so similarly like a predator doesn't over the long run really want to eradicate the prey but their populations fluctuate and that's a winnerless competition and in fact that's a co-winning competition and just one last point um i remember in the selfish gene some of the discussion of

out there on the savannah look at the cheetah eating the gazelle how can one say that that's like a mammal level selection at play that doesn't make any sense it's like but actually if that ecological relationship weren't there then neither population would have the resilience

So how we frame things and especially the level of holism that we bring is going to set the stage for whether we see something as sustainable or unsustainable, adversarial or non-adversarial.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so moving on.

Bijan says, free energy governance is firmly rooted in the belief that in a discontinuous and distributed world, the marginal benefit of structural reorganizations as well as structural compartmentalization of exploitation and exploration are rather suboptimal or possibly counterproductive.

Competitiveness and survival are increasingly determined by the extent to which a system is rather less rule or top-down supervised learning based.

Exploration happens increasingly in real time within exploitation.

In effect, the emergence of the new is essentially hypothesis testing within the existing.

And I really liked this, like, like, Daniel, you had mentioned earlier about, like, is this a partition or is this like a nesting and like this exploration and exploitation?

is a partition and also is like a nesting based on what Bijan says here.

He also says, in a distributed and discontinuous market environments, the real leadership challenge is to de-antagonize the past positive network default mode network dichotomy in the form of duality management.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you guys have any comments here?

All right.

Moving on.


SPEAKER_00:
Do you want to read these claims, Tyler?


SPEAKER_04:
Sure.

FEG's cross-hierarchical connectivity logically concludes that managing the TPN-DMN antagonism is not a top-down challenge calling for structural compartmentalization, but one of duality management.

By vacillating between or among discrete formal organization nodes, which is centralization and decentralization, the organization may increase dynamically the levels of exploration and exploitation

beyond those achievable through an approach based strictly on a static design choice.

In summary, we must conceive organizing as an informally deep learning and self-designing compass.

Centralizing intelligence at any hierarchical level of the organization can be counterproductive, increasing free energy, promoting entropy, and eventually capitulating to TPN, DMN's antagonistic forces.

So I think

One thing you might have been referencing here is when you're structurally trying to create your DMN and TPN and having them separate from each other, this is what's traditionally done in companies with having an R&D department, where this is where all the new ideas come from.

And so I think he was juxtaposing the FPG approach to that very traditional model.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
So we'll move on here.

So he gives here the free energy governance response to the task positive network default mode network challenge.

And it's this threefold response and he says.

Sensitizing the entire organization in regard to upper echelons, tendency to top down extrapolating is dominant, supervising knowledge structures, logic and past experience as a guide and prediction for future success.

A fallacy that task specific exploitation tends to reinforce.

Embracing strategic renewal as a matter of continuous deep learning in the form of cultivating cross-hierarchical processes, empowering purpose-directed and action-generated bottom-up market stimuli as a basis for double-loop learning.

Question the very models that generate the top-down predictions.

And three, default abductive attentional engagement at every level of the organization forms the basis for effective top-down bottom-up prediction error minimization.

After noticing an environmental change is essential to question 1's understanding of how the subsystems of the environment technology and markets and the organization knowledge and goals are linked without losing sight of the fact that environment is not objectively defined, but a product of action generated and socially constructed shared meaning and expectations.


SPEAKER_04:
so i think this is like how the duality management works essentially um that's kind of what what i took home here tyler do you have comments yeah and just that like these are all really big asks to make up an organization at every level like i think it's one thing to say like yeah i agree that this is the answer and if this could be done like be like hell yeah like i'm all for it but i again feel like you're kind of running up against

people's individual abilities to manage duality just within themselves and that will constrain your ability to do this within the organization.


SPEAKER_00:
It's funny because I think about the cognitive cone that we talked about with Michael Levin and it's funny.

What you just said, it's like the flip of the cognitive cone.

So usually it's like the, you know, the, the larger structure, or, like, the more top level hierarchical structure will cognitively constrain, like, things that are nested within it.

So the shape of that cone, the shape of the individuals within that can't.

be any other shape, right?

So they can't come out of the cognitive cone of the entire organization.

But it's interesting to think about how what is happening at the individual level, like the shape of the individual cognitive cone also lends itself to the configuration of the higher level cognitive cone.

Daniel, do you have comments?

I see you're writing furiously.

No?

Drawing furiously, doodling furiously.

Okay, so Bichon goes on to say, talk about a salience trap.

He says, while salience is critical to an active inference, it can nonetheless

potentially increase free energy to empower abductive sensemaking so that weak signals can serve as an information-rich enhancement to predictions processing, listening to what wants to emerge.

Organizational design is challenged to neutralize the tendency of experienced managers and board members to over-confidently superimpose the potential fallacy of their historic and self-confidence-powered pattern recognition.

since the human brain's task positive network and default mode network spheres are antagonistically related the only way to embrace antagonism as duality is by linking in circular causality top-down predictions and bottom-up stimuli um and so here is it i think that um bijan is really uh maybe kind of criticizing or or like the maybe not criticizing maybe uh

I don't know, maybe criticizing is the right word, like how experience leads you to prioritize, like leads you to place importance on things that and maybe perhaps miss things that are important in an adaptive organization.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you guys have comments here?


SPEAKER_06:
drawn to the salience not to the meaningful or adaptive necessarily we hope that our salience field can be aligned with what's adaptive and meaningful but i think we found out that that is not always the case


SPEAKER_00:
And it's funny, like I think about just in scientific discovery, right?

Like how we're so attuned.

We're looking for the signal that we're looking for.

It takes like a very perceptive and adept scientist to not fall into that salience trap and perhaps notice.

um what's going on in the periphery right like even though this is the center this is what we're focusing on there's a lot of peripheral things happening that that might actually be important or as important or maybe more important than than the central thing that we're focused on um yeah i mean i guess the other thing i say is that this is just like another it's one of those things where i agree with this and like theoretically but


SPEAKER_04:
There's so much stress going to many of these decisions.

For example, if you have to do layoffs, for example, it is very time sensitive and the stakes are really high.

And so going off your previous experience can be really helpful in there because you have to just make a really quick decision.

And it's often going to be heuristic space, which may be not necessarily optimal.

But you really are often constrained by your time and resources.

And really processing all of your bottom up signals, even with the best intentions, is really hard to do.

And so again, it's not to say you shouldn't try to do it or it can't be done.

But it's another one of these things where like, hey, this is a really big ask.

I just want to call out this is really, really, really, really hard to do, especially when you're under the gun.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I can see this is in the ideal world.


SPEAKER_00:
This is how it works, right?

Okay, do you want to read this claim for us, Tyler?


SPEAKER_04:
All right, so indeed, this real-time switching and vacillation process cannot be relegated to a single person, be it a CEO or executive chairman or upper echelon as a team, but must be the result of an unsupervised and FEP-determined learning process that relates top-down predictions and bottom-up data input in circular causality that dictate resource reconfiguration accordingly.

Consequently, the board's potentially unique DMN dimension cannot be ignored, but must be integrated into the process.

at the very top the board of directors given this cognitive diversity and composition and cognitive distance firms dominant tpn exploitation logics emerges as a monitoring surveyor of the system that is centered around managing the dynamic interplay of dual forces exploitation exploration and financial and strategic control um yeah i mean something i thought was interesting here is that like you know why he's making this claim and which he's been doing through the whole book about like hey the board is in this really unique position to be this kind of like an integrated unit

that kind of comes back to what you were saying earlier of like, okay, who was actually doing this duality management?

And so in one sense, I'm like, okay, it makes sense that the board would be doing this because you can hold them accountable to holding these different ideas in their head at the same time, uh, managing duality.

But it seemed, I would think that you would need that duality management to be going down the hierarchy, not just at the border as well.

And that each level of the hierarchy is managing duality in some sense.

Um,

So I very much want to ask for John that when we get on a call with him.


SPEAKER_03:
Blue, Daniel, anything to add here?


SPEAKER_00:
No, but this is one sentence that I pulled out randomly.

from the chapter that just like struck me and like he just like threw it in here and didn't unpack it or anything.

The firm is the generative social field and emerges in language.

And I thought that this was like really profound.

So I don't know.

I just put it in here because like, just like, wow, that's very deep.

I don't know.

I don't know if you guys have comments or this is something like I would ask Bajan to expand upon.


SPEAKER_06:
could ask a hundred people with different backgrounds what this invokes for them and see where that goes that sounds like a fun project it was just like a like a sentence that seemed very like yeah deep and like just casually thrown in there yeah so i'm gonna get this tattooed on my chest


SPEAKER_00:
right put it on your next business card that'd be awesome that'd be an awesome like statement for a business card right um that'd be great what so what is it you say you do i don't know i guess that's true this is a business philosophy awesome so do you guys have any final like comments questions tyler did you tell us all the things you wanted to tell us no


SPEAKER_04:
That's it for me.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay.

Yeah, we're moving along through the structure.

I'm looking forward to more conversations and also some digestions and reflections, making some schemes to visualize at a high level what we've been coming away from because this is like our eighth session.

And I think we're starting to see his patterns and style of laying out what he wants to convey and integrate.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I definitely think we're getting like the repeat, like repeat the message.

And so, so it's starting to drive some of it home for me at least.

So coming up to the end of the second part of the book next week, and I'll be looking forward to that and to hopefully discussing with the author at his convenience that that part.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, thank you, Blue and Tyler.

Farewell.

Bye.

Bye.


SPEAKER_01:
Next week, same time.

## 3oFfxaKBBXY

SPEAKER_01:
Hello, it's February 7th, 2023.

We're here in Act-Inf Bookstream number 1.09.

Off to you, Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, I'm Blue Knight.

I am a researcher in New Mexico, and we are the Active Inference Institute, a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can reach us at our social media links

here and just a reminder this is a recorded and an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we will be following good video etiquette for live streams.

And just as we're mentioning that all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, we will be having our final discussion coming up in about four weeks.

So if you would really like to participate, if you've watched some of the live streams and have some questions, we would really like to get some outside perspective.

So please get in touch with us so that you can participate in our final discussions.

Um, so, like I said, if you want to participate, this is how, uh, and so we are still discussing governing continuous transformation.

Um, and today our goal is to discuss section nine.

So chapter nine, um, and we will be doing book map roadmap and all of the typical things.

So I already introduced myself.

Um, Daniel just gave us the date.

Why don't you introduce yourself?


SPEAKER_01:
It's Daniel in California.


SPEAKER_02:
I'll pass to Tyler.

I'm Tyler in California.

I am a DAO researcher and protocol designer.

All right, blue.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

So here we are at the end of part two.

So next week, the author is going to join us for a discussion over part two, the free energy governance section of the book.

And then we'll be moving into part three.

I think we're going to do two chapters at a time as we go through part three.

And I don't think we'll be discussing the engaged scholarship interviews, but if you're curious about them, I encourage you to read the text.

Okay, Tyler, do you wanna read this first part of the abstract for us?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

All right, so beneath all chaos is an underlying structure.

A challenge is to exploit disorder's underlying order.

To survive, living organisms are encoded to resist disorder, i.e.

entropy, by way of self-organization.

Firms are nothing more than molecules and are subject to obeying the very same laws of thermodynamics.

Entropy will eventually rise.

Three specific propositions previously developed as part of this book's underlying dissertational research are outlined.

One, structure.

The stronger a firm's cross-hierarchical, top-down, bottom-up cognitive throughput coupling between and within governance and operational channels, the less dominant a firm's top-down approach cultivating a form of CEO centrism and strategy ownership.

All right, Blue, you want to take the next?

Next one.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

So to cognition, the stronger affirms cognitive disposition toward environmental enactment and innovative abduction as opposed to adaptation, the stronger the firm's strategic control and the smaller the risk of falling for the financial control trap.

Three, capabilities.

The stronger the board's DMN-centric duality stewardship, empowering upper echelon to sustainably balance exploitation versus exploration, as well as financial versus strategic control, the stronger the sustainability of successful and continuous strategic renewal, and hence the firm's prospects for survival.

strategy is less macroscopic but more subatomic less linear and deterministic but more quantum and discontinuous there is a dominant tendency of glorifying the realist beauty of top-down linear cause-effect relationships to the very detriment of quantum self-organization and i'm going to start off just reading this um

part from the book.

So Bijan says, I'm trying to see it over my screen.

Order anywhere in the cosmos is so singular.

It always requires an exemplary mechanism or a process.

While randomization requires no, I can't read the word.

It is simply the way of the world.

When particles are allowed to act randomly, whether it's the contents of a glass of club soda on the rocks or the countless atoms making up the air in the room, they slam into each other, exchanging energy until complete randomizations of their positions and velocities is observed.

And so Bajon quotes this Lanza et al.

2020 paper.

And I was just like thinking of like,

firms as organizations of people.

And it really brought this picture to mind of atoms randomly slamming into each other, people randomly slamming into each other, like the mosh pit versus the board meeting.

I just wanted to bring this juxtaposition of what is it to minimize free energy in terms of assembling humans as opposed to assembling atoms.

Anyway, I just had to share this mental image.

Okay.

Tyler, do you want to read this one for us?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So beneath all chaos is an underlying structure.

Our challenge is to exploit disorders of underlying order.

To survive, living organisms are encoded to resist disorder, i.e.

entropy, by way of self-organization.

Firms are nothing more than molecules and are subject to obeying the very same laws of thermodynamics.

And so, yeah, I thought the connection here that was interesting was comparing...

saying that the laws of thermodynamics apply to firms and that's what's really going on and we talked about this in previous streams i know we have uh blue's going to talk about a little more in detail here but whether that's more of like an analogy comparing to thermodynamics or something like a real underlying structure of thermodynamics and we'll talk about that more shortly


SPEAKER_00:
That also brings to mind the mosh pit.

And I wonder in our base case as humans, are we just chaotic?

Is our natural inclination to be increasingly chaotic and we override that?

I don't know.

I had all these mental images as I was reading this as well.

So yeah, Tyler put this in.

So I love this.

I'm going to read it because I love it.

So Bijan says...

Oh, he actually quotes Gould et al.

of 2016.

So in the quote, he says, if physical theories were people, thermodynamics would be the village witch.

Over the course of three centuries, she smiled quietly as other theories rose and withered, surviving major revolutions in physics, like the advent of general relativity and quantum mechanics.

The other theories find her somewhat odd, somehow different in nature from the rest, yet everyone comes to her for advice and no one dares to contradict her.

Einstein, for instance, called her the only physical theory of universal content, which I am convinced that within the framework of applicability of its basic concepts will never be overthrown.

Her power and resilience lay mostly on her frank intentions.

Thermodynamics has never claimed to be a means to understand the mysteries of the natural world, but rather a path toward efficient exploitation of said world.

Yeah, do you want to add comments here, Tyler?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, something I liked about this was that, like,

the kind of like mystical business leader, like a Steve Jobs character is kind of like a trope in the business world.

And it's kind of like almost like a joke at this point.

But there's also like a real case for the mystical business leader, which is almost kind of what I think Dijon is like describing here is that, you know, the real state of the world of like operating as a firm in a very uncertain, uncertain is probably not the word I should use, but like inactive in an active sense, like it's a very mystical, receptive way of engaging with the world.

um and i really like making that connection of mysticism with like business like you know corporations


SPEAKER_01:
One other angle there is organizations are doing work.

They're doing hopefully useful work.

And thermodynamics is concerned with how thermal energy, that uncorrelated exchangeable entropic dissipation can be channeled into moving the steamboat forward or lifting up the weight on the crane.

And so sometimes with the amount of seething activity,

in formal firms or informal groups.

It's like, but if we all just went in this exact direction at this exact time, we could do this.

And it's like, well, if all the air molecules just slammed against the wall, it would fall over.

Or if they all formed into a droplet, you'd get rain in the room.

Like thermodynamics helps us understand what is likely to happen

given those interacting state spaces.

And again, interestingly, it has to do with extracting work, useful work from this background of just vibration that's not work.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

And the other thing I'd like to just to build on that is like, it's okay to not know what's going on.

Is that like, that doesn't necessarily need to be a source of stress.

It's just like, you can harness those energies and kind of see which way the wind is blowing, so to speak, without necessarily understanding all the underlying principles.

And like, that's totally okay.

And I think that's generally something that gives a lot of people, both in the business world and even in our personal lives, a lot of stress.

But this is also, I think, a very like freeing way to approach an uncertain world.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and there's also like, just maybe to close the loop or maybe open it up a little bit more.

There's also the prospect of doing work that you don't know is gonna be fruitful, right?

And so like that is this like uncertainty minimization.

Like you could spend,

you know, your whole, like, an hour trying to crack open a nut and the nut is empty.

Like, that's also possible, right?

So, like, doing, even though you're doing work, like, that's maybe useful work, it might not bear fruit.

So there's that, like, uncertainty element, like, as just a human or also, like, as a firm.

Yeah.

so i just wanted to bring back these slides like while we're talking about thermodynamics we talked about this a long time ago and we talked about the difference between like thermodynamic entropy and information theoretic entropy um and so i just wanted to kind of bring this back and just remind everyone that um there's a difference uh there is

relationships between the two that are still being hashed out like mathematically um and and not totally understood but but the second lot thermodynamics is that this entropy like disorder in the universe is always increasing

And here, the energy is always lost in a transfer in work as heat to the environment.

So less and less usable energy becomes available.

And then in information theory, we kind of talked about entropy with an inverse relationship with information.

So here you can see an event that is

low probability is high information.

So like if you're decoding a stream of letters, I always like to think about it like this because it was explained to me like that and it made so much sense.

If you're decoding a stream of letters and like you're expecting a message and this was Claude Shannon and kind of like how he or how it was explained to me how he kind of came up with this.

So you're decoding a message and you get the letters T-H.

It would be really freaking weird if like the next letter was Z.

like i don't know any words that have thz like that's a very low probability event right so so it would be like a very high information thing or like you know maybe something came before the th and you missed it but there's some probability like the would be great or like thi but like thz wouldn't make any sense unless like the th was at the end of some previous word and so like you can kind of deduce what to expect in those kinds of situations um and so yeah the um

probability distribution is like when there's 50, 50 probability.

So this is the second graph on the right.

When there's 50, 50 probability, like the flip of a fair coin, that's super high entropy.

Like you don't have any idea if it's going to be heads or if it's going to be tails.

But like here it's low entropy.

If it's like a coin with two heads, there's heads on both sides.

Like you can only come out with heads.

So like there's very low entropy in such a coin flip because the outcome is always heads.

Right.

If there's no distinction between the two sides.

So I don't know.

That's the thermodynamic entropy versus information theoretic entropy.

And I think we talk a lot about thermodynamic entropy, but maybe forget that the FEP is really kind of founded in the information theoretic entropy as well.

Do you guys have anything to add here?

No.

All right.

So Bajan makes this claim in this section, and I'm not going to read the claim, but I'm just going to point out that here we kind of have a really concise definition of like he's been emphasizing the structure, cognition and capabilities for a few chapters now.

And so here he defines structure as the circular coupling, circular coupling of governance predictions and operational stimuli channels in the form of prediction error minimization.

He defines cognition as environmental engagement in the form of enactment rather than adaptation.

And he defines capabilities as sensing and sense making in the form of duality management.

And so this chapter was really kind of a good like summary chapter, I thought, and kind of gives us a chance to go back and revisit like a couple of the concepts that we talked about before, but maybe need to highlight one more time.

Do you want to read this one, Tyler, for us?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure, so yeah, through the rest of the chapter, Bijan is going through each structure, cognition, and he's really kind of going deep and kind of recapping what he's been covering through the previous, the rest of the book.

So for structure, he says, the stronger a firm's cross-hierarchical, top-down, bottom-up cognitive throughput coupling between and within governance and operational channels, the stronger the firm's orientation towards free energy and surprise minimization based on self-organization.

the less dominant the firm's top-down approach cultivating a form of CEO centrism in strategy ownership the stronger the sustainability of successful and continuous strategic renewal and hence the firm's prospects for survival


SPEAKER_00:
Well, thanks.

And so this is kind of like the punchline of the structure.

And so I pulled out maybe just a couple of topics from the from before the punchline to talk about.

And so this kind of like top down, bottom up coupling, I was like looking for a picture of like, what does top down, bottom up coupling like look like?

Like, how do you see?

see that?

Can I visualize that?

Actually, I was, like, looking for a picture to put on the previous slide.

And I came across this, like, 2008 paper, From Emotion Resonance to Empathic Understanding, a Social Developmental Neuroscience Account.

And, like, my background is neuroscience, but it's definitely, like, cellular and molecular neuroscience.

So I don't really have a good, like, comprehensive reading of social and developmental, like, neuroscience and what that looks like.

And I was, like, I loved this figure because it just was so...

like encompassing of so many of the things that we've talked about so far.

Daniel, have you read this paper?

Have you ever seen this before?

Like I hadn't either.

And I came across the figure and I was like, oh, I have to get the paper now.

And so it was nice to kind of just delve into this.

And it's really about what's required for empathy.

I'll talk more about it, but here you see the top-down, bottom-up coupling.

It's bottom-up information processing, top-down information processing relative to the individual and then the context or situation.

There's this perception-action coupling in 2008.

I'm like, the perception-action loop from 2008?

This is cool.

They talk about shared representation.

And this self-other awareness, which we talked about a couple of book streams ago, how distinguishing the self versus the other, self and non-self.

So I thought that this was really cool.

And executive functions, regulation and control, metacognition.

the looking at um like that's like double loop learning the the metacognition aspect so i thought that this paper was really cool and and um it really was like wow all of this is is like grounded in empathy um anyway it was me it was a good read uh it's destiny and meyer 2008 and the link is up there if you want the doi or

any of that stuff.

And it made me think, like, all of this is grounded in empathy.

So, like, what is, like, we know, like, or at least it's thought in business that, like, to be successful as a business person, your emotional quotient, your EQ is, like, way more important than your IQ, like, your ability to relate to others and interact with people.

So, like, a good emotional, high emotional quotient versus, like, an intelligence quotient is way more crucial to, like,

um business success and so i just wonder about like the relationship between if any between free energy governance and like the emotional quotient like is there like i like i never talked about this directly in the book but it just made me think like how important is empathy for this kind of governance structure um i don't know if you guys have any thoughts here on this


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, I think empathy is just really like sensitivity to your environment or sensitivity to like other actors and their internal states.

And so in the context of a firm, like it doesn't necessarily need to be like

you could think of an emotion necessarily as like for another firm, maybe the internal state of this external other firm.

So maybe like you are dependent on this other firm, things aren't going the way you would expect them to go with this other firm, maybe orders are backlogged or their API is being kind of intermittently down.

Maybe that is like a signal into the internal state of that firm.

and the internal state of the ecosystem as well.

And so I think that that might be analogous to an emotion in a human context, maybe.


SPEAKER_00:
They had a bunch of definitions actually in the paper.

And I can't pull it up because I'm screencasting.

So I'm not going to let you guys go through all my 25,000 open windows.

But maybe we'll pull them out.

And this is maybe a good question for Bijan about the relationship between empathy and the free energy governance when we get to see him next week.

But they had several different definitions of empathy too in the paper, which I thought was interesting.

They really tried to take a very logical approach to it.

And it was cool.

Okay, so here is a claim from the paper.

Bajan says, the higher the organizational friction in terms of obstructing bottom-up error messages traveling to and reaching top-down prediction generators, the higher free energy, the potential for surprise, and the more likely that top-down dominant logics fossilize prediction models and hence reinforce a firm's entropy.

And this is something that maybe Tyler and I have brought up either on stream, but we've talked about it off stream a lot.

How do we reduce this organizational friction?

Where are the examples that show us what is the best way to reduce this friction and to create a good top-down, bottom-up coupling?

We know that this coupling is super important at all layers across the hierarchy, but can we find an empirical way

way like that works in all situations to build that structure.

And that I think is like a challenge or maybe a future research question.


SPEAKER_02:
i guess another thing that is a little counterintuitive about this too is that oftentimes the things that will reduce friction and maybe like the longer term feel high friction in that moment so for example like in previous streams we've been talking about like dissonance as being like a way of thinking about that friction right well the easiest way to deal with dissonance the lowest friction way you could deal with it personally is just like not thinking about it just like tunnel vision and just like ignore it and don't worry about these weird feelings that you have um and that

But that obviously doesn't help the friction of the organization as a whole.

so yeah there's this kind of especially in your personal life too by analogy is like confronting your own emotions that you don't want to think about in the short term really easy to just like power through and just keep doing what you're doing but if you can like process these and integrate these emotions um that's a lot healthier for you long term so it's an interesting kind of like tension between like your individual tendencies of like not wanting friction and like friction in the organization as a whole


SPEAKER_01:
Also to connect back to the thermodynamics, what is friction?

Well, it's when a force is applied on some surface or through some media and it results in heat, which is dissipated, taking away energy from what could have been done for work.

And now think about friction engineering.

Do we coat every object with Teflon?

we want everything to just at the lightest touch fly off into space so just because we can increase or reduce friction actually doesn't tell us especially over time scales like you're bringing up tyler whether we want something to have a lot of friction like where the rubber hits the road or whether there are some fundamental trade-offs with how much heat the tire is losing in contact

a smooth road versus how much grip it has on a loose road and so all these different trade-offs are where the actual art and science is going to come into play but friction is not just a term that's used every day to describe annoying communication patterns feg is pointing towards that potentially being understood as an actual physical force cool uh do you want to read this one first


SPEAKER_02:
Sure, so the second proposition cognition so the stronger a firm's cognitive disposition towards environmental enactment and innovative abduction as opposed to adaptation.

The stronger the firm's orientation towards free energy surprise minimization based self organization.

The stronger the firm strategic control and the smaller the risk of falling for the financial control trap.

The stronger the sustainability of successful and continuous strategic renewal and hence the firm's prospects for survival.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, and so I'm going to read another quote from this section on cognition, and I brought back this picture because I think it's important.

Okay, so Bijan says, cognition in the form of world enactment is the purpose-directed action-centric and social construction

of shared meaning and shared expectations, anchored in the understanding that a firm's environment is a matter of environmental engagement in the form of interaction revealing significance and assigning probabilities to a bounded set of external unknown states.

and so like i'm coming back to this paper and i'm looking at like the information processing bottom up top down and like here i see this like shared represent representations and we've seen this like in like in this figure in this paper they're talking about like body language and like somatic response like heart rate increase or lower and all these things that have been measured in like the generation of empathy but like is is empathy maybe something that is required for shared meaning or shared expectation like i wonder is like do you have to

have that like like it is a sociopath like devoid of empathy empathy like living in a world where like things don't mean the same thing and expectations aren't the same like maybe right like there might be a a strong link there that i wonder if it's been explored or not so i'm just curious if you guys have thoughts on what developing shared meaning and expectation is and if it requires some kind of empathy with others


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I share that feeling.

One of the big questions I've had through this, and honestly, it's on a personal level, I've always been interested on whether you could build tooling that would help create that shared meaning and expectations or whether this is really just constrained by the individual.

If you have people who are sociopaths in your organization, maybe it's just like there's certain the way that they're wired kind of limits the way that they can engage and create shared meaning with the rest of the organization.

And so, yeah, I'm kind of curious what y'all think about that, too.

Like, I don't have an answer for it, but maybe that'd be a good question for Sean.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, Daniel, thoughts?

No thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, to have interpersonal empathy as a behavior, as a feeling, that's one whole area.

But in the creation of organizations, it's almost like we have to ask not how strongly we feel or what we feel, but whether some future person in that organization outside of our direct perception, cognition, action loop is going to

have some sort of outcome because I think it's easy just to sketch out that you could feel really empathic or any emotional state and it could result in a totally discordant state even for somebody you care about or vice versa.

So how do we not get lost with just the introspection of the feeling of empathy and translate that into systems whose efficacy

is equivalent to what we would have intended.

But that may not feel like empathy all the time.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah I mean I feel like especially for the last couple chapters we keep running into like a similar concept of like Earth theme of how the individuals wired in terms of like you know empathy and their ability to create shared meaning and how that bubbles up into the rest of the organization um and yeah like I keep feeling like there's no way out of like hey we're just limited as humans in our ability to like

integrate external information and that limits the ability of the organization.

But it sounds like Daniel was maybe sounding more optimistic note of like, well, actually, maybe you can build some, maybe there's tooling and systems you can build that can have organizational empathy, even if the individual doesn't have it.


SPEAKER_00:
So that brings to light something that Daniel and I have talked about before, working on the discussion of memes randomly, random insertion, random plug for the Eco Meme Project.

But when you're really thinking about painting a picture to convey a shared meaning, we talked about the echolocation, how the dolphin literally can paint a picture.

I saw a fish over here and can translate, puts the picture of the fish into the other dolphin's mind.

There's the picture of the fish.

And so you literally can paint the entire picture.

So even if we could do something as remarkable as that, we convey only the semantic content.

you can say the fire hydrant is red, right?

And you guys both know, can picture in your mind a red fire hydrant, right?

But we don't know what semiotic content is contained in that message.

Maybe someone's colorblind.

Maybe they don't know if it's red or green.

They can't tell, right?

And so the fire hydrant just appears in this gray thing that they think might be red.

Or maybe someone has been in a house that burned down and the fire hydrant didn't work and they have this trauma inspiration moment.

So the semiotic content, the symbolism behind the message or the picture that you painted, even in a situation where you can perfectly

create like the tooling to come to this shared meaning or representation, like you're never going to get the symbolism that exists for someone else.

It's a highly personal thing.

Like we can have shared symbolism to culturally for sure.

But there's a deep level of personal symbolism in every in every human that's dependent on your previous life experience, I think.

Ah, so coming back to abduction, because we did talk about it in the section.

I can't remember if it was in the last quote or not, but I just wanted to...

point out, this is a recycled slide, but coming back to abduction, where Bijan talks about it is, you know, abductive reasoning, this is a quote from the book, abductive reasoning usually begins with a surprising observation or experience.

This is what shatters our habit and motivates us to create a hypothesis that might resolve the anomaly.

Abduction is an inferential procedure in which we create a conjecture that if it were

If it would make the surprising anomaly part of our normal world of our normal understanding of the world.

So, like, this picture is like, the best way for me to always think about abduction.

Like, you can have a specific observation and you can come to a general conclusion.

Right?

And then you can have deductive reasoning where you have a general rule, but that's like.

leads to a specific conclusion that's always true and then when you have like an incomplete observation like you can't see what's going on you just go to the best guess and so in business and Bajon talks about this again and again and again like you have to use abductive reasoning because we're never going to have a complete picture of like the past and future of the market like the whole market right or even your target audience so you're dealing with the best logical guess


SPEAKER_02:
um oh okay do you want to read this one for us tyler this is you sure uh so the firm's generative model is the firm's eco niche if uncertainty and unpredictability dominate our worldly perception well then this reflects the very limitations and corrosiveness of our models and the underlying processes generating those models there's no objective uncertainty there's only your uncertainty

Environment is enacted.

Each act opens a new fork of multiple paths leading to potentially very different outcomes.

Reality is a subjective algorithm implying an infinite number of worlds in superposition.

Our actions not only create the junctures leading to different paths, but we are in control to decide which path to take at each juncture.

So yeah, I thought this really summarized well the kind of inactive cognition.

So there's a proposition, so on proposition two here of FEG.

And also just that was like a fun quote.

Because we talked about this a lot on the last stream, but John's been using kind of quantum language here.

And we talked about that on the last stream of, okay, what exactly does he mean there by that?

Blue, Daniel, anything to add here?


SPEAKER_00:
I love your Excel spreadsheet, quantum superposition of an Excel spreadsheet.

I love it.

It's great.


SPEAKER_01:
It's capturing the late night, blurry, what action selection to take based upon this spreadsheet.

Great.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

So Bajan makes this claim also in this section.

He says, in fact, we are challenged not to allow for the human brain's conceptual limits to solely determine perception and sensemaking.

Instead, outsourcing some of the heavy information lifting to the environment in the form of extended cognition is the essence of optimizing prediction error minimization.

The more exponential and hence discontinuous a market environment, the more we need self-organizing mechanisms that leverage the world as a supervisory signal challenging in circular causality the very perceptual content of our predictions.

And so like we've talked a lot about like cognitive offloading or extended cognition in terms of like cumulative cultural evolution, not in this book stream per se, but like over the course of active inference, like from the very first beginning live streams, we've talked about it a lot because, you know, we now are so much thinking is done.

um externally like in it's encultured at some point like but with the smartphone like we don't have to know how to get anywhere anymore we'll just map it so i i just am thinking like that this self-organizing mechanisms that leverage the world as a supervisory signal challenging in circular causality the very perceptual content of our predictions like

i mean i'm so amazed by chat gpt like i'm using it so much um just because it's like what does everybody know like chat gpt tells you what everybody knows it is like the selective synthesis of all information right and so like if you know something that chat gpt3 doesn't know like that's great you can write a blog about it but now like chat gp3 can just write all the blogs about every other thing

There's just like no, like it knows everything, right?

It's got all of the information synthesis, except like the rare pockets of like knowledge.

So is this self-organizing mechanism, this chat GPT-3, like a global search synthesis information management system?

I don't know.

What do you guys think about that?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, this is very out of my depth, both in terms of machine learning and active inference.

I was thinking about this last night, because this is a huge debate right now, is whether ChatGP T3 is actually showing emergent intelligence or whether it's just a clever algorithm.

um and i was thinking about this too like where the differences between like chat gbt3 and what i've been learning so far about active inference and like the crucial things it seems to be missing is like the inactive aspect of it like it's not really in dialogue with this world it's like stringing together information that's like a static right it doesn't even incorporate new information like if you were to ask it about the news yesterday it couldn't it couldn't do that and it's not making it's not taking actions in the world and giving feedback it's just like the static model of

how the world works and so i don't know it feels like fundamentally different to me and i'm not sure what that means i'm not sure if like something has to display active inference to have true intelligence i'm sure this is like a big hotly contested topic i'm sure you guys have many live streams about this uh but yeah daniel blue i'm curious what you guys think


SPEAKER_01:
well in the space of communication the response it provides to you is an action that's not moving a mechanical arm on a table but in our internet of everything it's not so hard to see how the digital outputs from a generative algorithm do translate to physical objects moving but it may not even need to do that it can send out messages on social media and

definitely meriting further discussion as things will continue to develop and gain more access to recent information world model learning and action capacity soon so like i i have a little bit of a of a like technical response here um


SPEAKER_00:
I think that the question is not about true intelligence, maybe, but the question that I hear talked about a lot is sentience, right?

And so, but like, I read this big article about like, is GPT-3 sentient?

And I think it was like from one of the inside Google people, the one that was released and now they're talking about it because everybody's using it.

And like sentient, they just said like, you know, able to think and act independently, but that's like not the definition of sentient.

Like, I'm not sure what the definition of sentient is, but it's not like autonomous.

Like they're using sentient and autonomous the same way.

And sentient is like able to feel things, right?

Like, so I think like, let's look it up right now.

Let's define sentient.

For the world at large, what does that mean?

Because intelligent, sentient, and autonomous are all different.

So hold on, I'm looking on my phone because I'm screen sharing.


SPEAKER_01:
Words, words, words.

Humpty Dumpty, Alice in Wonderland, people will use them how they want.


SPEAKER_00:
But that's everything.

So a sentient is able to perceive or feel things.

And so is GPT-3 feeling anything?

I highly doubt it.

Perceiving a lot, sure.

But as to your thing about updating, Tyler, I'm sure the model will update at some regular interval.

So just think about, I mean, we're not there yet in terms of compute power, but maybe in 10 years,

it will be training on the entire Wikipedia catalog every single day.

So, like, does Wikipedia have, like, a date entry for every day?

I think it does, right?

So, like, when you ask, like, what was the news yesterday?

It'll know that.

Like, that's just a matter of what's encoded and what's being processed through silicone.

It's only time, right?

Like, we're way close.

So, like, it will be able to update with some regularity.

Like, will it update itself?

I don't know.

That gets into, like, autonomous acting.

I don't know.

All those things are different.


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, that reminds me though, because we've had this discussion over the past 15 minutes about like empathy and do organizations have empathy, right?

And it's kind of like the same conversation as like GPT-3 of like, okay, well, like maybe organizational empathy, like it looks and just feels differently than like individual empathy, right?

And so you can imagine the same thing happening in GPT-3.

And I don't know what that version of empathy would look like in GPT-3, but maybe it's just like something that we can't quite wrap our hands around.


SPEAKER_01:
It'll be awesome.

Again, I think a further discussion would be very timely, especially if, for example, communication from one person's syntax could move into a semantic space or a rhetorical space from the eco meme direction, as Blue mentioned, and then be translated back into another semantic space for the listener that might be changing the amount of math detail or in a different human natural language.

So there's a lot of incredible opportunities.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, definitely.

I think, you know, it'll be interesting to see, to interrogate Bajan with such like esoteric questions.

It's interesting to see, to interrogate Bajan with such like esoteric questions and see what he thinks.

Like, does a firm have empathy?

Like, what?

Where did you even get this?

Well, we got it.

Sorry.

We're off task.

Anyway.

All right.

So moving on.

Tyler, do you want to read this one?

Preposition.


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

So the stronger the board's DMN centric duality stewardship, empowering upper echelon sustainably balanced exploitation versus exploration, as well as strategic or financial for strategic control, stronger the firm's orientation towards free energy surprise minimization based self organization, the stronger the sustainably sustainability of successful and continuous strategic renewal, and hence, the firm's prospects for survival.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And so we talked about this last week a lot.

I didn't put a lot of extra information in here because we did like the antagonistic neural or that perspective last week.

But I did just want to include the summary.

So Bijan at the end of the chapter summarizes it by saying, in summary, the board must assume the role of sponsor or enforcer of three categorical imperatives defining the success and sustainability of strategic renewal and firm survival.

First, foster cognitive coupling between and within all hierarchical layers.

I'm really excited to find out exactly how to do this.

Second, embrace environment as action generated and socially constructed shared meaning and shared expectations, which we've talked about a lot today.

And third, de-chain the firm from thinking in terms of antagonisms, but embrace real-time duality management as a critical determinant of performance and survival.

That's pretty much it.

Do you guys have any final thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
The overtime period, degenerative AI speculation moment, the hashtag 2023 questions that we all have.

Good times.


SPEAKER_00:
So we talked about quantum, so I'm leaving us with this one quote from this chapter because it was just kind of like thrown in there.

Bijan says, classical linear cause-effect thinking is no match for quantum exponentiality.

I wonder what he means by quantum exponentiality.

Like, are we again talking about position?

Are we talking about like, because that's like, I guess the many states existing at once?

Is that like what he means by exponentiality?

What do you guys think?


SPEAKER_02:
I think Bajan has a poetic bent in him.

Not sure if we're meant to take this fully literally.


SPEAKER_01:
exponents are used in a lot of quantum mechanics so there could be various readings just like any other good poem so we should jump in with these kinds of questions cool well that's next week um so


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, excited to wrap up this part and just a couple more book streams left for us winding down.

Again, get in touch.

If you would like to participate in our final discussion, we would really welcome any external perspectives.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Thanks.

See you next time.

## FB_93-zDqNo

SPEAKER_03:
Hello and welcome, everyone.

It's January 11th, 2023.

We're in ACT-INF Bookstream number 1.1 on Governing Continuous Transformation.

Off to the facilitator.


SPEAKER_04:
All right.

So today we are discussing part one of Governing Continuous Transformation.

We're lucky enough to have the author, Bijan Kesri, with us today.

I hope I pronounced that right, Bijan.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

All right, wonderful.


SPEAKER_04:
So we are the Active Inference Institute.

So we are a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing by an active inference.

All those links are socials.

So this is recorded in a live stream, an archived live stream.

So please give us feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome.

And we will be doing our best to follow video etiquette for this live stream.

All right, so this is a, all Active Inference Institute activities are participatory.

So if you want to get involved, let us know.

All right, so this is the 1.1 book stream.

So we've been discussing governing continuous transformation, reframing the strategy governance conversation by Bijan Khosri.

So we've, over the past four live streams, we've been discussing part one of the book, section by section, and it's been very methodical unpacking the concepts.

And today we're lucky enough to have Bijan with us in person where we're gonna be actually kind of unpacking some of those hairy concepts

or questions that came up during those previous four live streams.

So if you haven't seen those previous four live streams, definitely recommend watching those or better yet, reading the book.

And that will give you some important context.

All right.

So let's go into it.

So before we get started, let's just do some quick intros so I can start this off.

So let's do like an intro and then we quickly just say what you're excited about today.

All right, so my name is Tyler.

I work in DAO governance and protocol design.

In a previous life, I also was a strategy consultant at a large corporation.

So organizational change is something I'm very personally passionate about.

And I'm really excited to kind of dive into some of these thornier questions that came up over the previous four live streams.

I'm very happy to have John with us here today.

I'll pass it off to Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm Blue Knight.

I am an independent research consultant in New Mexico.

My background is largely neuroscience, but I am a founding member and on the board of directors here at the Active Inference Institute.

So I'm very excited to kind of get the perspective of free energy governance.

Like we are the Active Inference Institute.

We should be using free energy governance in the way that we kind of drive our industry.

Institute forward and with our board and our governance methods.

So I'm excited to just be studying this concept and learning how to best apply it to my work here at the Institute.

And I'll pass it off to Daniel.


SPEAKER_03:
Hey, I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California.

Looking forward to the conversation today, to continuing to develop our relationship with the work and just to check in periodically as the niche continues to develop so rapidly, which is a focus of free energy governance.

So Bijan, to you.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so I should address the very same questions.

uh well obviously um you know in in in life everything is is is very past dependent so uh i happen to actually a very young age go on the board of directors of public companies and um

As a result of it, I was always fascinated actually how companies are being governed.

And I was many times also astonished about the fact how disconnected the very top of the company where all the decision power resides is disconnected actually from the

from the frontline of the company.

I do recall actually one of the boards I have joined in 2019, very exciting company, Zülke, it's a difficult name to pronounce, but it's a global leader in innovation services.

We do really fascinating projects around the world.

And when I introduced myself, I said,

there's really all the intelligence in a firm is really at the bottom.

It's not at the top.

So that was obviously very surprising for board members to listen to because there's a very self-understanding of board members is that they are the smartest guys in the room and that they obviously are entrusted by the stakeholders with allocating all the resources.

So I'm really excited about how

The role of the board has to change in a world which is and has become increasingly discontinuous, very distributed, where a bunch of very smart guys meeting up four to eight times a year to take all the key decisions in the company is not, in my view, a recipe for sustainable success.

and that has obviously led to the fact that many times ceos become very very powerful and the board is there to guide to advise to approve and to make sure kind of things are more or less in order but i think like with everything with every person with every process

It's a little bit like flipping the coin.

I mean, as much as certain things or certain people explain success, they eventually also explain failure.

And the idea really behind the free energy governance concept and inspired obviously by Carl Fristen's free energy principle is when you look at biology, you look at nature.

you start understanding there's a lot of self organizing mechanisms, which determine the survival of an organism.

And my idea and the drive behind free energy governance is really, we should be revisiting

a number of self-organizing principles to make the company actually much more resilient in discontinuous and distributed market environments.

I'm just looking at the questions, the other questions.

I mean, that's certainly something I'm excited about.

That's in a nutshell really what has been inspiring from my background and from a theoretical point of view, the free energy governance concept.

And I do think, and that's why I'm looking really forward to this session, and I really appreciate the diligence with which you have prepared it and the questions.

that when I talk about the free energy governance concept, people get it because there's really three simple dimensions.

There is a structural dimension, which is very strongly inspired from neurosciences, but how do we connect actually our prefrontal cortex with the nervous system and how is it an interactive top-down, bottom-up connectivity which has to work?

And you can transpose this onto organizations and you can very quickly see there's tremendous friction in an organization.

because the bottom and the top don't really interact and connect the way our nervous system and our brain does.

The second dimension is a dimension I call cognition, but what it really means is

rather than teaching adaptation, which is really the dominant school at MBA programs, we should be analyzing the environment and then adapt accordingly.

I say the world and strategy is not environment-driven, but it's interpretation-driven.

So when you take a more interpretation-driven approach, you are much more in power to create actually your own

I don't like the word reality because that's a very relative concept, but you create your own eco niche and the eco niche you really want to compete in.

So I do believe we are much more in power than we resist to believe.

And the third dimension is related to capabilities and capabilities are

is a big topic in management science, obviously.

Capabilities at the board level haven't been really addressed.

And my work on the free energy governance side is trying to develop capabilities at the board level and certain meta capabilities.

And that really leads into the topic

when we say in a distributed and discontinuous world how does the board has to evolve in order to be meaningful it's either going to be completely irrelevant it could be potentially a source of inertia or it can allow the company to prosper and to outperform its its competitors i guess for this slide i wouldn't say much more


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

There's a lot to dig into there.


SPEAKER_04:
And so we'll get to some of those bigger topics in a second here.

All right.

So this is where we're at in the book.

We've been reading part one up to now, which is a lot about framing the conversation about what free energy governance is and the free energy principle.

And right now we're at the conclusion.

So we'll read the abstract for that in a second here.

All right, so the roadmap for today is a discussion around these seven questions.

In the beginning of the discussion, I'll be talking more about, like, really how do you communicate what free energy governance is?

And then later in the discussion, we'll be really more getting into some of the nitty gritty questions about maybe some of the implementation of what free energy governance can look like.

And we'll keep it free flowing today.

I mean, we'll try to get all these questions.

If we get off on a tangent, that's actually totally fine.

And we can just kind of take the conversation where it goes.

Very good.


SPEAKER_00:
Please.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, sorry.

Well, we'll just we'll start off by reading the the abstract and then we'll kind of get a bit of discussion.

But is there something that you want to say before we move on?


SPEAKER_00:
No, no, no, no, no.

I follow you.


SPEAKER_04:
OK, great.

So, Blue, do you want to read the slide for us?


SPEAKER_02:
Sure.

Is that all that's on the slide?


SPEAKER_04:
There's one more.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Strategic renewal research is now confronted with important challenges concerning process design, cognition, and dynamic capabilities.

Sensing and sense-making of relevant signals as a basis for initiating strategic renewal are preceded by an action-centric and explorative engagement with the world.

We are moving from co-aligning organization with environment in form of adaptation to co-creation as firms build agility through distinctive environmental enactments.

All existing frameworks and studies in corporate governance, as well as strategic cognition, remain characterized by one or a combination of the following fundamental limitations.


SPEAKER_04:
I can take this slide.

So one, the environment and environmental change are generally treated as objective reality.

Two, strategic renewal is treated as a top-down content rather than top-down, bottom-up process challenge.

Strategic renewal is studied at the managerial level, but only marginally at the board level.

Formal processes are the focal unit of analysis.

And five, demographic and universally measurable variables dominate with no due consideration for strategy-relevant meta-capabilities at the board level.

Free energy governance introduces a novel, cross-hierarchical, generative, inference-centric framework empowering the firm as a generative model of its eco-niche.

Shareholders and board directors must interpret the board's strategic relevance in this continuous world.

If not, the board is prone to turn into or remain a source of inertia compromising firm performance and survival.

All right, let's get into it.

So first question here is just, you know, pre-energy governance, as we've been going through this last, you know, four live streams, it can get very deep, right?

There's like a thermodynamic angle to it.

There's an information theory angle.

There's a machine learning angle, right?

So you can go down the rabbit hole and you can go very far.

But at the end of the day, too, like there's a very intuitive way you can think about pre-energy governance, right?

And so I'm curious, when you meet executives, other business leaders, and you have to communicate what free energy governance and free energy principles are, how do you succinctly communicate that?

Hey, this is different from what you're already doing.


SPEAKER_00:
When you look at...

What has been happening in the last 20, 30 years, we see that technology is not only building incredible connections, but we also do see that the cost of innovation is coming quite dramatically down.

If you take a startup in Silicon Valley in the 1990s to build something, let's say, which would take a million dollars at the time, you can probably do it today with $10,000, the same thing.

So the power of the individual in creating new stuff, changing the way we consume product-wise, has increased dramatically.

As a result of it, this continuity has been rising dramatically with that.

Apart from that, the world has obviously also, again, thanks to technology, become quite connected and integrated.

Now, when you look at all that stuff, what technology is doing, what individuals are doing, they don't even need to be incorporated.

It's creating a lot of change in the resource market.

And the resource market is really, I don't like, actually, I do not like the term top and bottom.

Probably the bottom certainly is much more frontline.

The top, yes, usually the top is the board because these are the last guys, the ultimate people taking actually the resource allocation decision on big topics which concern the entire firm.

But when you look at all this stuff that is happening right now in product markets, in supply chains, in universities, where there is great thinking, there is not only great ideas, there is new products coming out.

And you start looking at the guys who are sitting in the board of a big company.

They are so far removed.

from really being connected to what can happen.

And that's very natural because there's only as much attention we have, as much cognitive bandwidth we have, and how much can they process.

The bigger problem, however, is, and I would say to your first question, what's the hook is, every board member, every CEO would love and they love

There's a wonderful concept which is called skilled incompetence.

And skilled incompetence really means people are doing actions which are counterproductive to what they really want to achieve.

And C-level board members are really keen on understanding what's happening in all these markets.

And

catching up on all the impulses inspiration in order to think about where should our organization be going but inadvertently they're creating a lot of friction and they're bringing themselves far more removed so the big challenge and this is really what free energy governance is addressing how can we connect the top at the bottom in a much more efficient way

And that has a lot of challenges because you have middle management, how is information traveling?

But a much more interesting thing is, which is happening right now, is when you look at artificial intelligence, artificial intelligence effectively allows you to decouple two things which usually came as a unity.

It is the prediction and the judgment which together form a decision.

So when you look at the anatomy of a decision consisting of prediction and of judgment with the increasing deployment of artificial intelligence, that is being actually decoupled.

Now, what that means is that the value of human judgment becomes much more important

But then the question does arise, who is best positioned to make the judgment?

Is it really the C-level?

Is it at the very top?

Once I have all the AI prediction available and I can generate great predictions as an input into my decision-making and subject it to judgment.

So all of a sudden,

You have to very carefully think what should be and continue to be decided at the very top and what should not reach the top any longer because it's taking too long, it's creating too much friction.

And maybe the board of directors in the C-level are no longer best positioned to decide on many things they're deciding on today.

So I think what we will be seeing in the next decade to come

And it's partly driven by technology, but in particularly driven by AI technologies.

that there's going to be a shift in power where and how decisions are going to be taken.

And we will look at organizations the way they are run today, the way they're structured today.

They look like a dinosaur because they are not really connected to what is happening really in the marketplace in real time.

So the C-level is facing a big challenge of A,

how they're connecting to the bottom and how the information is flowing as a basis for them to take great decisions.

Second, decision power is probably becoming within an organization also more distributed.

So it's not going to be as centralized as it used to be.

And the more important thing is, and this is very fundamental to free energy governance, is communication.

When you look into companies today and even companies where I'm on the board of, it's frightening to see how communication is a real problem.

Everybody has the best intentions to be clear, to be transparent, but communicating is many times also a question of language.

And if we do believe that in the future, the interface between the machine and the human is gonna be increasingly important, we need to develop a language which allows us to much better connect to the machine.

And that's where I believe the free energy governance framework, which is built on the free energy principle, which is all about prediction error minimization,

When you start putting actually prediction and prediction models at the center of what it is about to run an organization, take the Active Inference Institute.

What is your prediction model?

You do have a prediction model, which is actually your world model.

And on a daily basis, you are generating predictions.

about what you think should happen, what is likely to happen, what interests the audience.

These are all predictions you're generating.

And eventually this team, you guys, are applying your best judgment of what you're doing.

Many times you're testing the predictions and the predictions may actually give you feedback which tell you you shouldn't be doing this.

So eventually your judgment will really matter.

But

What you do when you start adopting a language of prediction error minimization, I believe you become much more performing because what you start doing in a much more conscious way, you start measuring the performance of your individual predictions.

which eventually feed your decisions on the basis of your very judgment.

And over time, your judgment improves as well, because your testing and your measuring of performance of predictions is getting better.

And when you do this, and in my book, in a later part of the book, when I've been trying to

relay a very theoretical concept more to the world of practice, I've been looking at the budgeting process.

The budgeting process is a great domain where you have to make a projection, a prediction about next year.

And you make this prediction on facing actually two fundamental questions.

What is you control?

What you don't control?

What is what you know and what you don't know?

So there's a lot of unknowns you have to deal with.

And when I'm looking at a budgeting process, I'm dealing with a lot of unknowns.

What is really critical for me is not the number people put behind that unknown, but it's the process.

They suggest of how they turn the unknown into a known.

And it always starts with very small steps.

So I think organizations need to start communicating much more in terms of prediction models, in predictions, falsifying those, confirming those.

And when you start articulating a strategy or a vision you have as a prediction model,

and that there are predictions

generated by that prediction model, and you empower the organization through great and clear communication to challenge your predictions, you're creating a very different culture of how you engage the frontline with the key decision makers, who at the end of the day, of course, there's always a small number of people who are accountable for managing and allocating the resources of a firm.

So I think that's a critical hook because a lot of, you know, a lot of C-level people and board members talk about uncertainty.

But here's a really critical thing.

First of all, uncertainty is a very subjective concept.

What your uncertainty is may not be mine or vice versa.

So in my view, when somebody says the world is uncertain or unpredictable, I mean, we all agree there is a lot of things we don't know what's going to happen tomorrow.

So in that regard, there's many, many worlds that could appear in that regard.

Yes, there is some degree of unpredictability.

But if I talk about uncertainty,

Of course there is uncertainty, but at the end, using uncertainty and unpredictability is really just an admission of the very limitations of my world model.

Because uncertainty is an incredibly rich training ground for my predictions.

to eliminate and reduce uncertainty and turn unknowns into nodes.

And when you look at organizations, and I think sometimes most of the time, C-level and board level are not aware of the fact, if the further you go down in the organization to the frontline, they have much more intelligence and understand much better how rules

are creating the source of inertia and actually masking and burying uncertainty and don't make it available for prediction testing and ultimately better decision making.

So our challenge in today's world with a lot of discontinuity, a lot of change happening for very understandable reasons, because the individual has more power, we have cheaper technologies available to create much more impact.

We need to embrace uncertainty.

We should not avoid uncertainty.

And today, the organizational frameworks are not in place to allow organizations to embrace uncertainty because they don't know how to talk in prediction and prediction models and test those predictions.

I'm sorry, bloop.


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry, I thought you were wrapping up.

I just wanted to just ask a quick follow-up question.

Can you clarify what you mean by discontinuity or discontinuous?

I mean, I think I have an idea, but I would just like to maybe have a more clear.


SPEAKER_00:
You know, I try to avoid the word disruptive.

But when you look at and you look in management science, Clayton Christian's disruptive technology, which is not necessarily radical technology, it's technologies that can change, for example, a cost factor.

And the cost factor is so decisive that all of a sudden it changes the way business is being done.

and what is being deployed and whether you're still shipping something or you're not shipping something or whether it's, I mean, you could argue to some degree, let's put the particular context of the pandemic aside, but a valid question is the way Teams and Zoom have become so much part of our day-to-day engagement.

I have been someone who has always preferred the physical touch point.

And in my own company, I have offices in different parts.

And my approach has always been I'm going to be physically present in those offices at least once a month as I tour them.

I've changed this radically.

The pandemic is over.

So I definitely don't buy as many flight tickets any longer.

And this is not a strong example, but I do think that a lot of

airlines struggle with the fact that business travelers are not there the way they're there.

There may be more recreational travelers and the planes continue to be packed, but there's less planes.

We shouldn't forget that either.

So has video calling and created actually some discontinuity

on a massive scale that can disrupt industries.

So you do have these kinds of discontinuities.

They don't need to be radical innovations, but they change on a massive scale the way things are being done.

And there's obviously a lot of examples that happen all the time, that happen sometimes which are beyond our

what we can see, but there's a lot of stuff which is happening behind the scenes where things are so radically changed that companies are from one day to the next out of business.

And I guess that's what I mean with discontinuity more in view of disruption, but I don't like the term disruption.


SPEAKER_04:
That makes sense.

And I think just to, I don't know if you had more you want to give on this elevator pitch, but I think to kind of summarize what I think you're saying or the essence of my takeaway is you're really putting uncertainty at the heart of the organization rather than something that is to be worried about, to be anxious about.

You're really saying, hey, this is an intrinsic part of being an organization, having a world model.

There's nothing we can do about uncertainty, but we can manage it.

And we can do that by making prediction error as really the heart of how our organization thinks about it.


SPEAKER_00:
Absolutely.

And this comes back to the Active Inference Institute, because the most, most important word in active inference is active.

because you put action at the center of what you do.

And it's the actions that create your perceptions and not the other way around.

And that's a fundamental thing.

And you go into the sea level, they still do believe that they perceive and then they act.

And that's terrible, because then you are really a victim of whatever's happening outside your control.

And the power of the free energy governance framework and obviously the free energy principle is,

that you get actually into control and the way you work yourself through to reduce the unknowns.

And you can only do this through the actions.

And there was one question you had on the first slide, which I think was question number six.

We don't have to go back there, but it was related to Silicon Valley.

And when you look at the smaller a company is, when you take...

a startup business a startup business usually does not have the challenge of of uh top down bottom up because there's three guys sitting in a room and they wear many many hats at the same time all they do share is one purpose one mission and one big dream

And as a result of it, almost in a self-organizing way, all the right actions will fall into place because the goal is so clear of what they want to achieve.

The problems start when the team starts growing, when things are being delegated, when all of a sudden communication becomes important, when all of a sudden there is a distance between where the action is happening in the field and the person making the decisions about how financing is being raised, how it's being allocated, and what story is being told.

When you look at the very mature companies in Silicon Valley and those who have been successful and have kind of shaped a big part of our life in the last 10, 20 years, you look at an Uber, you look at a Facebook, you look at a Google, is because these companies stayed actually very true to their core.

And you can look at...

that they fulfill all three dimensions of the free energy governance framework.

They make sure the way they organize

that a lot of decision power is actually at the bottom.

They are not big fans of pulling all the power to the top.

They want to make sure that individual entities can work, operate, decide, and be very agile and very fast.

So that's already the first element, the structural element, how you connect the top and the bottom.

Second element is the cognition part.

Neither Google, nor Uber, nor Facebook, any of these companies are doing market research when they really started with what they want to do as business to figure out is there a market or whatever.

They create something which they enact driven by a deep passion, many times a deep passion of believing this is how the world should work.

We will adapt the world to us.

It's not us adapting to the world.

and that is what makes these companies incredibly strong because they're creating their own eco niches when you look at the the iphone coming out in 2007 everybody was mocking it blackberry which some of you may not know even at the time but was the dominant communication device because it had a great keyboard and all of this to have a phone without a keyboard was every disadvantage

low battery, which was literally putting everything together, but everything was really suboptimal.

One didn't give it much chance, but what effectively at the time Steve Jobs, as the visionary or representative of that vision for a whole team, articulated was

the phone will be a computer and it will be a computer that can actually do anything and you have it in your pocket.

And that was a tremendous vision and Nokia didn't have that vision and they focused on the prime functionalities.

So I think what these companies do is, and that's the second dimension of the free energy governance framework, they really enact their own environments.

And the third one, which is related to capabilities in the free energy framework,

And I have related to this in the free energy governance framework in my book.

I try to be very specific, but the capabilities part I focus on is how, and I'm always focusing capabilities on the board level.

And on the board level, I look at how you manage duality.

And in business, there is two sets of

of dualities, which explain everything.

These are the two fundamental sets and only those two sets.

The one is, how do you manage simultaneously exploitation and exploration?

You have to manage your existing business and optimize it and take that cash flow, which is available.

And you have to work on the future cash flow, which doesn't exist yet.

You don't have the products yet.

And you have to find a way, which is very challenging.

Lots of books have been written about it.

of how you manage these two things in parallel in the meantime my view is these things happen actually almost at once on top of each other rather than being two separate organizations but there's many different views also depending on the maturity of the company the life cycle of the company what is the better approach that's the first set so first set between exploitation of today's cash flow and developing through exploration tomorrow's cash flow

The second set is a very important one, is the trade-off or the duality between financial control and strategic control.

Financial control in this context means

how you buy other companies which you're not doing in-house to accelerate and to move forward.

Strategic control is really in-house innovation.

So a company and a board is continuously challenged.

Is there a sustainable balance between in-house innovation

and external innovation.

Or M&A doesn't always have to be about innovation, could be market share or geographic expansion.

But what is really important to understand, when a company relies too much on financial control, M&A, its survival gets really threatened.

Because the more companies you buy,

the more over a period of time, your in-house capability to innovate will weaken.

And effectively, you're losing your strategic control.

Now, coming back to the Silicon Valley companies, what they have done tremendously successful, whether it's a

like Meta, Facebook, Google, they have been continuously investing.

They have been the biggest investor as a percentage share of their revenues.

They have invested in R&D, but at the same time, they buy a company every month.

So they keep this balance in an incredible way.

And that is, in my view, a tremendous capability for a company to keep that balance.

Don't allow it going one way, but keep that balance.

So when you look at the free energy governance framework,

looking at really Silicon Valley as a startup, the question doesn't even arise because everybody's sitting in one room.

Now you take this massive company, some of them are the biggest companies in the world, like Apple and so on.

They have mastered it, in my view, by

not being obsessed of how the top has to control everything, understanding that we are much more powerful as an organization if the unknowns are being turned into knowns and that those who are capable of doing it are empowered and they're usually much closer to the resource market, suppliers, technologies, clients, in order to do so.

So I do think in those companies you find many facets of it

which make it very successful.

And I'm very convinced that they are also the next companies who are embracing artificial intelligence as a way of changing again how organizations are structured, how they take decisions, and how the power may be shifting.

But

And that was one of the questions you asked me, which is on the slide, is why being so obsessed with the board?

Actually, I'm not obsessed with the board as such, but the reality is that the board

depending on you know the role of the board varies many times from countries from jurisdictions culture you know what role they play but when you look at a typical board the ceo may be on the board in the us the ceo usually is on the board the ceo is actually usually also the chairman in the rest of the world they strictly separate these two roles ceo and chairman

But you will have the majority of the board members being non-executives.

And these non-executives have no role in the day-to-day operation of the business.

But they come and they leverage the expertise from different industries.

And overall, their experience, they have accumulated over usually a longer career.

And the board, because it is not executive, is in my view, uniquely positioned not to get involved in the content dimensions of the business.

The board can't tell you, you should be buying this, you should be doing this.

What the board should be doing is to ensure that we have a process that allows for free energy governance to come to life.

bottom and top properly connected, articulating prediction models, having the right language, articulating predictions and empowering the rest of the organization to challenge those predictions.

And the third one is where the board has to self-evaluate, are we really keeping a good balance between strategic control and financial control?

And these are a role which in my view cannot be delegated to the CEO.

and needs to come actually from a meta organ, which literally the board is to ensure those processes and just make sure that they are in place and that they stay alive.


SPEAKER_04:
Got it.

That, that makes sense.

So if I understand you correctly, it's not to say that a board is like intrinsically a part of free energy governance, but like we have inherited these legal structures where oftentimes for nonprofits and C corps, you need to have a board.

So you might as well put it to good use.

And again,

a nice attribute of a board is that it's separate from the rest of the organization.

And that means can play this kind of unique and special role in free interview governance.

Does that characterize what you're saying correctly?


SPEAKER_00:
Absolutely.

And if you look at a DAO, I mean, effectively, it's a software and it's a contracting, I mean, a smart contracting in a certain way.

So what you should be doing, you should be

Because in the Tao, the governance dimension is not about content.

I mean, it's not about saying, you know, you should be going left, you should be going right.

The real question is, are you following the right process when certain things should happen or they shouldn't happen?

And that, in my view, is for a board should be the guardian of control.

institutionalizing and of keeping alive self organizing mechanisms, as I described them with the free energy governance framework.

And I think in a DAO, you may actually write this into the software, the way those things, it's the language, the communication, the way actually, what information can actually take decisions and has the right judgment.


SPEAKER_04:
That makes sense.

I'm actually curious.

This might be a hard question.

I think part of the reason it's hard is it's very contextually dependent.

But I'm wondering if you could have your pick of a different governance structure, right?

Maybe it's not the board, but something else that would be more fine-tuned and appropriate for free energy governance.

And you can have any legal structure you wanted.

Are there things that you would change about the board?

Or maybe it's just not the board at all.

It's a different kind of entity that you would think would be more appropriate for free energy governance?


SPEAKER_00:
You know, I do think that the power of the board, and if you think about it, it's funny.

Historically, it was never one person on board.

It's always like two people, three people.

So I do think the idea of having a small group of people coming together that are not involved in the day-to-day business as a management team to deliberate and think about very key decisions which concern the whole firm.

uh is in my view irreplaceable and i really do believe in this now what we do see however is that some boards are completely irrelevant some boards are a source of inertia and

we we and a lot of the corporate governance literature is about how do you make the board really effective then it comes into diversity discussions and all of this i don't think that is really the key um it really comes down to i'm not a big fan of the of the diversity in terms of stereotypical diversity

to say, oh, we should have, for example, the Nordic countries in Europe have made it the law that a certain number of board members need to be female.

And right now, it's really crazy because they don't find enough women who are prepared to go on the board even and who are qualified to go on the board.

And I think that is the wrong way.

I think what you want is you want to constantly self-evaluate as a board to ensure that you have the right expertise, the right qualities on the board to steer the company through its next challenges.


SPEAKER_04:
I see.

So instead of like a top-down mandated version of like, hey, this is the kind of diversity you have, that should actually be an internalized process where you would internally be saying like, hey, actually we don't have representation from these groups.

That's actually probably hampering our decision-making processes in these ways.

Let's intentionally create diversity to create new cognitive capabilities on our board.

Did I capture that right?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I would put the emphasis on the cognitive dimensions.

Having said this,

see i'm on the board of a company in switzerland which is quite big has many thousands of employees is involved around the globe okay and i'm always embarrassed when i look at the website and you have four male whites guys on the board and this is a company which is globally

active, we have a very important part of women in our workforce.

And I don't think the board represents it.

So I do think the board has to represent in some way also the world you represent as a business.

And I think that board needs to change in terms of diversity, but the diversity shouldn't be just changed for the sake of diversity.

It should bring in, as you rightly said, the cognitive diversity at the same time.

But we all know sometimes, and I guess that's what the lawmakers imply, the cognitive diversity is many times related to the stereotypical diversity.


SPEAKER_04:
And let's say we have anything else to add to this.

I do want to kind of switch gears a little bit because we have about 10 minutes left.

And so something you're talking about too is like you're envisioning a very different version of what a board looks like and get to the right slide.

So both for like implementing free energy governance from the perspective of being inside a board, but then also within the entire organization, like it's a very different way that especially a board needs to operate.

And I know that you're on the board of several companies.

You're also a leader of several companies as well.

I'm kind of curious how you think about the resistance that you've encountered in implementing free energy governance, both within the board and outside of the board as well.

And so, for example, like I've had personal experience with this as well, not necessarily implementing free energy governance, but also implementing things that are less hierarchical, more of a collective sensemaking process where we're not top down deciding the strategy, but we're more collectively through a sensemaking process, understand, you know, finding what that purpose is.

And I've often found that can be very disorienting for folks and a lot of fear and uncertainty arises during that process.

And a lot of resistance comes during that process as well.

I would imagine that you would encounter similar things implementing free energy governance, both within the board and then within the larger organization.

So I'm kind of curious about types of resistance that you found and how you've kind of overcome that resistance in your own organizations.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, good.

Very good question.

I mean, effectively, it's a question or this whole topic touches upon, let's be very precise.

How do you make actually free energy governance work in an organization?

Give me some very precise tools.

If I was interested now in

reaching the bottom and the top and doing all these things.

What should I do?

Give me a plan.

Give me some inspiration what other companies have been doing.

That's what I'm looking at putting together now through a research project I'm undertaking to look at companies.

They may not call it free energy governance, but they're dealing precisely with those issues and what they have been doing.

So my answer will be twofold.

I'm going to answer first of all,

was your question, and then come actually to what should be done, because the two are kind of related in a certain way.

The resistance I see in boards is when you look at a board of directors, it's a really very strange group of people, because they...

Most of the time, the recruitment of those people is coming through connections.

I mean, of course, many times you do have a headhunter saying, like, we need a board member.

Can you find us somebody interesting?

And somebody comes.

And that happens.

I'm sure.

I don't know what the percentage is, but a fair share of board positions are being recruited.

uh done this way but then most of the time the board members obviously know a lot of board members and they say look this is a great person that person can join the board has these and these qualifications so what happens at the end that the board comes together a little bit as a club

So there is in the board, and by the way, there's a lot of research which also says it's quite important that the board members get along very well, so that there is a good climate.

On the board table, it's a group of people who share a lot of responsibility.

What I have

seen over the time is that because of these things, and also because many times there can be a lot of pressure on the board, taking decisions in particular, the moment of crisis, there's an additional communication challenge vis-a-vis the public, vis-a-vis the employee force.

So when you face these challenges, it brings you obviously together.

It's like a family in the forest facing a challenge,

To fight, you come even closer together and you tend, in the context of the board, you tend to become a little bit introverted.

And that's a real problem.

Because you start, again, it's skilled incompetence.

It's counterproductive to what you're actually trying to achieve.

You become further removed from the rest of the organization.

You start inviting people to make presentations, then you close the doors again.

You stay amongst yourself.

And I think you're going to be hostage to a lot of blind spots, to a lot of bias, towards a lot of pattern recognition, which nothing is always the same.

And you start becoming a little bit too overconfident the way you can take decisions.

And my approach has been, and that's a problem.

I do think that

every board what I've just described, suffers to a certain degree from that, that that that pathology.

And

That makes it sometimes very difficult because when you think about it, the free energy governance framework is all about how the boards opens, how the board communicates, how the board connects and picks up the intelligence, which is at the bottom.

And now we come to very concrete measures of what you can do in order to actually change this.

And I have to say, to answer your question,

I have been practicing free energy governance as a CEO, making that the way I run the company and the way the flow of information is generated, the way decision power is distributed, that the company is really empowered to make judgment calls and execute them, and that not the top becomes a bottleneck.

So I'm pretty good at that.

When I look at my board in my own company, which is a pretty strong board with very strong people and strong backgrounds, very serious business people, I find it very difficult, for example, to say, hey, on the website, why don't you put next to your photo a sentence which explains what's your contribution to this company?

Why are you on the board?

I think that's a question everybody should answer.

And I think it makes all of a sudden the board member much more accessible to the rest of the organization.

Because if somebody says to me, like, they're responsible for China and I'm involved in China, then there is a guy or a woman I should be contacting and maybe share some ideas.

So I think that's a way of the board opening up.

I think a board member should have on their website

stating in one sentence why they're on that board and what their contribution is to the company, from which angle they're coming.

That opens up.

Second, which is a great way, and I've been practicing this quite a bit, is creating deep dives where you take people, very junior people,

on a specific topic where you believe these junior people, middle layer people, executive leadership people, together with selected board members, not the whole board, create a deep dive around the topic, no presentations, and just deep dive into a topic, sharing actually what experiences there are to advance a topic.

And

That usually is an incredible experience.

By the end of the meeting, you don't know who's a board member and who's a junior guy because you don't come with this like, come in here, make me a PowerPoint presentation.

I'm listening to you, and then I will judge and come with all my experience.

You have to kill all of this.

The other element which I really like, and I'm looking much deeper into it, and there are a number of big companies who have been doing it,

is creating shadow boards.

So now what you're doing is you're looking closer to the front lines of really high potential people, talent, who form a board which is holding a board meeting at the very same time the main board is holding its board meeting.

They have more or less the same documentation, the same agenda points.

And they take decisions as if they were the board.

They define agenda items for the next board meeting.

And all of a sudden, you're creating a group of people closer to the front line who have to delve into the topics.

They must be obviously senior enough that they can be entrusted and that they are capable of understanding all the issues and assuming that role in a way of

not just looking at their domain where they are acting maybe, but looking at the whole organization because that's a challenge for the board too.

You have to really understand how to relate and how to respect a lot of interacting parts of a company.

And then you compare afterwards the shadow board, what they have discussed, how they have decided.

That's a tremendous input of frontline information, of intelligence feeding into the main board and possibly determining future agenda items.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh man, there's a lot of juicy action-oriented things I would love to spend the next four hours going into.

Unfortunately, we're at the top of the hour.

And so hopefully we can have you back and we can go deeper into some of these, especially the practice-oriented recommendations.

We'd love to explore that more.

But before we wrap up, just want to be respectful of each other's time.

Curious if anyone has any final closing thoughts, comments, reflections, questions before we wrap up.


SPEAKER_03:
I appreciate, Tyler and Blue, that you're leading this series.

We're going to continue the regular, more section-oriented videos.

Keep a space open for others to come in and range freely.

And Bijan, thanks again for joining.

You're welcome back anytime.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you for inviting me.

I'm very honored that you took the book and you're dedicating the time to it.

I do really believe, not because I wrote the book, obviously it's a very theoretical contribution, a more practical orientation contribution should follow.

But I do believe, and I guess that's why also Carl Fristen decided to write the foreword, and also Connie Helfert from Dartmouth wrote the foreword, is because I do think

This is the beginning of changing things.

And as I think Daniel said at the beginning, or I think it was Blue saying, this is something the Active Inference Institute should be looking at and being inspired by how you design governance.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks again.

Till next time.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Thanks, John.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you very much.

Bye-bye.

## DQhPABvJBFk

SPEAKER_01:
Hello, welcome to Act-Inf Bookstream number 1.2.

It's February 15th, 2023.

Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that's communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

This is a recorded and archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams.

Check out ActiveInference.org to get involved with live streams and other projects.

Blue, to you.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

Well, this is our second discussion of the book, Governing Continuous Transformation.

We are here with the author, Bijan Kesri, today, and we will be discussing part two of the textbook.

So I think we want to maybe go around and introduce ourselves.

I am Blue Knight and independent research consultant in New Mexico, and I will pass it off to Tyler.


SPEAKER_02:
My name is Tyler.

I'm a protocol designer and DAO researcher in California.

Pass it to Daniel.


SPEAKER_01:
Daniel, I'm a researcher in California and pass it to Bijan.


SPEAKER_03:
okay so um obviously an author uh really coming much more from the practical side of the world having been serving on the boards and eventually taking a strong interest in the theory and being inspired by active inference and in particular the free energy minimization

principle to adopt that and apply it to the world of corporate governments so hence the book i very much appreciate that you invited me today and hopefully being in a having another stimulating discussion i always love to see how um you know there's so much work which goes into writing a book it's a very lonely journey

And when it's once out and you see actually such a gifted group of people looking at it, reading it, critically reviewing it and engaging in a dialogue, it's a great gift for an author.

So I'm very, very happy to be here.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Well, carry it forward.


SPEAKER_00:
So we are here discussing part two of free energy governance.

So over the last four weeks,

we have discussed these last four chapters.

And so today's discussion is going to just encompass those sections.

So a bit of a roadmap, we had some kind of category questions regarding the role of empathy in free energy governance, the role of artificial intelligence in free energy governance, and also on duality management.

So starting off with empathy, we got here.

So I just actually was, I think, looking up a photo for like top down, bottom up.

Like, what does that look like?

Top down, bottom up organization and communication.

And so in my photo scrolling, I found this old paper, right?

So it's from 2008.

And it's really about empathy and emotional resonance.

So this picture I thought was a great picture and it had perception action coupling and shared representation and kind of like the self and other distinction.

And I don't know, Bijan, if you've read this paper, but for me, like it was a figure that kind of encompassed all these things that we've been talking about in the book all along.

And so to quote Bijan's book, he says, cognition in the form of world enactment is the purpose-directed, action-centric, and social construction of shared meaning and shared expectations, anchored in the understanding that a firm's environment is a matter of environmental engagement in the form of interaction revealing significance and assigning probabilities to a bounded set

of external unknown states.

And I just was wondering like about maybe the role of empathy in like gaining a shared representation or a shared understanding.

So I don't know if you want to flip to the next.

There we go.

And so here is empathy required for this shared meaning and shared expectations.

And I'm curious to know, Bijan, what your thoughts are maybe on either this or maybe I know we hear also a lot about the role of emotional intelligence in business success.

Where does maybe emotional intelligence come in to free energy governance?

Is that also essential or what are your thoughts here?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, no, I think it's a very good question.

First of all, I did not come across the paper.

I think it is a brilliant illustration.

Having said so, it's interesting to see it puts perception and then action.

I put it the other way around.

I see the action is really determining our perceptions.

But I think it's a very, very good question because what you're doing is you're opening something which I think, as part of my work, I consider the black box.

Because when you look at

know i don't like really bottom i think i said this in one of our previous discussions i prefer frontline workers i mean people are really in the front line having said this the the top down bottom up dynamic you have at every hierarchical level and effectively sometimes it's a question of how you naturally work together so then you open up the black box of teamwork

of um how do you how do you engage actually which is how do you understand each other and i think that's where empathy plays a very important role i think that's where um in emotional intelligence starts playing a very important role what i have done for the purposes of the book for the purposes of the free energy governance concept i really focused on i think communication

But there is a lot in communication, which is also empathy related, you could argue, to make sure that actually people hear what you're saying.

And obviously, sometimes there needs to be an empathetic dimension in it.

But what I think the waterfall here is you start really with a purpose.

when you don't have a purpose then it becomes a little bit fuzzy but if the purpose is very clear that we want to go to rome then there's many ways that are leading to rome but as you're going on this journey and keeping actually the team together keeping the team energized motivated of going through a lot of hazards maybe crossing the alps from from europe to you to on the way to rome

communication becomes very essential.

And when you look at the practical side of the work, even when you take a publication like Harvard Business Review, which in my view is one really of the leading business publications, which addresses really current issues managers, company leaders, but including frontline workers are focusing on.

and you see that empathy emotional intelligence and communication are really critical things in making the most complex strategies work because there is no point of being very smart about analyzing where the world is going if you're not able to align and motivate all the resources all the dots of intelligence in the firm

to join this so i stayed away as part of the work of looking now into the microcosm of communication of what's happening between you know let's say a leader and a frontline worker how much empathy you show in certain situations to ensure that actually the whole flow is going to work so i think to answer to summarize the answer

When you look at emotional intelligence, when you look at empathy, there are dimensions, you would consider more on a micro level in the way things are being translated, which I stayed away from, and really considered it as a black box of how the how probably the communication is best done in very specific circumstances.

That's clear because it's a very unusual, I think it's a very good question because it's a question which really strikes the heart of management and has become obviously in recent years a very popular theme.

And nobody has ever asked me that question in this context, so I really appreciate it.


SPEAKER_00:
And I do remember, I mean, I'm not sure if you've read Human Communication as Active Inference.

That was like one of the very first papers that we did at the Institute in our live streams.

But, you know, it still is communication as like a necessary tool and how communication is used to kind of establish that shared meaning and shared expectation.

But as for like the nuts and bolts of it, it's still... Oh, and then we did another recent...

um paper dealing with communication as active inference kind of like the follow-up but by a different author like the counterpoint to that paper i can't remember the name of it um that was interesting too i would really appreciate if you could send me the links to those papers sure sure um daniel i'm sure remembers and i can go back through the live streams if i don't remember um i appreciate it thank you um and so just do you think that um

in human cognition, we have, we have empathy in, in human cognition and it plays a role.

Do you think that there's an analog in organizational cognition?

Like, do you think when a firm has cognition that there's what, what would be, what would take like the equivalent role of empathy in a firm, if anything, or, or maybe that's kind of esoteric or, or what, what are your thoughts there?


SPEAKER_03:
No, I do think, um,

You know, I mean, what is a firm?

A firm is a legal fiction.

And it's really a bunch of people and a bunch of assets.

And sometimes actually the only asset could be the people.

Let's say in a services business where there's no machinery or anything.

So I think it really comes down to people.

I think it comes down to leadership.

It comes down to the identity.

It comes down to the culture.

And

in recent years you've seen that many many companies rip i mean through their leaders have paid a lot of lip service to being an empathetic organization having understanding for the needs of the workers of the frontliners of the asset really of the company so i do think that today

I cannot imagine that a firm which is not empathetic and or integrates empathy

as an important pillar of the values and the culture, it lives, it doesn't have a great chance to survive.

And when you look at culture, what is culture in a corporate, in an organizational setting, it's really behavioral benchmarks which determine really what we would expect of people in this particular setting.

And I think this empathy today is incredibly important.

And by the way, I do think that the concept of empathy has gained an entirely new dimension following the pandemic.

know when you start seeing um people being locked up having to when you have two working parents kids sitting at home all of a sudden there's so many things to juggle where a company an employer needs to show empathy and understanding for the very particular challenges people face and if you don't um you you will eventually lose


SPEAKER_02:
sometimes even the best of your people so the other follow-up question on that and maybe just to pose the question in a slightly different way so a lot so far we've been talking about empathy in terms of like an individual human cognition right and like hey that should be an important part of your culture because it allows communication to flow within and without the form the firm

But I'm curious if this is an analog on the firm organizational level scale.

So in the same way that on an individual scale, you're mirroring the motions of another person, of an external individual, is there a way in which the organization as its own entity mirrors the outside world and mirrors kind of its own perception of the environment and what you could call the emotions of other firms or other processes happening in this external environment?

It's a very maybe strange question, but I'm kind of curious, in what way do you think that the firm under free energy governance is receptive and can integrate information in its external environment?

And is that different in a way to how people traditionally think of gathering data about the environment?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, when you look at actually, if you were to dissect empathy and what is it really, I think there's two aspects.

there's two, three dimensions I could instantly think of.

You say a person matters, so somebody matters.

Secondly, you respect that person.

And thirdly, you listen.

I think the listening part is an incredibly important part.

How can you be empathetic if you haven't listened in the first place?

So when you look at all these three dimensions, respect,

listening um the idea that some some somebody and what somebody has to say matters is an essential foundation of free energy governance because free energy governance effectively says even the weak signals bear the transformative potential we need to listen to so first of all you need to open all your senses in free energy governance

to listen to what actually frontliners have to say and

start with the working assumption that what they have to say matters doesn't matter what in in what area they address it um to be able to read in between the lines so that's the only way i could stretch the the concept the dimension of empathy and really link it into um into free energy governance by dissecting it into let's say these three dimensions what empathy stands for

and then pull it back into the free energy governance framework which effectively says the strategy fundamentally is a generative process of prediction error minimization and so you may articulate predictions at the top but they are only as good as you can challenge them with bottom-up data and the bottom-up data to access it to make it

low from the bottom to the top probably requires an element of empathy because my personal experience is the more you go the closer you go to the front lines in an organization the stronger is actually the resistance to sharing valuable information

And the reason is not that people don't want to share.

The reason is that people prefer not to stick out.

People prefer not necessarily to assume responsibility now for something they say, or even if it becomes a project in its own right that they may have to execute it, but they wouldn't want to execute it.

So what you find is unlocking the valuable intelligence, which is at the front lines of an organization,

is a management challenge in its own right and i think it requires very strong communication and it certainly requires empathy and the empathy and maybe now i can i can close the circle here to your question tyler and what blue was referring to before maybe it has to be more than just an empathetic leader maybe it has to be trust

in processes, in an entire culture that I feel comfortable about for this to work on a continuous and sustainable basis.

Because when we look at free energy governance, this is not like a one-off project.

This is ingrained into the DNA of the firm, of saying the future of the firm is best ascertained

if we continuously generatively minimizing prediction error.

So predictions at the top, but possibly sometimes at the bottom.

And we want to challenge those predictions with frontline intelligence.


SPEAKER_00:
So just a quick follow up.

As you were talking, Bijan, especially about the pandemic, and I was there thinking about

empathy and leadership, you know, I was just directed back to the task positive network versus the direct default mode network.

And so I think maybe like empathy is the central component in the default mode network, like empathy, like the default mode network is like the people centered part.

of that.

Um, and, and I was, I think like now with the pandemic, like it just like jarred me into like, we're now, so I feel like we're so off task, like, like, I mean, maybe not in every organization, but I think as a society, like,

we're so much more centered, we're flipped into heavy on the DMN as opposed to the TPN, just culturally because of the greater amount of empathy that everyone was just required to drum up for people and their circumstances, right?


SPEAKER_03:
Absolutely.

And I do think what has reinforced, it's a very good way of looking actually at the task-specific network and the default mode network.

You're absolutely right.

The empathy is part of the default mode.

When you look now at the pandemic,

it was all about the default mode.

I mean, because there was so much misery, so much tragedy, certainly in the first waves, and uncertainty, unpredictability, and our models were overwhelmed because our world models were not prepared to deal with this.

It took a year, a year and a half, and we integrated the pandemic perfectly well into an adjusted, a further evolved model, and we developed new strategies of how to deal with this.

But one element is, for example, home office.

And when you think about how hard it has become for many firms to bring people back to the office, and you could almost say the office is maybe

the physical representation of the task specific network.

You go because you're really executing a specific task in a building and then you leave it and then you're out of it.

So almost there was a certain link in the brain between office

and task specificity um i do recall another example which is kind of interesting in that context but i don't want to drift up too far but i do recall that banks introduced um you know it was kind of only in the 90s i think that they introduced that you can have a casual friday so normally it was really just you wear a suit and then you come on fridays you can wear casual smart

And I remember somebody was telling me, actually, when you go on the Goldman Sachs trading floor, the person who has a hole in the sweater and all of this on a Friday, that's probably the guy who makes most of the money because he shows, like, I don't even have to wear a smart cap.

But a lot of people said when the financial crisis hit in 2008,

and which was really exuberance of all that cheap money putting a lot of people into misery with debts and mortgages, that this was partly related to the fact that the casual Friday became almost a casual whole week.

And it had an impact.

on how people were performing actually their tasks and their attitude towards risk.

So I do think that form and informality are very, very critical aspects of how an organization works.

And sometimes the informal organization, which is obviously a function of the formal one,

can be much more important.

And sometimes it can be much more important how information is flowing.

Most of the time in organizations, coming back to the free energy governance framework,

The most valuable information does not come through the formal channels.

It comes through informal channels.

It may come through a conversation at the water cooler.

All these things which are not necessarily documented in the traditional forms of corporate communication.

So I think these are probably also the channels

where empathy can be best communicated.

And I think the big loss during the pandemic was that while the office work and the office space was maybe very formal and very...

task specific I think it was at the same time underestimated how important it is to provide to frontliners to even to leaders a source of empathy in exchange because I think most people were confronted with a terrible loneliness and so we shouldn't underestimate and we shouldn't

bash too much the physical office space is a very important place not only where um where you perform your task but could be also a source of of being energized and receiving understanding for issues which have nothing to do with your job and more importantly it's really the the side of learning

I do recall when Morgan Stanley, CEO, insisted that people are coming back to the office.

It was really by saying our future as a company is dependent on continuing training people and bringing in young talent who have to learn on the job.

How can they learn on the job when the office is empty?

So there is a duty.

in the name of firm survival to keep the firm as a learning side and that means bringing in the side so that's a long talk um obviously the the concept of empathy in the context of free energy governance is not an obvious one but i think this is an interesting very interesting conversation and i do think that we um we need to dissect

what really empathy means for.

And then we need to look at what is a firm, a firm consisting of people, of assets, but also of the physical space.

And I think the space is a very important dimension to consider.

And that's where the pandemic is an interesting example of how it can be a source of whatever positive we associate with empathy to provide.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So we'll move now into talking a little bit more about artificial intelligence.

And you say in the book, you say, in fact, we are challenged not to allow for the human brain's computational limits to solely determine perception and sense making.

Instead, outsourcing some of the heavy information lifting to the environment in the form of extended cognition is the essence of optimizing prediction error minimization.

The more exponential and hence discontinuous a market environment, the more we need self-organizing mechanisms that leverage the world as a supervisory signal challenging in circular causality the very perceptual content of our predictions.

And in reading this, I have been having lots of fun working with GPT-CHAT, as I'm sure you have and many others have been, and really as just kind of a...

like a platform or a standing like a springboard for like where we what we already know like it's a very big cognitive synthesis of like you know the whole internet circa 2021 or or something like that and so like this is really a cognitive extension like our smartphone and many other things um and so i just was wondering what role

you might see for chat gpt or other automated artificial intelligence i mean like the you know there's no limit to um assist us with free energy governance because i really see like an assisting with the synthesis and integration of information like at a very large scale even just now compared to a year ago so do you see a role um

for AI in free energy governance or helping us to kind of springboard our leadership platforms?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, very good question.

So let me, there's many dimensions to it.

Number one, free energy governance, strictly speaking, does not consider making use of AI at the board level.

Now, when you look, and let's briefly talk about an organization and applications of AI, you have today

I mean, so many examples from credit cards where you have AI, I mean, which used to be, which has been now automated in a massive way of how credit checks are happening on the spot.

It's no longer left to the retailer, but there's a central system which can authorize the credit card transaction instantly or refuse it.

So there has been predictive algorithms being centralized and changing

the way certain tasks have been done in an organization.

So I would say the application of AI today is very much at the front lines, whereas it's probably

A little bit further up the chain also is if you look at healthcare.

So a radiologist is possibly redundant today, but if you make the radiologist redundant because a machine can maybe possibly read the images much better, it may have repercussions of how you're going to start organizing the whole hospital because who's assuming now what role and maybe the role of the nurse is going to be upskilled because on the basis of the machine output,

uh there will be direction to the right doctor to to look really for treatment whatever is the reading from um from the images so i think we need to um see now that ai starts first of all in a very task specific way but moves up and all of a sudden has very systemic changes applying ai at the board level

I don't see this

at this moment.

You know, information processing will not be done at the board level with AI tools.

I doubt this at this point.

When I look now specifically at free energy governance, well, free energy governance, if you look at free energy principle, for me, that is an artificial active inference.

And the way Carl Fristen has been even applying it to neuroimaging is a machine learning algorithm.

So for me, free energy governance

is really a machine learning logic in its entirety.

Now, when you look at what is happening, chat GPT is not as smart as a lot of people think.

At the end, it's just a language model.

And it makes statistically very plausible

language it produces which it doesn't understand itself so it poses obviously great challenges so i think that has been a little bit misleading having said this

I think it's not misleading to the extent that chat GPT is an indication that generative intelligence, automated, augmented, is the future.

And this is going to come, and I think we will have a hard time as humans to catch up how fast it can evolve and the things it's doing because it's getting better every day because it's training on the back of massive training knowledge.

Now, what is happening...

And that is definitely a challenge for the board.

You could ask, how can the board continue fulfilling its most basic fiduciary duty of monitoring company and management if itself, the board, has no means of understanding what the algorithms do?

Because algorithms can be potentially very damaging.

So I do see that there will be a safety and ethical, a regulatory dimension, which will probably need to be addressed

at the board level when you look at it from an ai point of view now so that's a little bit to the question of artificial intelligence and free energy governance i specifically specifically have not considered any tools at the board level

now when you look at what is artificial intelligence really about it allows you to separate two components which make up a decision it's a predictive component and it's a judgment component i think the predictive component can be more and more done the prediction element by machines on the back of data but i do think that it revalues the judgment component of the human

now it could be that it's no longer really the top let's say leaders which are best positioned to make the judgment component maybe people on the front lines

now being empowered by artificially intelligence fueled prediction models and prediction tools can place a much better position to make the right judgment call so i think the impact of artificial intelligence on the company will be more distributed decision making to be really more in real time now coming back to the quote you originally were reading out

The most important element of that quote is what you see today is that most people in leadership positions will tell you the world has become uncertain and it's unpredictable.

And my answer to this is always, first of all, uncertainty and unpredictability is a very subjective concept.

It's not an objective reality.

And

Your perception of uncertainty or unpredictability is really a function of how good is your world model, how good is your prediction model.

So if you're telling me the world is uncertain, you're effectively telling me your model is not good enough of modeling it and in a generative, actively, inferential way, going step by step forward to improve it and make the world less uncertain.

the way i do believe also for the pandemic was a brilliant example if you if you had a world model which maybe bill gates said that pandemics are going to come they're going to be massive and they're going to be global there's no way you're going to contain in today's world something which started in china it's going to stay in wuhan but it's going to be global but if you think about it it started off

in 2019, November, December, and people until January, February in the Western Hemisphere still thought this was a Chinese problem.

they weren't prepared at all now think about it some people were smart enough and they exploited the business opportunity by going up front into producing a massive amount of face masks so when all of a sudden the pandemic hit in march april they were the ones making fortunes because governments didn't have the right prediction model and they didn't have enough masks i know actually the guys

who did take advantage of this in Switzerland, and I think they made $250 million or something like this, because they caught really the government naked.

So you see the discrepancy, even governments where you suppose with all the resources they have at hand, all the information they have, they have bad prediction models.

So your prediction model determines

how uncertain and how unpredictable the world is.

And a big problem you have today in companies is that companies do not embrace uncertainty, but they bury uncertainty.

A book which puts this brilliantly into perspective is from Agarwal and Avi Faab.

It's called Power and Prediction.

And it shows very clearly how companies

have developed, as Aguirre said back in the 60s, it's skilled incompetence, where you act in a way which is really contrary to your intentions or what you really want to achieve.

And what has happened is that companies have created rules, best practices.

You could even argue that putting the CEO in a super dominant position, controlling everything,

is a form of bearing uncertainty because you look now to one person and you say that person is going to give me all the answers of the world instead what we need to do is we need to make our models available to testing in the marketplace in a generative inferential way by acting

and generating new data points that make our model in a generative fashion better and better.

And as a result of it, our predictions models get better, the predictions they produce get better, and the world will be perceived as less uncertain.

And that's really the essence of the quote you started off with.

we have two elements here one is really the the uncertainty um element i i think we need to really highlight is a subjective concept and it's a question of world modeling of prediction modeling and prediction testing the second dimension you addressed is the one of artificial intelligence i do think artificial intelligence or augmented intelligence you could argue is it really that artificial

um is is is just at the very beginning it's going to be exponential it's going to be faster evolving and spreading than anybody can expect and i do believe that in around within 10 years 70 to 80 percent of knowledge workers will disappear and only those people will survive working in any organization that can understand manage and complement

artificial intelligence.

And by the way, there's so many examples, you can see how artificial intelligence allowed in an incredible way to get rid of, I mean, millions of jobs, you know, already.

And even if you think about a radiologist has a very intense training in medical education.

And in the book, Power Prediction is a really good example.

I think it is in that book.

There is another great book I recommend on the topic.

It's all in on AI.

by devonport and metal which gives you a really good overview good structure a few good case studies and you can see that the the the the job of a radiologist can be divided into i think roughly 35 or 38 tasks and when you look at each of the tasks a machine can do this today so that job is gone


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's interesting, the level of synthesis.

So for me, the essence of that quote was cognitive offloading into systems that can synthesize and integrate information.

How much of that task is what is done by AI?

And I do agree with you that we will need to be able to work with the AI, like to understand that synthesis and integration of information that's provided by augmented intelligence systems in order to be functional in the workplace going forward.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, you see the big weaknesses where people don't understand.

By the way, that quote, when I recall, it's...

It's Howie.

You guys know Howie?

He wrote a brilliant book, The Predictive Brain.

And Howie is probably more a structural Bayesian guy.

But he's really brilliant in the way he shows that actually what the Bayesian brain is about is really you...

You use the world as a feedback loop.

So you can come up with any predictions you want.

Let the world, you know, give you all the feedback you need.

And that's a very powerful way of how you start in a generative way reducing uncertainties.


SPEAKER_00:
Definitely.

So I don't know, I guess we should maybe go on to our last set of questions on duality management.

So here, Bijan, is it only critical for the board to understand duality management?

Or do you think at every level of the hierarchy from the frontline workers up to top tier management and the board, does everyone need to understand duality management and practice this?

Or is it only necessarily at the top?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I don't think you would explain to anyone in the front line that you have to engage in duality.

But because to a certain degree, it's an abstract concept.

And I developed duality management really at the very, very top level, almost dynamic capabilities, the concept of dynamic capabilities in strategy management.

is defined a dynamic capability as a non-operational capability.

So you say it's a, some call it also a meta capability.

So it's not a task specific capability.

So you would almost say when we talk about duality management, you move very quickly into the default mode.

side of the brain and what it really is about i i used it in the context and i think i i said it in our last discussion you can really reduce

everything about a company about two dimensions one is exploiting today's cash flow and making the money that's really the business you have and developing the future cash flow stream which is the exploration so you have exploitation exploration and

have been so many theories about and case studies about can you do both at the same time how does it work and sometimes people said oh you do exploitation here but you create a whole different new thing over there and you don't mix them and sometimes they don't mix that easily i don't think companies have that luxury any longer and i think

exploitation focusing on today's cash flow and doing something new is it really that radical is it more incremental is happening kind of in real time but it requires very strong leadership because when you think about exploiting today's cash flow is a very hardcore operational

activity.

So CEOs usually immerse very, very strongly in the exploitative activity.

When they're really good, they can also do exploration and they need to make sure how they switch between the default mode, which is probably more for exploration, thinking creatively about innovation projects, and at the same time managing and optimizing an existing cash generating business.

My idea was behind duality management to say the board is actually uniquely positioned because it's not involved in any operational activities really of the company.

The board is not involved in running today's business.

It can have a great super view

of saying where should actually maybe the CEO be guided towards of maybe emphasizing right now more exploitation or exploration where people see as a board when they analyze the business they can see the problems that concerns one

complex second complex i have is financial and strategic control and they really stand for in-house innovation and innovation you buy through by buying other companies or certain things and i the view of the free or the way free energy governance um and this is how the whole section two is structured you have the structural component which is really how you connect the top of the button

the cognition component is really related to how you have a an ability to enact your world create a model and i always like the googles the facebooks all these companies have created massive businesses but they really created this um

in a in a in an active way they did not copy someone they did not do a market research or that but they had a vision of their own which i think is essential and the third dimension are the capabilities and the capabilities i developed this duality management as a dynamic capability and dynamic capability is really a specific meta capability in strategy management

So I think when you look at these two complexes, how much do I focus on the business I have?

How much do I focus on the business I would like to have tomorrow?

And how much of it is done in-house?

And how much of this is done possibly by buying it?

are forces which sometimes are going against or going in line and i think the board in its meta position supervisory position being above the executive leadership as a unique position to practice this so that indirectly answers your question i think duality management

the more you go down in the hierarchy of a business, which means the closer you go to the front lines where hard tasks are being performed.

the less you have a duality management.

You shouldn't have a duality management at all because people are really focused on very specific tasks.

And the further you move up and the more you have to decide, are you going to do one of this or more of this, you may find the duality management challenge.

So it may not be just on the board, but it's certainly on the board when it comes to exploitation, exploration, and financial and strategic control.

Now, that's a long answer I gave.

I hope you could follow me.


SPEAKER_00:
That's great.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you so much.

I try to make it simple because obviously when you look at the very origins of this book, it was originally a dissertation which started off really in strategy management.

And I'm so happy that I found it all the way to the more neuroscientific dimension.

And we're talking in the context of the Active Inference Institute.

But obviously, when you talk specifically about the duality management side, we are really pretty much in business school.


SPEAKER_00:
So going from maybe a more thoughtful to the more practical, can you give an example of...

how you can reduce organizational friction through this top-down bottom-up hierarchical coupling.

Like it gets very fuzzy for me as, I mean, even as we're talking about like what levels need to understand duality management, like the, I mean, I get that the communication between the levels is key to like organizational maintenance or like the persistence of a firm, but like translating that into some kind of practical terms that I can apply at my firm,

for instance, is maybe a little bit more difficult.

So do you have any advice for us that are down here in the nitty gritty of it all?


SPEAKER_03:
So I do think what tools you apply that are practically of relevance is maybe a function also of the size of the organization.

So let's start with a really big organization.

Take a big insurance company.

and you have the board of an insurance company which will be very respectable people who have probably jobs as ceos on many different other companies they come together four or five times a year they take major decisions um how can such a board better understand independently of ceo framing as a filter

what overall is going on.

How can the board make the CEO stronger to ensure that the CEO actually is properly connected with what's really going on in the front lines?

And one concept I like a lot, I think I've talked about it before, but I think the concept

is a good concept to bring as an example again because it highlights and then you can think creatively of what other things you can think of but they are shadow boards so having a group of young high potential people who are quite far removed from the very top

that they form a board themselves and have board meetings with very similar agenda items and can discuss what should be maybe the future agenda items.

And that can serve as a tremendous source of inspiration from the front lines to the main board, which is sitting on the very top,

And that is a wonderful way I see as connecting the top and the bottom and leading the information flow.

Companies which have done this is like Total Energy, one of the biggest energy companies in the fashion business, Prada, Gucci.

And when you think about it, Prada and Gucci are obviously companies which are living off young talent.

people young designers something edgy something new because think about it in fashion you've got to come up every season with something which is setting a trend so you're really dependent on being connected to the front line and from creative people picking up what is the next so i like the fashion houses

because they show how important it is to be connected to the very front lines.

A big insurance company may not see it, but a big insurance company may be missing what could be the next big thing maybe young people will be asking for as a business model for as an interesting insurance market.

And so I think that is a really good

tool now let's go into small organizations let's take the active inference institute as an example and you're saying look we have this wonderful scientific advisory board you have a wonderful board who is advising you uh and and and and and guiding you um how to

make how to increase I mean you have I think you have one purpose to increase the impact of the active inference Institute in the marketplace and you're looking at various tools you're looking at very various engagement platforms our dialogue is one of them you're reaching out through channels

to at every juncture optimize that and i'm trying to support this as well because i really truly believe in in the mission of the active inference institute and i do believe that it is the very beginning of a great movement because i see that as the future i'm absolutely convinced of that so in that regard you're definitely pioneers our community is still very small now here's the question of how you connect the top

which is you guys now, was the front line.

And the front line may have really interesting weak signals which could give you some really inspirational input where you say we should take it on.

And I think you're doing it.

You're doing it with a newsletter.

You're reaching out.

You obviously want to make sure people read it.

They engage with this.

And you have internship programs.

You have a number of ways of how to bring in

really the marketplace to challenge you, to improve you, was one and only one mission and purpose in mind.

To make sure that the products, the output from the Active Inference Institute has impact

represents the aspirations you have for high quality intelligence that more and more people should connect to.

And I think you're doing quite a great job with the limited resources you have by doing all these tools, creating these dialogues.

You are acting actually to generate great data points, including our conversations,

the way you then package the output to reach out and collect input from people we may not know at this point who may connect to the content and i think this is a form of structure in a very distributed environment when you look at how the active interference institute is working of connecting actually the top which is you guys

the frontlines are possibly people like myself giving feedback.

So frontline is not always, you know, it doesn't imply is somebody, that's why I don't like the word bottom.

Sometimes your most intelligent people in the network may be your frontliners giving you the right feedbacks and data points.

I hope that answers the question and puts it a little bit more tangibly into your perspective.


SPEAKER_00:
most definitely and i think uh thank you for all the nice things you have to say about the active inference institute that's always a it's always nice to get a compliment um and i think that um that's it for today unless there's any more like burning thoughts or questions


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.

Well, thanks.

I always enjoy these conversations.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, yeah.

And hopefully we can have you back as we wrap up the book.

We're going to come around the bend and maybe we'll see you back in a few weeks if you have time to come discuss the end of the book with us.

That'd be great.


SPEAKER_03:
I will always be happy for you.

It becomes a little bit more, I think towards the end, it becomes a little bit more philosophical.

So this was a hard part.

I think the next chapter goes a little bit more into the corporate governance side.

I think we've covered quite a bit of this.

So when you I think the next one is three conclusion.

And

I think chapter 13, which is Outperformance and Survival as a Matter of Self-Organization, is quite philosophical, I think, as a topic.

And I look forward to it.

And thank you so much for also taking interest in my work.

It means a lot to an author.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

We will see you next time.

Okay, all the best.

Peace.
