SPEAKER_01:
There we go.

Hello and welcome, everyone.

It is Tuesday, April 6, 2021, and it is Active Inference livestream series that we're going to be kicking off with Jon Boyk here.

This is going to be really interesting because we're going to have three discussions with Jon and I and interactive Jamboards.

for people who are working with us live or asynchronously.

And then we're gonna be having two group discussions later.

So it's gonna be a really interesting look through a really rich worldview and hopefully a paradigm that we can be starting to think about enacting or learning more about what it might look like in reality.

So let's just get right into this interesting set of topics.

I'm Daniel and I'm a postdoc in California.

And I'll pass it to John just to introduce himself and this series.

Thanks for coming on, John.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Daniel.

I appreciate it.

I'm happy to be here with you, actually.

So we're going to talk in this series about a series of papers that I just published in the journal Sustainability.

That series is titled Science-Driven Societal Transformation.

And it covers a lot of material.

All three papers are kind of lengthy, so that's one of the reasons that we wanted to kind of have some time together, talk out loud, and cover some of the main points.

I am a data science by training, just as a little background, actually PhD in cancer biology, essentially.

And also, I'm a courtesy faculty at Oregon State University.

So this series of papers is published under my affiliation with OSU.

And they just came out at the end of last year and this spring.

All right, so I think the jam board has links, I won't bother to give the links to them.

There's also a little short survey, a short summary paper in science x that the link is there.

So you can also check that out.

And I would like to say that for for additional information, you can go to the project web page, which is French principled societies project.org.

And there you'd find links for all the papers and a bunch of other material.

Also a live simulation model you could play with too.


SPEAKER_01:
John, let me just ask about the three paper format, because like three first author papers in sequence, it's kind of a, there has to be a story there.

So just how did it come to be?


SPEAKER_00:
The story is I'm verbose.

No, there's more to it than that.

You know,

I had some ideas in mind.

I mean, obviously, that's what the series is about.

But I had some ideas in mind of what transformation might look like and how we might get there.

But I think the ideas are fairly unusual.

And I didn't want to just put them in a short paper because without background,

I think that the ideas could have been easily misinterpreted or misunderstood.

So I felt it necessary to explain the background in more detail about what the proposal actually is and what the concept is.

The whole series as a whole is kind of a proposal for an R&D project, a science-driven R&D project aimed at societal transformation.

But it's a little bit more than that, actually.

It's a way to think about transformation, a context for how we might go about societal transformation and what that looks like and why we would even want to bother with the concept in the first place.

So it just was too much to fit in one paper.

And I had originally written it, put it all in one paper, and then I could see that wasn't going to work out.

It was going to be way too long.

So I split it up.

And I'm very happy that the journal Sustainability was willing to publish this.

They were quite interested.

So, so that all worked out really quite well.

And maybe I should say to this work represents about 10 years of my efforts.

This is kind of the, in a sense, the culmination of 10 years of my thinking on this topic.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool, really interesting, and I'm sure we'll hear more about some of those threads.

So just the first slide on this Jamboard, which people are welcome to join if they're watching live or if they're looking at the replay.

The first slide is capturing how we're gonna go through these three parts of the triptych, the paper series,

in order at this same time slot 3 p.m pacific for the next three weeks and then we're going to be having those group discussions so we're going to kind of pour over these papers but who knows maybe take a few tangents as well and this principledsocietiesproject.org website is where more information can be found so let's just maybe start with a little background before we jump into the paper on just what

collaborative dialogue has to do with all of this?

Why are we structuring it this way and experimenting with it this way?

And just how does dialogue fit in, in specific or in general to what you're talking about and thinking about?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, you know, as I mentioned, the series is kind of a R&D proposal for an R&D project.

And while it's important that the concept as a whole move forward, at least it's important to me, and funding, you know, we secure some funding for this project so it can move forward.

Perhaps the biggest thing that has to happen is just the concept, a few concepts, a few primary concepts that I talk about.

Just getting those concepts articulated out to the science world and to the public.

That may be, you know, if I die and that's all that ever happens from this, just that those concepts become talked about more frequently in the public discussion, then I probably have done my job.

Obviously, I hope it goes a little further than that, but that's the place to start, and maybe that's the most important thing.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Where would just citizen science or participatory science dialogue with really inclusive participation play a role in the R&D programs of the future in what you're kind of thinking about?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so...

I frame this R&D program, it's conceptual at the time, it's not funded yet.

I'm hoping that we can secure funds.

But I frame it as a partnership between this global science community and local communities.

So dialogue with the public and within the science community and among interested stakeholders is extremely important in this.

To me, science has a role in such an R&D program because science is really where we would turn to answer some really difficult questions.

Like if you wanted to build a simulation model of how the environmental or

environmental or economic outcomes might be given, you know, A, B, C, and D, well, then, you know, that's a technical, those are technical questions.

If you're asking how can we measure, what kind of metrics are reasonable for environmental and social well-being, those are largely scientific questions.

You know, the math can be complicated, for example.

But the questions of what do we want?

What do people want?

How do they want to live their lives in society?

Those are questions for the public and for communities especially.

The intention of the R&D program is not to develop

one-size-fits-all solution, you know, to trial it in a local community and then spread it everywhere.

That's not at all the idea.

The idea is that this is an ongoing learning process, a true partnership between local communities and the science community.

And there would be just a million sorts of, you know, experiments that one might run.

to improve the kinds of societal systems that we have, or that we're, you know, that we're proposing.

Develop a new system, try it out, see how it works, gather data, you know, do another experiment, all within the partnership with local communities at the local community level.

I think maybe, since I know this stuff so well, I think that maybe I'm already jumping ahead of some concepts that this all might become clear as we talk a little bit more.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

Well, this slide was just to show that there's a bunch of questions that could almost apply to every stage of this model and to every stage of this conversation.

Like, what are we doing here?

What is our goal here?

What are the next steps?

And how is active inference coming into play?

Not that active inference good, not active inference bad.

We're going to go a little bit deeper than that.

But what does this have to do with actually having impact will be something that will be cool because what we're talking about is really new syntheses of the theoretical and the applied.

So that means that we're always like looking to staple across the divide in new ways with the questions that we're asking and the teams that we're working on, the projects and everything.

So maybe we can go to the fourth slide and to kind of frame this research line.

What is the issue?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, yeah.

So obviously the word transformation is in the title of the series.

So, you know, the general topic is societal transformation.

And that term alone is a little bit, you know, people have different ideas of what societal transformation means.

So I want to make a few things clear.

Especially in the second paper, I make the distinction between reform and transformation.

And by reform, I mean anything that would improve our governance system, improve our economic system, improve our legal system.

One example might be levying taxes on the wealthy or something, and then using those fees to provide medical services or something.

or altering how long a representative can be in Congress, in the legislature, or something like that, or ways to vote, or things like that.

Really, those are all what I would consider reforms.

And I'm interested in a different question.

I'm interested in the question, out of all conceivable ways to organize the societal systems, and by societal systems, I really focus on a few of them, governance systems, economic systems, legal systems, educational systems, and I think maybe one or two others.

I view those systems as the cognitive architecture of a society.

That is, that's how society thinks through those systems.

It learns, it adapts, it decides, and evolves kind of through that kind of cognitive architecture.

And my question is, out of all possible conceivable ways

For example, out of all conceivable economic systems, what ones might be best for demonstrably showing that they excel at improving or maintaining social environmental well-being?

So even there, we have the concept of a fitness coming into this.

That is, out of all conceivable systems, which are the most fit for purpose?

And now soon we can talk about what purpose might be.

But that is a new question.

That is a question that's hardly been asked in the history.

And I think maybe it's only now that science has the tools and the theoretical understandings that maybe this is right.

Maybe it is time that we can talk about the purpose of a society and how fit a given system design might be.


SPEAKER_01:
Very interesting because in active inference land, we're really familiar with talking about policy selection, but we're coming at it from the angle of model policy or simulations policy.

But that kind of question about policy setting and then sensemaking, again, maybe different groups use kind of different terms, but all that sensemaking and problem solving has been siloed.

and the fact that there's not uh connection and common frameworks to bridge as you're placing it in one integrated brain like societal systems as a cognitive architecture that's not going to work if the different sections are not

properly having their within and between connections working and we're seeing all these different sectors all these little regions of the brain health governance political legal justice education scientific analytical economic financial monetary you could go to a news site and on any given day see all of these things changing

So very prescient to think about how the total system is going to be changing and finding new stable states.

Otherwise it's going to be just on a spiral, probably not in the right direction.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

As it seems to be, unfortunately.

Yeah.

Yes, so the idea is, can we design societal systems, like economic and other systems, such that the set of them, the set that is the cognitive architecture for society, can we design them so that they are serving the same purpose, that they are integrated, not separate systems?

I think you were sort of referring to that a second ago.

But the idea here is an integrated set of systems that serve a common purpose and for which a fitness evaluation, a fitness score can be made.


SPEAKER_01:
Is that something that we're going to return to is like, how do we define common purpose?

How do we make this?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, we're going to get, we're going to get, we're going to get into that.

We're just sort of doing some warmups here.

There's, you know, unfortunately there's the, I mean, maybe somebody might do, it might help to read this whole series twice because the first time you are like getting just

the kind of the big picture context thing like oh what's this what's this what's this then maybe on the second time around is a little more clear like ah this fits in that's just talked about in the first paper but it really fits in in the third paper nice so there's just so many there's just so many concepts here it's a little uh it's a little chaotic at first as we cover some of these things


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

But the framing of the problem is not dissimilar than any number of other perspectives.

It really synthesizes a lot.

And there's a ton of scholarship in the paper.

So really, I would recommend reading it before imagining that it does or doesn't say something.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, please.


SPEAKER_01:
I get that a lot.

yeah oh you must you must have meant this but i'm not done with the paper just fyi um here on slide five there's the science x link that people could click to and what is this about or what was this um showing


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is just a short little summary article that Science X published of mine.

And maybe I don't want to be boring, but I might want to talk about these seven points.


SPEAKER_01:
These seven points on the right there are actually a summary of... Sounds awesome because people who might like to read it or hear it, both modalities, and you're really going to unpack it in a new way.

So no worries about even stating it the way you stated it.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, good.

All right.

So these are the seven main thrusts of the series.

So this is the spoiler alert.

So number one, societal transformation is necessary if we're to avoid catastrophe and maintain and improve social and ecological well-being.

That's the starting.

That's where this whole thing starts.

That transformation is necessary.

Number two, one kind of societal transformation is a science-driven transformation.

You can imagine all kinds of, there could be war, revolution could be a type of transformation.

And I'm not talking about revolution here.

I'm talking about a science-driven, evidence-based development of and migration to fundamentally new systems.

So we're talking about de novo design from scratch.

So we're not improving capitalism, for example, or representative democracy.

We're looking at conceivable de novo designs that might be fit or among the most fit of all possible designs.

Number three is if I were a genius, which I'm not, but if I were a genius and I came up with the greatest plan that we could rearrange society according to this design,

If there were no way to, practical way to implement that, then I would have been wasting my time.

So a big part of this series is actually, especially paper number two, is really focused on what is a, how could this actually be done in the real world?

How can you do this?

So I claim at least that there is a viable and affordable way to go about transformation that within a reasonable span of time,

and I consider 50 year program here to be a reasonable span of time, transformation could spread to near global levels.

So, you know, we're talking about a concerted effort over a long period of time to reach a global scale change, but that does not mean that no change happens until the 49th year.

It means that change happens exponentially fast

So maybe in the first few years, there's not a lot going on, but it goes exponentially fast from there.

And those communities, local communities that participate in this R&D program would obviously be the first to reap the benefits.

Number four, and this is maybe one of the key worldview aspects of this.

Paper number one is all about worldview.

The proposed program views society as a cognitive organism and its societal systems as a cognitive architecture.

So that, if indeed society is a cognitive organism and our systems are part of the cognitive architecture, that already lends itself to ideas of how you might measure fitness.

We're starting to get an idea of what is a system supposed to do.

So we'll be getting more into that today.

Number five, the intrinsic purpose of a society.

Obviously, if we're going to build a new system, we have to know what is a new system supposed to do?

Like, what is an economic system supposed to do?

What is a governance system supposed to do?

What is the purpose of them?

So purpose is also a big part of the worldview in the first paper.

And one of the points of the fifth point is that the intrinsic purpose of a society, of societal cognition, and thus also of societal systems, is to achieve and sustainably maintain social and ecological viability and vitality, broadly defined.

If you're listening carefully and you're of the active inference persuasion, you'll already see active inference in here.

When we talk about sustainably maintain, that means anticipation of the future.

All right.

I also say here the cognition is largely focused on reducing the uncertainty that our intrinsic purpose will be successfully fulfilled now and in the expected future.

So again, we have a concept from active inference that is uncertainty.

The cognitive view opens up many new opportunities for research, and I feel like this view is really critical if we are to truly have some kind of optimally beneficial societal systems.

And number seven, the last one, this proposed R&D program, like I already mentioned, it's conceptual now, but it represents a partnership between local communities and the global science community.

And neither of those are monolithic.

The global science community is however you might want to envision it.

a hundred labs or a thousand labs around the world or individual researchers or groups of researcher teams, interdisciplinary teams at one institution, teams across institutions.

That is really who I'm speaking.

In this series, I'm speaking to the science world and I'm suggesting or offering or hoping that the science community might find this perspective interesting and see the benefits that would be, the scientific benefits that would come of this, the research gains that would come of this

the possibilities that would come with this, and get engaged.

So it's kind of like I'm asking the science community to get engaged in this problem.

And in a particular kind of way, in what some people have called a second, well, the phrase escapes me in the moment.

I forget what the...

What is the title there?

I'm going to just call it second order science, but I think there's a slightly different phrase.


SPEAKER_01:
Very interesting.

I remember reading this.

Second order, yeah.

Yeah, second order science.

So what is second order science?

And I'm sure we're going to, again, go into it in this fractal convo, but what is second order science and how does everyone play a role in it?


SPEAKER_00:
Right, so traditional science would be first order science is the scientist is removed

from the experiment, is an observer to the experiment.

Maybe the scientist sets up the experiment, but then steps back and watches the results unfold and just observes the results and then does statistics or whatever on the results and records the knowledge gain.

The aim of that is to build knowledge.

And that's wonderful and fantastic and terribly useful and important.

And that is mostly what science has done over the last few hundred years or so.

Second order science is a little bit different.

It is the science, I would say, that is really appropriate for today, for our problems today.

In second order science, the aim is to change the system.

It's more about unfoldment of an experiment rather than getting to the end, a certain goal of an experiment.

The scientist is part of the experiment.

It's reflective in nature.

It's intrinsically reflective.

And it really represents a partnership between the science world and the stakeholders.

So it's a little bit more like engineering in a sense.

has more of a flavor of engineering in that there's a group of stakeholders who want some, you know, want something to happen.

And the science world is engaged in building that.

But it's part of it's like a, you know, series of learning together, and reflecting on what is important and what is a value.

So it's very much value driven, which, which is unlike first order science is not particularly value driven.

So the the, the aim is to change and is value driven.

And the science scientists are part of the experiment.


SPEAKER_02:
Hmm.


SPEAKER_01:
really interesting.

That reminds me of working for the first time really closely with someone outside of academia, and then their insistence to include stakeholders in the conversation very early.

And that was something that I didn't see as a practice around me in academia.

So I didn't see it as an affordance.

I didn't see it as an opportunity in my projects.

And then when I kind of was like, well, I could contact

anyone early on potentially and maybe even include them in the project that's um then you realize how closely clustered all of the current communication and research is in development on not that axis so it really just casts a stark light on how a lot of these information uh

projects have been organized.

And so it's really interesting.

And as you pointed out, like there still is a role for the first order of science because it's sometimes you need to make the measurement like first order cybernetics, the thermometer, we need to keep the temperature range.

Second order, is it the right thermometer?

Third order, should we even be tracking a thermometer?

There's a space for all of it.


SPEAKER_00:
What do we really want?

What do we really value?

Yeah.

And maybe I should just inject here, too, that if the science world is going to be involved in a value question,

It really just has to be like transparent, out front, like this is what we're doing, as opposed to more, you know, obtuse.

We're actually making value statements, but we're sort of hiding them in first order science language, you know, so it just has to be transparent.

This is what we're doing.

This is what it's about.

We're learning together.

We're evolving solutions to real problems that humanity has.

And everything is like transparent and clear and above board.

And if it's done that way, then it's, I think, could be extremely useful.

And it is just what the world needs, actually, because there are serious, serious, as we'll talk about, you know, like overwhelmingly serious problems that we face.

I don't know how or if we can solve them.

And if we're not engaging, you know, the scientific world, some of the brightest minds on the planet, if we're not engaging them,

then, you know, we're not going to get the kind of solutions that might be, you know, I mean, we're better off engaging the science world in these questions, along with communities, right?


SPEAKER_01:
Because that Yep, I was talking to you.


SPEAKER_00:
No, no, that's fine.

That's fine.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Yeah, yeah.

Okay.

Just one short on that is it's actually a really respectful way for science to approach this question of like, we'll be ready as scientists or as systems thinkers or as modelers, we'll come to the table of policy and value discussion when we have a transparent model that's actually going to be adding value rather than potentially being a vector for some

non-transparent force to have undue influence on discussions that really matter so it's it's um i hope this conversation helps people rethink how science could be involved in these policy discussions because those are going to be the exact terms that we're going to be talking through so right right and when we talk about the second paper we'll get more we'll talk a little bit more about uh second order science and its role and there's citations there for anyone that's that's interested

Nice.

So here we go to number six.

Why transform?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So, um, I mean, I, I'm, I'm guessing that, uh, for your audience, you know, the, the, the, the, the, your audience probably has a general sense of things are not good.

You know, things are not moving in the right direction.

And I think maybe lots of the public has the sense that things are not good, not moving in the right direction.

And climate change is certainly part of that.

On the ecological theme, climate change and biodiversity loss are perhaps two of the biggest challenges that humanity faces now and over the next, say, 1,000 years or something.

But our problems go deeper than that.

It's not just that the temperature is warming.

It's not just that the birds are dying and the insects are dying.

It also has to do with social issues, poverty, for example, financial instability, and all the social problems that climate change and biodiversity loss and other things are going to bring.

Already with COVID, I think, the split between the rich and the poor in the world is getting even larger than it was, and it was already disgustingly large.

um there's a question of power you know why do why why does it in a sense if we think of money as a voting tool why is it that a billionaire has a billion times more power to decide what society should be like than i do you know like there's questions like that there's just fairness questions of fairness

There's questions of decision-making.

Who actually makes decisions?

Like how much of society is involved when society makes a decision?

There's all these questions.

And all of them can be, I think, addressed together in an R&D program like this.

And we have to address them.

I don't think there's a...

an option of not transforming.

So voices for transforming, for some kind of bold transformation, are getting louder and louder, both in academia, at the global scope, global policymakers at the UN and other folks like that, just within the general public, even within some municipalities, city-states, local governments, and even the national governments.

there is a rising chorus of voices saying we need to transform and we need to go big and we need to change things kind of radically somehow so that we can get what we want.

So 50 years from now, my children can be enjoying a better world, not a dying world.

Now, that doesn't mean that I'm going to jump just a little bit ahead here.

That doesn't mean that everyone thinks that transformation is necessary.

Lots of people don't.

Lots of people would just as soon keep everything just the way it is.

Or they just haven't thought about it maybe or whatever.

So I just want to make clear that I'm not

You know, it's fine.

People, you know, people can fall wherever they fall on the spectrum.

But the paper, the NDR&D program is really aimed at that percent of the, you know, the population and the science population that is interested in bold change.

And it doesn't really...

need, the R&D program really doesn't need the rest of the world to even engage or pay attention to this.

The R&D program is designed to be successful even if a small slice of the population participates.

So that was a long story to say that we face severe social and ecological risks, and they're getting worse.

I do want to mention one more, that kind of secondary risks that we will be facing more of

Already we have forced migration problems, people fleeing lack of economic opportunity and fleeing violence and things like that.

But you can imagine that if that's happening today and climate change hasn't really even hit yet and biodiversity loss really hasn't even hit badly yet, or at least this hasn't hit widespread badly,

Where are we going to be in 10 years?

There's going to be millions.

I read a paper, and I'm sorry I don't remember the citation, but I read a paper that said that possibly a third of the global population could be migrants in the future, in the coming decades.

I mean, that's billions of people have to go somewhere.

And we are not prepared at all, like in America or really anywhere, we're not prepared to absorb those people, bring them into some kind of productive, engaged society where we're all working together and cooperating to address the needs of society.

We're not anywhere near that.

And maybe I'll mention one more, too, because it's one that people don't usually think of.

But even if there's no catastrophe, even if things plug along as they're going and there's no mass die-off of humans or anything like that, the population is set to decline.

I don't know when the peak is supposed to come, but the peak is supposed to come within the next 10, 20 years or so.

After that the world population will start to decline, how is how is this growth capitalism model growth space capitalism model, how is that going to function when the world is shrinking.

You know so there's there's just there's there's there's short term issues there's long term issues.

there, there's just, I would say overwhelming evidence that what we're doing is not sustainable on any level.

And if we don't do something, it's going to lead to to even greater catastrophe.


SPEAKER_01:
I have a few questions.

One just from the chat.

They wrote the science community here seems to be referring to the natural rather than the social sciences.

So it seems more like this is about STEM and technology.

So maybe where do the social sciences fit into this


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, in the second paper, I give a laundry list of fields, scientific fields, that I think could really contribute to this project.

And it's essentially A to Z, from anthropology to zoology, like really every branch.

And not only every branch of science, but art, media.

There would be room for every kind

branch of this human endeavor to get involved with this thing agriculture and psychology and public health and you know sociology and all that would just be like at the moment you know as i said this is not a funded

program.

But if it were funded, I anticipate that either the organization would act as a clearinghouse for funding for proposals or there would be some kind of mechanism set up to distribute funds or I'm not sure exactly how that would work.

But it would be my hope that funds are distributed to literally every branch of science and then beyond science.

to, like I said, to art and to literature and to, you know, all of that stuff.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, then let me ask one more question on this slide.

So the communities that are likely to institute, for example, the flood prevention, some sustainable strategy, they're going to be in a flood area or they're where the sea levels are changing, for example.

So when we think about cognitive architectures, what kinds of individuals or teams or communities or systems cognitively are like the early canary in the coal mine that you think are ready to transform or somebody who might hear something about a system they're involved in and think, actually, yeah, that sounds like my organization or self might be at this sort of transition point.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

If one looks around on the web and elsewhere, there are numerous kind of experiments going on in a variety of things, in new forms of representative democracy, new forms of decision-making, new forms of economies in the sense of local digital currencies and things like that.

I think all of those are,

excellent resource to draw from.

of the task is then is to take these ideas, these ideas that are springing up all over and integrate them in a way that is functional, you know, can serve a community.

Initially, maybe the community is small, just a few thousand, but the idea is that it would grow over time, exponentially grow to who knows, you know, hundreds of thousands, millions, I don't know.

So how can you take all those ideas and actually make them work?

Sometimes I liken it to, you know, you might tinker in the garage with an airplane.

You know, you might build a two-seater in the garage, and that's totally cool.

You know, you can, you know, maybe what the Wright brothers did or something.

That's fantastic.

But I'm really interested in building a jumbo jet that takes, you know, 500 passengers at a time in an hour and a half from New York to London or whatever and doesn't fall in the ocean, you know.

So how do you do that?

How do you build an integrated system that is safe, that is resilient, that has metrics that you can monitor progress, that has

good anticipation so you know where you're going tomorrow.

Where is this going?

What's going to happen tomorrow?

And sort of what's going to happen to me?

That's part of the question.

So I think the challenge is to take all these ideas that are popping up all over, some really great ideas,

and then to integrate them into a coherent whole that spans every one of the, I think maybe is it six systems that I talk about, so that they're not designed in silos.

We're not just building a new economic system.

We're not just building a new educational system.

We're building a cognitive architecture that includes all of those.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome response.

Awesome response.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, we're moving slowly.

It's totally fine.

So this slide, this again is the topic of why transform, and we only got the first paragraph so far.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, nice.

Okay, we'll stay on six.

We got a ways to go on six.

We can continue on.

You can just summarize in one sentence or however you want to do it, but up to you.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, very well, I'll try to go a little quick through the rest.

Most of that discussion on is on humanity faces severe social and ecological risks.

The next one is our systems are dysfunctional, as is, and I would say that is evidenced by the fact that we are under extreme threat.

Like, you know, what kind of sensible, healthy

puts themselves on an alleged hanging by their fingertips I mean like that's not something's wrong you know like you don't do that a competent cognitively competent society does not push itself to what it could literally be the the early stage extinction of

You know, there's something deeply wrong, deeply dysfunctional that we find ourselves in the situation that we're now in.

And we can do far better.

We must do far better, obviously, if we're going to thrive and survive.

And not only that, but as we talk about purpose, we actually long.

It would make us deeply.

Deeply happy to do better, to solve problems, to be more engaged with a healthy society, to really feel like there's a deep cooperation happening in society.

That would, you know, our hearts would burst, you know, of joy, sort of.

We would be happier if we were a part of a society like that.

It's very stressful.

We were designed by, you know, evolution.

Through evolution, we have become, we were, really, every organism, as we'll talk about in a minute, is a problem-solving organism.

And if it can't solve problems, there's like a, you know, like fundamentally going against the grain of what it means to be an organism.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

All right.

Good.


SPEAKER_00:
Shall we go on to the next one?


SPEAKER_01:
You can go to the third part or do you want to go to slide seven?


SPEAKER_00:
What is the third part?

Well, I was kind of the, I think that was about it.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

Let's go to slide seven.

So John, what is this series?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I'm glad you asked.

Oh, I have a script.

Don't worry.

So as I've mentioned already, the series really is a proposal for an R&D program aimed at the de novo development of new societal systems.

And it's also a way to context and a way to think about what transformation might mean.

So it is a long-term project, like a 50-year project.

It would be dangerous to change society radically overnight.

So this is a long-term project for long-term benefit.

And then early communities that become involved early in that process would, of course, see benefits quite early.

And there are, I already mentioned that we cover six primary societal systems.

So that's the cognitive architecture.

Once again, they are economic, governance, legal, public health, and what I call analytical forecasting and education.

And any one of those can be broken down further, like economic really also includes a monetary system and the financial system and things like that.

So six primary societal systems.

The idea is out of all conceivable designs, what might work best?

The whole project is based on three underlying propositions.

The papers are and the project.

First is that a society of any scale, and I don't mean society as in millions or billions of people, I mean society as in a thousand people, like a sub-city, a community that is not even a whole city, just a group of like-minded people who are willing to give this a field trial a go.

A society of any scale can be viewed as a super organism.

So that's kind of fundamental.

Everything really, really works from there.

We are together.

We are not just individuals connected.

We are a whole.

Society is a whole.

And it's a whole with the environment and its wider sphere.

So as we'll talk about today, even the idea of an individual is, it's okay to talk about individuals is fine, but it's kind of like a arbitrary thing.

An individual could be an individual cell or an individual person or an individual species or an individual ecosystem, but it's all deeply,

embedded and enmeshed, entwined with the whole.

So a society can be viewed as a superorganism.

A society's complete set of systems, as we've already said, the six big systems I've mentioned, can be viewed as a cognitive architecture.

It's the means by which a society learns, decides, adapts.

And this society's efforts, this is the third underlying position, the society's efforts to learn, decide, and adapt, and be viewed as being driven by an intrinsic purpose.

And that's really key also, because it's not just that we're learning, deciding, and adapting willy-nilly.

I mean, maybe it seems that way in the world.

In a sense, we're so dysfunctional, it kind of is willy-nilly.

But what really matters is that we learn, decide, and adapt in relation to whatever intrinsic purpose we actually have as a society, as individuals in a society.

It's that.

It's, as I will use the term maybe several times today, it's solving problems that matter, that really matter.

That's what we're after.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Well, on this super organism point, as someone who studied ants and still studies the eusocial insects, this kind of multi-scale thinking is really fun.

It's just always such an interesting question.

What level does purpose exist at?

So is it that purpose exists at every level, like the cell, the nestmate, the colony, the colony and its symbiont, and its predator prey, and the microbes in the niche, and then where you draw the sort of qualia, like philosophy lines.

It's a whole debate.

It's a whole thing.

Yeah, it is.

It's rich.

It is rich, but then also there's these systems...

kind of systems mapping approach that albeit coldly does sidestep those questions and i think part of the humanism is about how to bring these multi-scale questions and multi-scale perspectives which are basically neutral tools because one's preference vector and active inference could be to lose money i mean then i guess you know good job but

We have to have the preference vector.

And then what will be interesting to draw out, I think, in these discussions will be just like you said, with the transparency of the values.

What does it look like to actually specify values within a model based framework and take the bold step from just like I trust my models and I'm a fan of liberty to I trust my model about liberty and I'm willing to let that model

drive for a little bit with respect to my decisions so that's really like such an interesting handoff and that's also new and related to technology that's evolving so like you're bringing a lot of ideas together i hope people are you know listening to it and finding it exciting or maybe we'll just jump ahead a little bit here


SPEAKER_00:
is as far as a preference vector, I took pains not to suggest a preference vector of any kind in this series.

It wouldn't be very useful for me to do that, for one thing.

But for those listeners who are active inference fans, having only

preference vector is, is maybe I should say, having a having a check off list, like, you know, there should be this level of education, there should be this level of health, people should live this long.

And so we have our fitness, and we're gonna, we've decided in advance, even before the system is running, we've now have a list of things we're going to check off, we're going to score each one.

We're going to come up with some kind of integrated fitness score from that.

And that's how we're going to move forward.

We're always going to refer to this fitness model and this fitness vector and these kind of hard-coded values for what's good and what's bad.

So in the world of artificial intelligence and in the world of active inference, that really doesn't go very far.

That doesn't work.

That doesn't work very well.

Because what happens is you didn't think ahead.

Something happens tomorrow, and whoever came up with that list of those values or that model didn't really include the fact that maybe spaceships from Mars were going to land and cause a new disruption, and we have to deal with that problem now, too, before we deal with anything else.

So that wasn't in the plan, and now what do we do?

So there's...

Right, so this is really where active inference plays into, that's one way that active inference plays into this, is how do you evaluate and act in a world that is full of uncertainties?


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

The unknown unknown.

Maybe the unknown unknown is the temperature dynamics, but you know it's going to be temperature.

And so how can you plan for what you know it will be in a distributional sense and make stabilization on that?


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right.

So you realize, you know, already you realize maybe that this is not a proposal to build a, say, like a model of, you know, like how society makes decisions.

You know, that's not it.

It is, what is the process by which society cognates?

And what kind of infrastructure and tools and mechanics can we use that would facilitate that?

But it's not to build a thing.

It's to realize that we are engaged moment to moment in a cognitive process, society as individuals are.

And how can we do that together as a society so that we're, you know, we balance exploration with exploitation, you know, so that we learn about our environment, we grow, we learn, we explore, we make good decisions based on available evidence and based on knowledge, based on cultural knowledge, you know, like all those things.

Right.

So, so this is a, this is the, the, the, the, you know, I think organisms are a process.

They're not a thing anyway, right?

Cognition is a process and societal decision-making is a process and really society is a process.

You know, there's, there's not too many things in this world.

There's mostly processes, living processes, intelligent processes.

So that's the hope.

That's where this is trying to go is to like, with that in mind, with that broad understanding or broad concept in mind, how do we think about

You know, how we come together as a society, how we cooperate, how we coordinate, how we make decisions, how we learn, how we explore, what do we monitor, what kind of information do we seek, you know, what kind of experiments do we do, all that kind of stuff.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

Do you want to go to that?

Seeks answers to two questions?


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yeah, yeah.

That's the last one on the slide.

So the two questions that we hopefully would try to answer with this R&D program is, and one of this I already mentioned, but out of all conceivable designs for societal systems.

So this isn't about capitalism versus socialism or something like that.

I would think there's an unlimited

potential we're creative we're creative people there would be a million varieties of of societal systems and integrated societal systems that we might come up with and some of those probably would work very well and some of them probably would work very poorly um so among those what what might be among the best and not the the single best that's not the purpose either it's not just to find one thing that works is to find like a

you know, more of a variety, a process of things, a mishmash of things that communities can choose to implement that, you know, works well for them and that suits them and that works well for their neighbors and works well for the whole, really.

Second question is, of course, the kicker is not only what systems might be best, but how would you possibly implement them?

What viable way is there to implement new system designs?

Otherwise, what's the purpose?

This isn't just an academic excursion.

This is like, let's change the world.

And that has to be practical and has to be viable.

So those are the two questions.

What might be best and how do we get there?


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Well, it really does, I think, read like you've turned it over a lot and communicated with a lot of people about it.

So yeah, we can go to eight.


SPEAKER_00:
Should we go to the next one?

Yep.

Slide eight.

OK, so let's suppose your listeners are with me and we kind of agree like, OK, yes, transformation is necessary.

And again, I want to emphasize I'm not talking about reform.

I'm not talking about a softer, better capitalism.

I'm not talking about improved voter registration or any of those things.

I'm talking about de novo, starting over from scratch, what might be best.

And if it turns out that the old systems were better than anything that humanity can come up with, well, you know, that's the answer.

I can't imagine that's true because the old systems were never designed in any kind of, you know, thoughtful science driven, you know, process to test, to explore and to come up with fitness.

Like what is the, you know, we don't even have a fitness for our current society, much less a fitness for societal designs.

I mean, we have the GDP, but that's a terrible, terrible limited fitness metric.

Okay, so suppose you're with me suppose we're we're on board we we want to do this de novo design thing where do we start what's the what's what where do we even get off the ground on this and I suggest that the way to do it is through first address worldview.

from worldview, once we understand what the worldview is, what a reasonable, useful worldview will be for this project, then purpose derives, worldview begets purpose.

Once you understand what it is you want, what you value, what do you value?

Once you understand what you value, then you can say, well, I value A, and therefore the purpose is to

have a manifest in society, for example.

So once you have purpose, then you can think about what metrics, how would you measure?

So here's a new design.

Is it fit for purpose?

Does it fulfill its purpose?

That's the question.

and then metrics go with some kind of fitness evaluation and then finally last of all of those would be the design okay we know what we know what we value we know what this thing is supposed to do we know what the purpose is we know that a tractor is supposed to you know plow the ground or something we know what this is supposed to do we know how to measure success and uh now

Finally, then let's talk about design.

What are the specifics and mechanics, and how does that happen?

And the series is really kind of laid out this way.

The first paper really talks about worldview and purpose.

The second paper talks about more of the mechanics of things, like viability, how would you make this thing viable, things like that.

And then the very last paper that's subtitled design.

Okay, so that's how we, and maybe I will just mention here that I put metrics before design because we might have some ideas, getting back to that preference vector, we might have some ideas like we would like people not to die at 30.

We would like people to mostly live to a ripe old age and have enough water to drink and food to eat and all that kind of stuff.

So, you know, what kind of design once now that we have metrics to measure that kind of stuff, longevity and nutrition and things, what kind of designs would help us to reach those targets, you know?

So that's one reason why design why metrics comes before design.

Okay, so now we can start to jump into the, you know, now we start to jump into this topic of worldview, the very first one, worldview and purpose.

And I think we're on page 10 maybe of the first paper so far.

We've still got a long ways to go.

Nice.

OK, so what I've tried to do in the main theme of this first paper is I've tried to lay out a worldview that is cognizant of, that reflects some of the latest developments in science and in a variety of fields in science.

And those fields would be like complex systems science,

cognitive science, evolutionary biology, you know, a few fields like that, information theory and a few things like that.

I've tried to outline a worldview that makes sense from that leading edge of science.

And I would say too that science has gone through really kind of a revolution.

It's kind of like there's the pre-1950s slash 60s science, and then there's what we have today.

And there's enormous jumps, enormous leaps in understanding that have happened

just in the last, say, 50 years or so.

And some of those leaps, the ramifications are only now being felt.

Some of the concepts are a distinct shift from where we were in the pre-1960s or pre-1970s or so.

And obviously, we see the changes in our lifetime.

I was watching an old show on TV the other day, and somebody put money in a payphone.

They put a quarter in a payphone to make a telephone call.

And it's like, OK, well, that's history.

So there's all these technologies that I grew up with that don't even exist anymore.

They've been replaced by entirely new frameworks.

And that's the speed of that evolution is exponential.

So it's tremendous changes happening very quickly.

And the task of the program


SPEAKER_01:
Oh yeah, just one point on that would be, potentially because you're taking such a broad perspective with complex system science and evolutionary bio, you might say that society has always been a cognitive architecture.

But if you had asked in 1500, is society a cognitive architecture?

You'd be like, well, no, I mean, you have agriculture, you have this, you have this, you have that.

Whereas now if you tell people, hey, telecoms are...

they run through everything and the internet of things, the internet of people, like all this sort of stuff.

And you tell people, actually, it's a multi-scale cognitive architecture.

Humans are in the loop and our algorithms are never independent from us.

They're in feedback with us.

It's like, yeah, that was what the mainstream was telling me.

So actually it's a total alignment point because it reflects how rapidly things are changing.

That it's just undeniably obvious that the communication infrastructure is the system that we're engineering.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

Right.

Absolutely.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Communications have mind-blowing changes in communications, and that brings mind-blowing changes in outlook.

But I want to emphasize a few points to this worldview that, you know, it's not just that everything is connected.

Like, you know, I know what a complex system is.

It just means everything is connected and we're all kind of whole and blah, blah, blah.

Okay.

Fine.

But even for people who are in that ilk, who understand the basic concept there,

there's ideas that have come out in the last decade or so that are even pushing that boundary.

And I just want to highlight a few concepts here.

And I think active inference really is like, in a sense, a culmination of some of these ideas or an embodiment of some of these ideas.

The main thing I want to say is that life is intelligent and whole.

So it's not just that everything's connected.

It's that everything is intelligent.

Everything is, you know, life is an intelligent information processing thing.

Everything is intelligent.

adapting learning deciding whether we're talking about everything is cognitive you know and cognition really implies information and information processing so whether we're talking about a slime mold

or a human, there's in everything, in plants, in bacteria, in mold, in anything that has any life at all that can be considered alive is intelligent and is learning and reacting, not just reacting, but learning, reacting, and also deciding and acting and remembering and all those things.

And you might ask, well, that's impossible.

bacteria doesn't have a brain.

It can't be cognitive, but it is cognitive.

But we just have to relax how we define cognition.

On the slide, I have

little thing there that every organism is cognitive in the sense that it displays capacities typically associated with human cognition such as sensing learning problem-solving memory storage and recall anticipation anticipations is key to everything and attention is key to everything so every organism does that plants and everything else and it doesn't require a central nervous system

And I might add to this that not only is every organism cognitive, but essentially every organism is cooperative too.

Those cooperation and cognition go hand in hand because

Any intelligent organism, any organism that can act to better its viability is going to cooperate in meaningful ways with other organisms and other species and things like that.


SPEAKER_01:
nice point because um there's cost to communication whether it's exactly whether it's the cost of making the pheromone or just the time which is super finite or attention fundamentally and so costly interactions through time the game theory are either to exploit and stabilize which is fragile or to succeed together


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, exactly.

And succeeding together, cooperation is like everywhere.

Once you understand what you're looking for, it's in the biologic world, it's like everywhere.

So this idea that we're, you know, one person against all or, you know, we're a dog-eat-dog universe.

I mean, it's, you know, in a certain sense, it's true.

Obviously, tigers eat, you know, whatever they eat, zebras or whatever.

I mean, that happens, yes, of course, but in the larger picture and over multiple timescales, not just in five minutes, but over evolutionary timescales and developmental timescales and everything, the cooperation is really the rule for the most part.

And if any listener needs proof of that, just think of your body.

I mean, there's about a trillion, some trillion, some cells

are enormously harmonious like your blood pumps every day or you know this is a this is like a miracle I don't want to use the word miracle because I want to get into whatever that might imply but it is amazing awe-inspiring

The depth of cooperation just in our own bodies is like evolution must prefer cooperation or else there would never be such a complex pattern of cooperation as we see just in one human body.


SPEAKER_01:
Just to give one example from the bees, so from a species I study, it's almost like a sparring type of cooperation because when it was discovered that there were some workers with developed ovaries, there was a whole story about cheating and policing and about altruism and this equation says this and that equation says that.

And then when you take a step back, it's like the colony having a distribution of ovary activation may be more ecologically resilient.

so um i as an evolutionary biologist never think well my interpretation of what would be lovey-dovey in this system must be how it works because that's so clearly not true it's just to say that there are interesting dynamics within and between levels and in the long run cooperation and stable cooperation and like learning to adapt to your niche

is a winning strategy in a way that locking down just isn't but unfortunately under high um stress and uh high uncertainty conditions simple strategies can become rife so that's sort of a failure mode of a population so that's what i understand also like you know what you're saying yeah no it's uh nice if a if a species can avoid uh highly stressful situations because that's


SPEAKER_00:
often things don't go well, once you get to that point, you know, things can go awry.


SPEAKER_01:
What's that?

Do you want to go to nine or stay on eight?


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yeah, I think let's go to nine.

Let's move ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
Perfect.

What is the individual?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so why in the world would I, why would we ask this question?

And why would I spend, you know, multiple pages in this paper even discussing, like, of course we know what an individual is, right?

Or maybe not.

Like, that actually turns out to be a difficult question.

What is an individual?

And it's important to this discussion of societal systems because who are we

What is the purpose of a societal system?

Who is it supposed to serve?

So you have to ask, really.

It's good to ask.

If we're going to build a societal system, who is it that it's supposed to service?

Who are we?

What do we want?

It's part of figuring out what do we want?

What do we value?

Who are we?

Start there, I would say.

So we've already kind of touched on these themes, but this idea of rugged individualism, you know, like from a certain perspective and a certain, you know, from a limited sort of time frame perspective, sure, there's rugged individualism that exists, right?

And it can be useful in certain situations.

But by and large, that's not what life is doing.

You know, that's not what...

it's really even difficult to say, if I'm a rugged individual, where do I actually start and where do I end?

Where is me?

Even physically, it's hard to say, because this physical me is really,

I think more bacterial cells than it is human cells, right?

So like I'm a sieve, I'm a process through which things are flowing through, I'm a ecosystem myself with bacteria and viruses and human cells and all of those components are necessary for me to survive today and for humans to survive over eons.

We're like a mix.

We're a bag of human-like things and bacterial-like things and viral-like things.

And we're porous.

And we're part of the carbon cycle.

And we're part of the nitrogen cycle.

And then when you say, OK, well, how could you be a rugged individual when you're really this porous smorgasbord of things?

Right, so there was an interesting paper that came out, I cite it in paper number one, that was looking at this question of what is an individual, and they were looking at it from an information theory standpoint.

So they came up with this theory.

uh and i think do they have a name for it yeah uh information theory of individuality and they say base it's done at the bottom of the slide there and they say basically that uh you know an individual is a process just what's what we've been talking about before that propagates information from the past into the future

So that, you know, implies information flow and implies a cognitive process.

It implies the anticipation of the future and implies action.

And this thing that is an individual, it is not like it is a layered hierarchical individual.

It's like you can draw a circle around anything, you know, in a certain sense and call it an individual under, you know, with certain values.

uh definitions you know if you want to define what its markov blanket is but uh but you know we are we are we are our cells are individuals our tissues liver say is an individual um human is an individual a family is an individual you know and it just keeps expanding outward from there the society is an individual

So none of those have any kind of inherent preference levels.

There's no preference to any of those levels.

Everything's an individual, layered, interacting, overlapping individuals.

And the idea of an individual is just, where do you want to draw your circle?

And then you can talk about an individual at whatever level you want.

yeah so so that's all about information so it's all about processing information right and that's and so society is an individual and we are part of society and we're talking about societal systems and so at that level that seems to be our level of focus here at that level we can talk about society as an organism as a cognitive organism that is

propagating information from the past into the future.

And from an active inference standpoint, we can say, under the, you know, under the fitness score, whatever word you might want to use for that of reducing uncertainty.

So we act to reduce uncertainty, right?


SPEAKER_01:
One interesting point on the ant colony again, it's the example I'm coming from, is the 1911 paper by William Morton Wheeler is called the ant colony as an organism, not a super organism, because super organism implies that nestmate would be the true organism.

And that's assuming that insect with a six legged version is now the whole super organism.

Oh, well, the ant colony is society.

That whole frame is actually the shadow of what the evolutionary reality is, which is that the ant colony is an organism.

not a super organism and the answer tissues and so which level we prioritize or do we say no there's no a priori level ant is just i'm not even going to say there's anything out there called ants it's it's you how you're thinking about it or do we get lost or are we going to find a ladder in that multi-scale


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, well, the latter is active inference because it doesn't say, active inference doesn't say make an internal model of the world that is accurate, that accurately captures all the details of the world, of the universe.

That's not what the mind does.

That's not the point.

The point is to act.

under uncertainty, given some useful model of the world, act under uncertainty so that your fitness score improves

And by fitness score here, we essentially mean anticipated uncertainty.

So I would very much like to have some certainty that I'm going to be alive tomorrow.

And if it's freezing outside and I don't have a coat on, that becomes iffy.

So I'm going to be happy if I'm going to go find a coat because it is going to reduce my uncertainty about survival over the next 24 hours.

But you can expand that outward.

Right?

All organisms are acting under uncertainty.

And we can think from that perspective as a society of what are we doing and how do we measure success?

Well, we're measuring success by acting under uncertainty and then paying attention to what happens.

And then acting the same or differently or, you know, some other way or somehow then choosing to act again in this cycle of act, you know, act, process, act, process, act, process, you know, model, act, model, act, model.


SPEAKER_01:
That reminds me, of course, of the OODA, Observe, Orient, Decide, Act model and other sort of cyclic models of action and perception.

And then I would say that active inference provides a few nice little benefits over other phrasings of action and perception, qualitative and philosophical ones like inactivism, as well as quantitative ones like cybernetics and other kinds of control theory.

So I totally agree.

This is nice stuff and nice.

We can carry on if you want.

Do you want to go to 10?

Okay.

Yeah, yeah.

10.

Let's go to 10.

So everybody's listening.

You can ask questions in the live chat or you can join us in the Jamboard and flip over to slide 10.


SPEAKER_00:
So I'm thoroughly enjoying this conversation, but is it true that we have about a half hour left of it?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, we have 35.


SPEAKER_00:
Is it going that fast?


SPEAKER_01:
I believe so.

We can slice slides or move slides to another day.

So however you want to do it.

I'll try to go for a few more minutes afterwards.


SPEAKER_00:
Try to go a little quicker.

But there's so many things to say, you know, this, you know, it's one thing to read the paper and written, you know, kind of written in a, in a, in a sort of scientific terminology.

And, you know, it's, but it, but it doesn't really convey the feeling, you know, like, you have to kind of think about what is the feeling of this whole project.

And we can do that better in a conversation, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
agreed.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so, so, so then, you know, we're on this topic of what is what is our worldview?

What do we value?

And what is our purpose?

And then we've come to this question, then, okay, so who the heck are we, then we know we're, we're, and not only who are we, but who are we building these systems for?

You know, what, what is

what should societal systems serve who or what should societal systems serve and the only reasonable answer that you can come up with is that societal systems should serve the the extended self like not just the body not just the family not just the

you know, the thousand people in a society or the 10,000 or a million or whatever, but their environment, the society next door that they're engaged with and cooperating with and coordinating with, the society across the planet that they're sharing information with and learning together with.

And so it's the whole that we, our metrics as we, as later as we come to metrics, those metrics have to represent

both the cognitive process, how are we cognating?

How well are we cognating?

Are we functionally cognating?

And are we achieving, through that cognition, are we achieving the kinds of aims that is serving the whole?

Is the environment improving?

Is the quality of air improving?

Is the quality of life improving for individuals?

Yes, so we are, so this in a nutshell, this is the worldview in a way.

We are intimate with our greater world.

We are individuals, but of the nested overlapping variety, individual cells, bodies, groups, communities, ecologies, nations, and all of civilization.

We're not separate in any absolute sense, and there's no privileged level or scale to any of that.

nor are we passive bystanders in this unfolding.

This evolution is not just a chance thing, like by chance somebody does this one day and then evolution goes on another avenue.

No, there are...

There are opportunities in the environment that we can react to that lend themselves to providing information or providing gain of benefit of some kind.

And we are driven.

We are consciously creating.

And, you know, even a really great societal system, the integrated societal systems would be consciously creating, acting, cognating, acting, cognating, consciously creating it towards some goal.

And that goal then has to be, you know, the maintaining of vitality for the extended self.

All right, so that comes the slide.

That's the topic of slide 11.

And what is our purpose?

So over on the right there, I just want to reemphasize, we are anticipatory.

We are cognitive.

We are problem solvers.

We are a we.

And then I have below that, I am a we.

I am intimately connected with this.

I'm everyone in that sense, you know?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, well, yeah, the Whitman, you know, I contain multitudes and also Gilbert et al have a paper called We Were Never Individuals, kind of on that wavelength that you were talking about with the sort of distributed systems all the way down approach.

And also Dennis Noble, no privilege level of biological causality.

Similar, basically realization that multi-scale perspective, complexity science basically entails either the choice of a priori level,

like saying it is multi-scale and humans are the best scale or gaia is the scale or quantum is the right scale that's a claim as well as it being a claim actually there's no privileged level of causality so that's the sort of table as it's set


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right, right, right, right.

And you know what?

It's not that really this entire project, you could say in like a sentence, you could say that this whole project is to help us be who we are more, be more

honestly who we are more real to who we are right it's not the it's not to to have people behave in some unusual way or some ultra altruistic way or anything like that it is to it is to have it is to be more more ourselves more fully ourselves more completely ourselves and then all of these pages all these things we're talking about is who that self is who are we really


SPEAKER_01:
And it's about the adjacent possible for who we are.

Who we are is not an essence that is, there's seven seals and it's being unlocked.

It's actually something that's being drawn out through inactive realization in the niche, through niche modification, through stigmergy,

through becoming and and then the adjacent possible is where the imagination and the planning comes into play and if people are hesitant to talk about the adjacent possible for who we could be just think about chess it's the adjacent possible with a strategy on the board and we're talking about the adjacent strategy possible for who we could be in terms of our strategy for you know all these recursive layers our strategy for how we think of ourselves and all these other things you're talking about


SPEAKER_00:
Absolutely, absolutely.

And then ultimately serving the kind of fitness purpose of, you know, if we take action A, is that going to reduce our uncertainty about those things that really matter, you know, that are the key variables, you know?

okay so uh so uh you know this is maybe a summary now we we've we've talked about about about who we are and i just want to say a few words then we have a purpose and uh from like a biological i call it an intrinsic purpose but like from evolution by being the fact that we are a part of life we have a purpose because all organisms possess this

sense-making capability, causal powers.

And the intrinsic purpose of an organism is to achieve and maintain vitality, a sustainable flourishing of self, which can include that extended self.

And we do that by sensing and evaluating states of the world and ourselves and implementing appropriate actions that

are based on anticipation.

We anticipate what will happen if we do or don't take an action, and we choose, if we're functional, we choose those actions that can serve our intrinsic purpose of remaining vital into the future.

So anticipating vitality.

And that obviously implies some kind of modeling of the world.

Anticipation implies some kind of modeling of the world.

So that's an organism's intrinsic purpose, and then society, by, you know, by...

uh you know that's necessarily shares a similar related intrinsic purpose which is to achieve and maintain vitality maintain and maintain it by maintain i mean anticipate into the future maintain uh vitality which is accomplished through cognition and cooperation so the self that we must keep vital is the extended self

And it follows that the intrinsic purpose of societal systems, like financial systems and other, is to serve the intrinsic purpose of society.

So now we know, or we don't know.

I'm just putting this out as my take on it.

But this is what I'm offering as a concept for the world to chew on.

And obviously, I'm getting these ideas.

I'm not coming up with all these ideas myself.

I'm digesting them.

hundreds of other papers that have been put into this kind of summary in a way.

So that's, we need to, our purpose is to remain vital into the future.

And when we talk about the self that remains vital, it's the larger self.

All right, so slide 20.

Or 12?

Or excuse me, 12.

Yep.

Yes, slightly off.

uh so there's a lot of discussion about complex systems you know we've been discussing complex systems and i just want to make a couple of points here because uh commonly some it is not uncommon that someone will say a complex system well that just means that it's liable to fall apart at any moment you know it's just too complex it's going to crash uh but and that that obviously can happen you know systems can collapse quite quite true

But obviously, life would not be doing very well if the evolution builds complexity in species and organisms and ecosystems.

Life would have a rough go of it.

if it was so fragile that complexity became a burden and then you reach a certain level of complexity and then you fall apart.

That's not really, I don't think, I mean, that can happen, but useful complexity doesn't make you fall apart.

actually just does the opposite.

It serves what we've been talking about all along, and that's problem solving.

So we are anticipatory organisms.

We are problem solving organisms.

It's our nature.

Most of what the human brain does is to solve problems of one kind or another, social problems, physical problems, whatever.

and maneuver in the world in a useful way.

And complexity is what allows that.

There's a number of studies that I cite here that show that as an organism, even as a robot, faces more difficult pressures from its environment, it complexifies.

And complexifies by complexity, then it implies a greater number of parts

coordinating or cooperating in some way to solve this new challenge.

And obviously, as a human, we're very complex.

We have complex needs.

We can think not just what's going to happen in the next millisecond, but we can think about what's going to happen in 100 years.

I mean, part of this project is to think about what might be happening over the next 100 years or even 1,000 years.

So as an organism complexifies, it at least potentially becomes better adapted to solving more complex problems.

And from that sense, you could almost equate complexity with problem-solving capacity, at least in a general sense.


SPEAKER_01:
And then I talked about that just reminds me of in the free energy calculations that we have gone over in various papers.

It's like accuracy is the modeling imperative.

And then complexity is tolerated to the extent it facilitates accurate modeling.

So if you get the one parameter model and you got 99% and it's adequate and it's good, then you're good to go.

And you're going to go for simplicity and,

But then what you're saying is actually the appearance and the hallmark of complexity in the world.

It means that that organism has the need to solve problems at a given level of counterfactual depth or inference skill or temporal depth, temporal thickness.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

Exactly.

Exactly.

Yeah.

That's, that's it.

Yeah.

Yeah, so I talk in this kind of middle of the paper now, I talk about a few ideas, good regulators, requisite variety, self-organized criticality, and then the free energy principle from active inference.

And maybe I'll just try to briefly mention what those ideas mean for people who aren't familiar.

and so good regular really came from the good regular theorem or whatever it's called really came from cybernetics ash ash ashby yeah

a lot his law of requisite variety and the it's the concept is that a organism or a you know system must be must be a model of that which it but that needs to control so so I am humans are a model of a

their niche, their physical niche, the gravity.

Our bones are a model of gravity.

Our complex problems that we face of maneuvering through the world with our senses and our sensitivities and our

you know, vulnerabilities, we have to be complex enough ourselves to handle a complex environment.

So that's just another way of saying that systems complexify in order to handle, you know, adequately handle their environment.

And part of that complexity then is having enough dials.

You know, the system has to have enough dials and enough levers and enough movement opportunities to control that which they need to control.

So a good controller has a similar variety to that which controls.

That's the requisite variety part.


SPEAKER_01:
And I just add the technology allows us to sort of play with that.

For example, someone driving a car with the affordances of just their arms and degenerative model of the road can be driving in very challenging situations.

So this doesn't mean that you need to have the road inside of your head or need to be the road to drive on the road.

It's a statement about how action oriented systems choose actions.


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right.

And maybe I'll just mention that that plays out on all timescales, right?

So the immediate mechanistic timescale, the developmental timescale, you know, the evolutionary timescale and everything in between.

Right, because think of an organism that only once every century has to deal with a one-year drought or something.

Well, somewhere in the mechanics of that organism has to be a little piece that is capable of digging down into the dirt and just hanging out for a whole year or whatever without water.

Even though that only happens once in a total blue moon, you know, like like we have to have this We have to have this flexibility within us even for those extremely rare but deadly, you know, potentially deadly scenarios and situations that we might face Okay, so complexity essentially you can almost equate it with problem-solving capacity and again the world

Slide 13.


SPEAKER_01:
Slide 13.

Help organize criticality.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so maybe I want to just kind of back up for a moment and just say like,

Again, what is the purpose of going through this stuff?

I mean, it's useful, sure.

If you want to build some new system, it's nice to know what the purpose of it is, obviously.

But these ideas that we're talking about, and self-organized criticality is one of them.

these ideas can not only serve this larger context of understanding what it is we're trying to do here what is what what are we building what is this purpose how do we measure success you know it can have immediate uh input or immediate influence on uh how a design might happen and and this self-organized criticality is is one example of that so it's not just we're not just in the theoretical philosophical

set here, we're, we're also talking nuts and bolts, like, okay, so what might designs be like, we have to think in our, as we're going through the series, you know, we can think in our head, okay, that's interesting.

What kind of designs might reflect that concept?

and uh we'll go into an example here with self-organized criticality so the idea there is uh that was coined by back back bak in 87 the term self-organized criticality and it's it's really not a controversial that that living systems and and many most systems in life complex systems organize in some way but

The idea of self-organized criticality is that the organism itself is adjusting, is keeping some kind of adjustment to maintain a critical state.

And by critical state, I mean a state on the, like you can think of a saddle point.

So if you drop a model on a saddle, it's going to not stay there.

It's going to, you

it's going to change one way or the other.

A critical state is like that threshold where things are about to change from one way to another way.

It turns out with work in information theory and other fields in recent years, it turns out that processing, whether you're talking about a computer or some other machine or a brain,

Turns out that processing is kind of optimal in a sense when the system is at this critical state and some people call it on the edge of chaos because things can easily change.

And sometimes it's, you can think of that threshold as a threshold of a critical state.

You can think of it as a threshold between exploration and exploitation.

Like, should I go find a new,

planet for humans to live on, or should I fix the systems on this planet first?

How do we balance exploration of the new versus using the information we have to improve what we already have?

So you can think of that as exploitation trade-off, stability, agility trade-off.

Do we remain stable and use ideas from the old in the past, or do we

Are we more agile and we're more flexible and we bring in new ideas?

So it's like you can call it an old new trade-off.

But whatever trade-off you want to call it, it's this sitting at the edge of going one way or the other, maximally flexible of going one way or the other.

And it's at that threshold, that level, that point, the kind of that region of criticality that information processing seems to be maximal.

So it's no wonder then that the human brain is organized in such a way to be living on this threshold between agility and stability.

And now here's an example of that from like a real world example.

So a system that is at a critical state is going to be maximally sensitive to input.

So that means that just when that marble is sitting on the saddle, just a little bump to that saddle from one little corner of its universe, like just one little

organism bumps it and maybe that marble rolls one way or the other, right?

So that one little input had a major impact on how the whole thing moves its trajectory into the future, right?

But isn't that kind of what we have in mind for democracy?

I mean, don't we want everyone to have access of engaging into the decision-making processes of a society

and have every voice heard in at least in the sense that there's the possibility that just my voice, just me doing my participation in this system might actually ripple through the system and have a, you know, a real effect, a useful effect.

I mean, I think like maybe self-organized criticality can help to inform us

The concept of self-organized criticality can help to inform us of what do we want from democracy or a decision-making process.


SPEAKER_01:
You know, that just makes me think about different landslides.

And that's something that criticality theory and catastrophe theory has been used to study.

And instead of cascading failure, we can think about cascading neighborhood cleanups.

So a bunch of people just say...

Today, just for an hour, I feel like doing a little cleanup and all of a sudden one person puts up the flag and then it's cascading locally in some just unspecified way.

But all of a sudden you're getting this distribution with a ton of small little meetups and then several really large sweeping changes.

But the total number of people cleaning up is higher because you offered the affordance and the ability for the affordance to sort of propagate.


SPEAKER_00:
That's right.

That's right.

We're talking about a propagation of a propagation of information, a propagation of action, and the possibility that even, you know, just one or a few individuals could start a little chain chain reaction that actually does affect in a positive way society.

Now, it's a little too, it's almost too bad that sandpiles were the original, you know, topic of this

self-organized criticality because as you point out it's not really about things falling apart it's about it's about if you think of it again if you think of a complex system as a system more capable of solving more challenging problems then more often you can think of self-organized criticality as a way to propagate information when it is really needed when the system needs to change then information is


SPEAKER_01:
you know it ingests information from its world from its senses and can act accordingly we we just um submitted an abstract with criticality and active inference and one of the points was actually the existence of self-organized criticality implies a far from equilibrium system that's actively pumping energy in that's right passive system that's not locked and loaded you don't get that kind of a non-linear response when you poke it it just stays there


SPEAKER_00:
Right, right, right, right.

And I think maybe we won't have time to go into it right now, but also the idea of criticality is a little bit at the center of structural organization of society in the active inference theme.

Like, how is it that organisms and life and other

systems then you know form structures well they form structures so that as you were just saying they form structures so that they can maximally cognate and those that happens to be structures that are existing in some sense near critical thresholds so and that and also as you mentioned that of course takes energy you know it takes energy to make that happen you have to eat food to think you know right nice 14.

Okay, so now finally, we get to Active Inference, all this discussion, and we're finally getting to the point here, right?

Welcome to Active Inference Lab.

So I had already touched on some of this before, but it would

You know, today, if you're going to develop a really good AI system, and you're going to have a robot saying the robot has to act in some environment, it's pretty well understood that if you program that robot to, you give it a, I mean, traditionally, you'll give it a fitness function or some kind of valuation.

And it's, for example, it's good if it, you know, you lose points if you fall through a trap door and you get points if you, you know, whatever, find a piece of cake or something.

Well, that's fine for extremely simple universes that your robot might work in.

But as soon as you get beyond, as soon as you get to any kind of more realistic universe that your robot has to work in, that pre-programming concept just kind of falls apart.

It would require the practitioner to think ahead of all the things that the robot might encounter and then how to value those situations in certain ways.

And that is really what active inference offers is a kind of a cognitive understanding or a mechanism by which an organism will, where it's fitness score is in a sense,

involves both achieving goals and exploring its world for epistemic gain.

So that's how we would like to program the robot in a sense.

so that it can learn on the fly from its experiences.

It can alter its actions and goals as it becomes clear, as it gathers more information from its universe, as it meets new situations that were never

never conceived of by the programmer, that through an active inference or an active inference-like mechanism, it can learn and explore and critically balance exploration with exploitation.

And then we come right back to that whole concept of criticality.

So what you would really like your robot to do is remain at that critical phase between exploring what's out there and making use and goal-directed behavior of what's in front of it.

And that's how you could program this robot to act in the world and be pretty good at it if you build it well.

So that's what the systems of a society can help a society to do.

it's worth talking about building new systems i think it would not be wise to say this checklist of like we wanted this level of education we want to want this you know to react this way in this situation react this way in the situation and this level of uh you know whatever money and this level of this and this level of that uh while those kinds of preferences can be a useful start

Society has to be alive in its moment, you know, in the moment that society is alive, it's cognating, it's actively, you know, comparing what it's the result of its actions to the model that is in its head.

And so active inference offers this way to balance exploration and, you know,

exploitation and remain critical and remain optimally cognitive, right?

So that's part of it.

And then part of it, I mean, and for me, the idea of the embodied, you know, the three, four E's.


SPEAKER_01:
Embodied, inactive, extended, uncultured, ABCDs, a whole book of adjectives, actually.


SPEAKER_00:
They sell that.

yeah the you know the this is what i really am attracted to in active inferences in a sense it's kind of a simple concept it's not really very complicated you know if you've studied bayesian uh uh theory at all it's kind of straight you know in a way it's kind of straightforward but the the you know the way friston has connected the dots and and and and uh extended that into the bigger picture of life kind of it it to me it is uh

It is rich.

There's a lot yet to be learned and gained and explored in this umbrella of active inference.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so we're getting close to the end here.


SPEAKER_01:
I don't know if maybe we should call it quits or... You know, we could either go a few minutes over to just walk through these last few slides, or we could just do whatever you'd like to do.


SPEAKER_00:
You know, I think because I can see now, I'm not very good at walking fast.

I'm too verbose.


SPEAKER_01:
You know, it goes through a lot.

It goes through a lot.

So I think it's actually good to sometimes just take these little side paths.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, well, maybe this, you know, leaving it at active inference, maybe that's a good stopping point.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, then maybe to kind of close on that active inference note, you know, we are the active inference lab.

And so we always think about these sessions as a two directional highway.

There's people who are in the active inference community who are being exposed to some new ideas.

And then there's people who are being drawn in by these other things that you're bringing up, which are so pressing as far as the issues, as well as

systems that influence everyone like governance information, maybe this is the first time they're hearing about active inference.

So it's sort of like, we're on the cliffhanger.

And maybe when we come back next week, we can really do a little recap, and then start in with where is active inference coming into play?

How are we going to make it specific?

How are we going to include people in this process?

What would it look like to do?

It's a really nice spot, I think, to kind of pause.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, sounds good.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

So we will hang out again 3 p.m.

on April 13th Pacific time.

And that will be the second of the three sessions.

So thanks again for joining, John.

This is like an awesome discussion.

And I hope people read the papers and we can share this first YouTube link and invite people for next week's session, which will be, yeah, at the time stated.

So thanks, everyone.

See you later.

Thanks.