## VsOqIxNYpPQ

SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Hello and welcome everyone.

It's ACT-INF Lab live stream number 41.0.

On April 2nd, 2022, four squared two comma two zero two two.

We're discussing the paper Extended Active Inference Constructing Predictive Cognition Beyond Skulls.

So welcome to the Act-Inf Lab, everyone.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at some of the links here.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

Head over to ActiveInference.org to learn more about what is happening in ACT-INF Lab.

We're here today in ACT-INF stream number 41.0, where we are learning and discussing the paper Extended Active Inference Constructing Predictive Cognition Beyond Skulls by Axel Constant, Andy Clark, Michael Kirchhoff, and Carl Fristen from December 2020, so long ago.

and this video is an introduction for some of the ideas and some of the pieces of the paper it's not a review or a final word and the dot one is just us getting excited and

doing our preparation so that the dot one and the dot two, the participatory group discussions, we can start to unpack them more.

We're gonna go over some aims and claims, keywords, the abstract and the roadmap of the paper, address the big question, and then walk through some of the figures and formalisms.

And the coming weeks we'll have the dot one and the dot two, which of course are open to anyone who wants to join.

So we'll just begin by saying hello and any thoughts we have.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California.

And on the topic of distributed or extended cognitive processes, Dean really appreciated co-stigmatically

extended in space and time collaborating with you on the slides.

I loved your first pass on the slides and it just made me remark on how different it is to be involved in a distributed cognitive process versus the kind that can just play out in the quiet room within the skull.

And that's like just one example of what this whole paper and extended mind, extended cognitive area is about is actually,

among other things, respecting those kinds of processes and thinking about how to frame them.

So that is obviously something we'll be talking about a lot more.

Over to you.


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, my name is Dean.

I'm up here in Calgary.

And I think what I really liked about this paper is their ability to sort of say, there's some ways that we've been looking at this question of how far does the process go

go and then there's this paper which introduces a new way of maybe having a conversation around that they talk about things like uploading entailing some of the more nascent features of offloading and so that to me has the potential of morphing if we because we've done a lot of morphology lately from subject matter expertise to prediction matter expertise if

Somebody can also hold up an egg and a chicken, for example.

So I'm kind of excited about that.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, excellent.

Into the paper we go.

So the paper link is provided here.

And as stated, it's from 2020.

I'll just, why don't you summarize what you felt some of the key aims and claims were?


SPEAKER_00:
uh well i'll summarize the aims you you can summarize the claims for me the aim was to be able to optimize organize organisms generative models which a cognitive niche construction implies but these authors essentially sort of put that out there in a in a they articulate that uh

It reviews generic predictive approaches to niche construction.

It takes and looks at both the functional and the psychological components of what that active generation of a cognitive niche might be.

And then they argue for, and I think this is the critical bullet,

an extended active inference, henceforth EAI, based on our model of cognitive niche construction.

So there's a model within the modeling universe.

This is theirs.


SPEAKER_01:
Excellent.

Yes.

As we'll explore, they aim towards reconciling some of the functional and grounded and embodied aspects of what is known as the cognitive niche with some of the essentially metaphysical in the sense that they're not as embodied.

They're like purely cognitive features of or psychological features of the cognitive niche.

So that's kind of where they aim.

And yes, they aim for a synthesis reflected in the EAI idea.

So some of the claims in the paper.

So these are things where it's like you could ask whether these are valid assertions or assumptions.

Cognitive niche construction, which again, they're thinking of in a functional and psychological sense, is the process whereby organisms create and maintain cause effect models of their niche as guides for fitness influencing behavior.

So it's kind of like extended autopoiesis, self-maintenance, but not just at the level of the epithelial, like a cognitive boundary.

Extended mind theory claims that cognitive processes extend beyond the brain to include predictable states of the world.

Statistical regularities in the generative process and how to leverage those processes.

Active inference and predictive processing in cognitive science assume...

organisms embody predictive which is generative models of the world optimized by standard cognitive functions like perception action learning so putting different cognitive features on common grounding those are some of the aims and claims of the paper let's see how they get there here's a few of the keywords that were in the paper active inference

affordances, capacities for action, availabilities for action, cognitive niche construction, which we'll go into a lot more, ecological psychology, which is something that's been around for decades.

It's about breaking the psyche out of the skull.

and that's very related to extended mind and then predictive processing and this sort of anticipatory perspective and the real-time signal processing action loop all these things that are like active by another word or kind of like the latent proto-active threads that um are brought together here anything to add on keywords no no okay i'll read the abstract then you can feel free to give a thought

Cognitive niche construction is the process whereby organisms create and maintain cause-effect models of their niche as guides for fitness-influencing behavior.

Extended mind theory claims that cognitive processes extend beyond the brain to include predictable states of the world.

Active inference and predictive processing in cognitive science assume that organisms embody predictive models of the world optimized by standard cognitive functions .

This paper presents an active inference formulation that views cognitive niche construction as a cognitive function aimed at optimizing organisms' generative models.

We call that process of optimization extended active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
What do I think about that?

I think of it from the view of a professional setting as an example of an environment.

and how that professional setting traditionally is not necessarily seen the agents within it like we sometimes consider the internalities within the epithelial limits.

But we very much depend on those things functioning correctly.

So this kind of opens up a little tiny portal

into how our imaginations might be able to sort of access that.


SPEAKER_01:
makes me think about the professional setting, the professional niche.

Is that something that's just reflected in the skull of the expert or the professional as a person?

Or is the setting something that's distributed where it wouldn't be possible to locate or focalize it within the skull of any individual

while also recognizing, for example, that a lesion inside of the skull of a person in a professional setting would change it.

So we don't need to like deny brain functionalism to have an extended yes and approach to cognitive systems.

So what are we going to find out when we go down that way?

Well, here's some of the signposts along that way.

This is their roadmap, how they get from discussing previous work in the extended mind and cognitive niche area towards their concept of extended active inference.

The introduction covers some of the core background concepts like cognitive niche, active inference, and the extended mind.

They then kind of lay out where they're gonna go.

In section two, the functional and psychological niches under active inference, they partition or delineate different ways of thinking about the cognitive niche into a psychological and a functional component, and then present a case study.

um there's also figures that we'll walk through and through the presentation of this disambiguation of cognitive niche and case study in connection to the active inference models they present extended active inference eai and then discuss several features or aspects of eai like the parity principle which we'll come back to of course functional isomorphisms epistemic actions and diachronic cognition under eai

Anything to add on the roadmap?


SPEAKER_00:
No, let's get the big question here.

Go for the big question.

Okay, I'll just read it off the slide here.

The set of questions that fall within our scope relates to the computational function of cognitive extensions and the developmental and intergenerational, so we're going to talk about a little bit of a temporal thing here, process whereby this computational function emerges, given...

The cognitive niche is sometimes studied as a psychological habitat, refers to the set of organisms' niche relations that offer organisms relevant affordances.

And two, the cognitive niche is sometimes studied as a functional habitat, refers to the set of resources that support species-specific tasks.

That's the behavior angle.

Then, this means that one must define the functional habitat on the background of the organism's phenotypic dispositions.

This is where Daniel's expertise can step in.

For example, books are part of the functional habitats of humans because of humans' ability to read, but they're not part of the beaver's functional habitat unless, of course, the beaver wants to include it as part of their environmental structure, which if they're an imaginal beaver, maybe they do.

The psychological and functional habitats can be part of the same overall physical habitat,

My question then was, how then do cognitive extensions exist?

We're not answering that today, but we're parking that for future conversation.


SPEAKER_01:
There's a famous quote in biology, nothing makes sense except in the light of evolution and a million other mutations on that.

And we've talked about eco evo devo in biology, like the importance of thinking holistically about ecology and evolution and development processes that entail different mechanisms and play out over different scales to influence phenotype as studied.

And what I see here is ecology

which has been dancing with cognition.

That's the ecological cognitive area, ecological psychology.

Then there's developmental psychology, of course.

So how does learning happen?

And then there's evolutionary psychology and any of those fields people can take or leave, but it's almost like we're going to dissolve those couplets

into just eco, evo, and devo, pull them away from the cognition, from developmental, ecological, and evolutionary cognition, and then like bring it all back together.

So no one's denying that humans don't read books or that beavers don't make a dam or anything like that.

So what are we really getting at here?

It's a different way to recombine and reframe how we think about cognition and ecology.


SPEAKER_00:
Can I just add one thing to that?

Because that's, thank you.

A decade and even two decades ago, there was a real push of real philosophical density forming around the idea of hands-on science.

But this questions, what can we get our hands on?

Because if, again, if you want to simplify it and just say, oh, if we give everybody a chance to

touch the beaver kit that will somehow change their understanding of beaver behavior um what you just described says no what that will give us is an understanding of the the direction that their fur um all seems to set up as right so again we have to be careful that we don't come up with these oh here's here's the way to solve all of these really complex issues


SPEAKER_01:
hands-on example also um it made me think about how you could still have a very brain-based approach to thinking about hands-on cognition someone could say it's been shown that when there's multi-sensory engagement that the learner updates their cognitive model more rapidly so multi-sensory learning or experience-driven learning is more engaging for science it keeps people in the game longer they learn the concepts better

That is still within the individual intraschool paradigm, but it starts moving into the periphery and the peripersonal space.

And it's like, where is this extended cognitive process?

Aren't the hands always on something?

Or I'm sure there's a lot of other.


SPEAKER_00:
Are they literally on?

Are they on?

Are they on an abstraction?

That's the big question, right?

So, yeah, it gets really interesting in a hurry.

If you want to take a quantum bike ride with Chris Fields, you got to be able to explain how that works.


SPEAKER_01:
Another piece I just can't help, but it's from the Active Inference textbook.


SPEAKER_00:
I can't help myself.


SPEAKER_01:
I have a new car.

I have to drive it.

This is on the first page of the preface.

To illustrate the simplicity of active inference and what we are trying to explain, place your fingertips gently on your leg.

Keep them there motionless for a second or two.

Now does your leg feel rough or smooth?

If you had to move your fingers to evince a feeling of roughness or smoothness, you have discovered a fundament of active inference.

To feel is to palpate, to see is to look, to hear is to listen.

So if you can't, with your hands on, with a finger on, if the pants don't have a feeling of smoothness or roughness, except for as a function of action, what are we handling, grasping, comprehending with cognitive things?


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

That whole niche development thing, which we're going to get into today.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Awesome.

So cognitive niche, section 111.

Do you want to give a first summary on any parts you think are important?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I'm going to just read some of the stuff from the paper itself.

I threw a few references in here as well.

But in cognitive science, a form of instrumental intelligence, to be in Devorah, if I hope I'm pronouncing that correctly, create and maintain cause-effect models of the world as guides for prejudging which courses of action will lead to which results.

We've had a few conversations about guides in the new year, 2022.

So I thought that was interesting.

Residues in the environment act as cues and prompts.

Concept development niche as where and when your genes act given the epigenetic envelope over selective niche as genetic information inherited.

I thought that made a clear differentiation.

The concept of cognitive...

cognitive niche that we're referring to here is a sort of hybrid, again, I love this, between the concepts of the selective developmental and cognitive niches.

This paper's questions fall under that which conceptual function emerges, sorry, computational function emerges.

So bottom line is they say that there are things in the timeline of the environment which are passed along.

So how do we explain that through

lot of different ways but active inference in particular and so that's what this is about and so again i threw a couple of different ways in terms of explaining the cognitive load aspect of that like why would we download or offload or upload into the environment and why would the next generation necessarily be able to pick up on that through some sort of pointing or signal signaling effort


SPEAKER_01:
What were you getting at with the cognitive niche for enabling somebody to learn and apply active inference and about how that relates to professional or other settings inside and outside of academia?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, the enabling part is what I was really wondering about.

So how is that set up?

Is there a set the condition for that or are what they're describing here as is something variant retained?

meaning conditions set, right?

Because there's always a tendency to want to say, okay, well, things are too complicated.

So let's focus on X.

Right.

And that was my essentially what my question was here is, is the interdisciplinary question satisfied by organizing along chapters and subject areas?

Because we just don't want to overload people.

Right.

I mean, we get why we do it.

There's a reason for it.

And that's what they're talking about here.

There's a reason why there are tracks laid down in the environment that can help guide the next generation.

pass her through, right?

But the bottom line is, is the constructionism aspect of this, the mechanics part of it, the default or functional enhancement outside of the academic niche?

Like when you get out of school, what do you do?

Do you necessarily follow the same patterns that you do in school?

How does a bridge to uncertainty, as a metaphor, change the nature from

explanatory to explorational and back.

So when we go out into the world and then come back into academia, how does that change our perception of the structures that academia places down to make sure that we get to certain outcomes relative to the variants that still exist out there in the greater space?


SPEAKER_01:
makes me think of paths in a forest.

And it's like, is within a generation or between generations, are we trying to pass down the path?

Or are we passing down a healthy forest where wayfinding can happen?

And it's like, well, I paved the path and I removed all the brambles from it.

Where's the forest now?

Because in order to make that path stabilized...

the functional niche had to actually change.

And so that shows how like the cognitive and the functional needs start to have interplay over these multiple timescales.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

Great.


UNKNOWN:
1.1.2.


SPEAKER_01:
Here's where they introduce the concept of active inference.

What parts did you pull out on the left side?

Like what text pieces did you find important?

Before we talk about starting and progging.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, no, I just highlight where I thought it was kind of interesting is if you just read the stuff that's fonted in red, you have to entertain.

There's a probabilistic relationship.

We have to think of this not just over a single time frame, but as you said, over possible inference, probability, and modeling time frames.

What's entailing what?

when we're talking through the active inference lens.

Transitions amongst causes.

Hmm, interesting.

So processes of processes, the updating piece, right?

And so again, the sodding and the pronking thing, all I wanted to do is in that section of the paper say, here's an example in the wild where we could identify each one of the aspects that they were talking about in this section of the paper.


SPEAKER_01:
And you had listed a few functions or a few as here, and then I added a few more.

And I think it just reflected how there's always a plurality of answers to the why question.

In biology, we have 10 Bergen's four whys, and we have different time scales and whether the approximate or the ultimate cost, all this stuff that we've talked about other times.

And then just even within the active perspective,

Why do these animals do this jumping behavior?

And how does active inference help us think about that kind of behavior?

Like, it's a signal to itself about its bodily integrity and its coherence and its capacity.

It's a signal to other entities like itself, like other conspecifics.

For example, an early warning system for a predator.

It also...

has been brought up in the literature that this is actually a honest and costly signal to the predator.

Like, look at me jump and play.

You think you're going to get me?

That's absurd.

Go after somebody who's not jumping and playing.

And then there's so many other ways like to think about it.

And those are things that you could disambiguate.

You might be able to design an experiment or a professional setting to reduce your uncertainty or to engineer and scaffold

something but once you get this deer in the lab on the trampoline in the vr headset with the predators approaching from both sides when that doesn't happen in the wild what are you actually studying right i like the last bullet too because it could be pronounced as way updating or way up dating so i mean anytime we and i i i i


SPEAKER_00:
I hope people appreciate that it could literally, literally be interpreted both ways.

And that's what I think is kind of fascinating about this paper is that inversion in our minds of what, so what does that just put a place in the emphasis reinforces two very different concepts.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

And to close this set of introductory concepts, the cognitive niche, active inference, and we get to the extended mind concept.

So what pieces did you find relevant here and what did you pull out of the text itself and associated citations?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, just for me, it was an affirmation of what I've been thinking about for a long time, that the idea of saying something is contained in your skull and shall no further pass doesn't get answered just because we can communicate back and forth to one another.

There's probably a lot more evidence in the larger environment if you

take the time to look for it.

And it doesn't always necessarily cause issues in terms of what you can or can't imagine.

So those images out there are collective.

And so do we always come at it from the perspective of,

we're making connections because there are associations and we get that.

But is there an uploading aspect of this that quite literally in the community can look like a museum, right?

So these ways of being able to understand what's happening have other ways than what has traditionally been thought of as here's where something ends and something else begins.


SPEAKER_01:
One piece I thought was interesting, this is kind of a classic modern example of extended mind.

So they discuss reliable access to external states of the niche, e.g.

the cell phone that functions as an extended memory for recalling phone numbers.

Okay, how about when those are your cloud contacts and now that phone is pinging a global communications network?

So again, no one is denying that an entity can take an action that triggers computational events and cognitive events to occur around the world and beyond sending those signals off into wherever.

So what are we actually doing?

discussing what is extended relative to what again reifying the epithelial boundary and saying well it's extended relative to the epithelial boundary but isn't this about updating our priors to think about cognition in a more extended way so then why do the sort of straw person version of epithelial individualist brain-centered cognition and then posit extended cognition as a contrast from that like what is the real positivist

or positive claim in extended cognition.

And there's a lot of interesting citations here back through the decades, and people have been talking about this stuff for a very long time.

So that'll be a cool thread to draw on.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah?

Yeah, what's interesting is I've had conversations with Sweller and Ginn's

back, you know, like 15 years ago, about this whole question of what is cognitive overload.

And one of my favorite references is Lucy Sukman's The Human-Machine Interface, where her book is essentially set up as a case study around people encountering the photocopy machine.

And what exactly transpires there as an extended mind?

Because there are people that have sort of built the photocopy machine in the hopes that it becomes intuitive.

But as she points out in her reference,

Well, that's in the eye of the beholder.

That's in the person who has to key in their passcode and then try to determine, of course, the person who's actually built the photocopy machine, try to determine how each one of those individuals with each separate passcode

necessarily believes that their mind is being extended so that they don't have to, you know, as Stephen used to do, make another copy and make another copy and make another copy, right?

So there's a lot in this and it can't always be reduced down to an assumption around a particular order of steps that will just naturally seem present to the person who now has their hand available

and a screen from which they can select a number of options, but still can't get what inside of their head they want in terms of that version or that format.

So anyway, I love the extended mind concept, but now how do we employ it in such a way that it actually is something available as opposed to just theoretical?


SPEAKER_01:
It makes me think of playing pool or billiards.

So in the extended desire to move the ball from one area to another, like you use a cue and it's like transducing mechanical force.

And then that force is transmitted to the ball that you strike.

And that has all these outcomes in the board.

what is the pool cue for these increasingly abstract processes?

We talk about the grip and the embodied performance, the skilled performance of playing pool and all of those aspects.

And again, how do we talk about epistemic grip and we're extending not just into the functional niche, so like the real phenotypic substrates, but when we start thinking about, as the authors reminded us of,

selective developmental and cognitive niches this is like apples and oranges and kale chips over different time scales it's not just counting how many pieces of fruit are on the table these are different nested interacting and even types of things so how do we keep all of that on the menu and still do yeah and you introduced with the pool cue a field thing which


SPEAKER_00:
In Sukhman's reference, she talks about field thing.

It's not just the touching of a screen.

There's a huge field component to this that's often left out, but can't be if we're talking about extending our minds.


SPEAKER_01:
It makes me think about putting the chalk on the tip of the cue, and that helps the pool tip make grip with the ball better.

But you wouldn't put the blue chalk on your feet on the ground.

The way that they grip the ground is different than how the extended...

cognitive apparatus gets a grip.

And that's like where we see a lot of challenges in programming.

Somebody with skill in programming goes, well, of course that's not going to work because like to get a grip on this process, this program needs the API call to look like this.

And then it can get a handle.

It can get a web hook.

It can make this call so that on the other side of the phone, the right other program calls back.

But here's the other person still, you know, shining their shoe with a blue chalk and wondering why the billiards not going the right direction.

Exactly.

Okay.

Here we get to their outline and argument.

So, what would you say is important about what they wrote here with all of these different cues that we have annotated and added into the text?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, what I appreciate is that in order to be able to introduce the concept of uploading, which we'll get to here, they're basically saying, so...

And I don't want to put words in the author's mouths, but my interpretation of what I read was, this is why it's taking so long.

Because they're going to cut into a time, a temporal piece to this eventually anyway.

And rather than read all of the highlighted parts that I dragged out, maybe you want to talk about the things...

that you think for the point one and point two, we might want to spend a little bit more time on.

When you're done, I'd like to talk about the stuff on the right-hand side of the page.


SPEAKER_01:
Excellent.

Just a few pieces that would be cool to unpack would be salience and attention and ostentative cues in communication and how sometimes cues can be transient, like what I'm about to say next is really important, but then other times cues can be

acting through time, like stigmergy.

So epistemic cues as ecological legacies is really powerful, guiding epistemic foraging.

The notion of a shared cognitive model,

But once it becomes one shared cognitive model, is it extended anymore?

Or by drawing the boundaries around that shared model, is it saying, well, it's not extended within.

So I think optimization, leveraging of shared generative models through action and perception

excellent place to pick up as we think about our intra active lab and other contexts share generative models um cognitive uploading one place to start there would be like what is being appealed to or invoked with this upload download metaphor how many

KB per second are we talking about?

What are we getting at or potentially seeing only one facet of when we use this computationalist notion of up and download, which they do unpack.

and also the idea of cognitive extensions that gain independence from the specific individuals having produced them.

So it's kind of like if the pool cue doesn't do a different type of thing, but then as people might be interested in more and more autonomous pool cues, allowing them to be further and further from more and more complex pool tables until they're not even looking at the pool table,

They're just sending a sequence of messages to something that is outside of the person who designed it.

It wouldn't even be called a pool queue.

but all of a sudden it's so extended, it's involving all this cyber-physical apparatus that it does have this degree of autonomy or independence from the individuals who created them.

So then where do we put these complex cyber-physical systems where it's like, it's not Dr. Frankenstein, nor is it Dr. Frankenstein's monster.

What is really the cognitive apparatus in those situations?

What about what you see on the right side?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I want to just, before I go to that, I want to just say, because I put it on that thing there, professional initiatives programming, and I'm not horn-tuning here, but basically that was the name of the company that I started up and ran for a decade.

And essentially, the reason why I put it in there is because, to the point, the optimization and leveraging of the shared generative model, sharing through action and perception of what we

call extended active inference.

When that's actually applied and you actually see people doing something with that,

it's actually quite fascinating because it's actually very distributed.

You don't have a job wall and then people decide whether or not the things that are on offer are things that they want to partake in.

What it does is it's an inversion of that.

It's essentially saying, are you an explorer by nature?

And if you are, are there other explorers out there in the larger community who that relational frame is something that you could share?

So again, these are interesting things that this paper now surfaces.

So I just want to talk about that for a second.

So my questions were, should we assume that the exploration done in literature is a proxy for functioning in the wild?

We take maps with us, but do we continue to stare at the maps while we're in the wild?

How much focus on the epistemic resolves what, when, which questions to predict when the bird strike happens?

These random things are how do we respond to randomness and then how does the Hudson River take care of cognitive extension gain?

Because that seems like a weird question to ask, but in the context of this paper, that's the question that's being asked.

So don't be afraid.

Ask it.

Don't be scared because the alternative is a lot worse, right?

That's what's fascinating about the sort of creative part of this that active inference, I think, enables.

But it's not constructivist.

It's creativist.

And I'm not saying that there isn't a huge constructivist piece here, but you're leaving off another magnificent part of it if you only focus on the computational and the constructivist.


SPEAKER_01:
Excellent.

A lot more to say on that, but let's move forward to section two.

We're going to now talk about active inference entailing functional and psychological niches.

Okay, so here's where we get to equation one.

And they write, a generative model, which is this left term here with a purple line, is a probabilistic statement about a set of unobserved hidden variables, i.e.

hypothesized causes, like you didn't actually see the lightning strike, but there's going to be some unobserved cause, which is like the actual event of the lightning initiation, and observed sensations, i.e.

consequences.

So that could be like the volume and the visual input of thunder and lightning.

which represents an organism's predictive or causal model of the world.

That's that joint generative model.

A generative model is usually expressed in terms of a likelihood and a prior term.

And this is sort of like a fundamental statistical...

tool slash trick slash tip that you can take a joint distribution and then kind of pull out and condition upon one of the variables in that joint distribution so it's like probability of flipping a coin rolling a die it's like flipping a coin conditioned on rolling a die multiplied by rolling the die but not exactly in this likelihood prior case but it's very much similar so quick question for you can you can you tell me when you say trick


SPEAKER_00:
Is it as simple as a flip?

Like effect, cause, cause, effect?

Is that what you mean by trick?

Like a hot trick.


SPEAKER_01:
Like a pattern of performance that enables you to win statistical games.

Okay, okay.

of course anyone can describe it however else they want so here they're saying the likelihood corresponds to the probability of sensations given the priors and then the prior corresponds to the probability of the conditions or causes that generate the sensations

So this is like beliefs about how the world is in the prior.

And then this is the likelihood of sensations, which is here, S, conditioned upon those beliefs of the world.

And two other places to learn a little bit more would be,

ACT-INF stream number 34, where we were discussing Axel's paper, Free Energy Principle.

It's not about what it takes, it's about what took you there.

We talked a lot about bays, exact bays, variational bays, and about free energy minimization, and when do priors go right?

When do they go wrong?

And then here is an example from the ACT-INF textbook from 2022.

And on page 18,

They show an example with frog and apple.

That's the hidden state of the world.

What is actually in your hand?

Is it a frog or an apple?

And so initially there's a prior belief, like 90% that it's an apple and 10% that it's a frog.

And then there's this observation of jumping, which could be like visual, it could be tactile, proprioceptive, et cetera.

And then that has an associated likelihood model of apples jump 1% of the time, frogs are jumping 81% of the time.

And then it's like much more likely that jumping is a frog than an apple.

People can see that.

And then that updates the prior belief into a posterior belief, but it never eradicates the alternative.

It's still 10% likely that it's an apple that jumped because initially we thought it was like very likely.

So that's just one example from the book.

Let's see how we actually use that generative model decomposition into likelihood and prior to talk about functional and psychological niche.

They're going to use variational inference to invert this likelihood, which is the statistical distribution of sensations given causes of the world.

So how you should interpret a given sensation conditioned upon your beliefs about how things actually are out there.

approximate the posterior probability of causes once a sensation has been sampled.

So here it's P S conditioned upon eta, I hope that's the right,

pronunciation of fancy N. But here we're looking for actually the probability distribution on unobserved causes of the world conditioned upon observed sensations.

So these are like two of the directions of cognition.

Given the prior on what's out there in the world, what is being sensed?

And then this is given the sensations, what is out there in the world?

So the big picture level, this is like how we're both doing inference on perceiving the lightning and thunder and the actual likelihood of what's happening in that cloud out there, despite not being able to directly observe it.

So that's the inversion that they're talking about here.

And that could be done through different methods, but the variational approach allows this inversion to be done in like a tractable and computable way.

And so here they're going to use the same notation and they're just going to unpack it into equation two.

And they write the variational density becomes a posterior belief.

So that's a prior that's been updated by input about the causes of sensations given the sensations that were experienced.

This inverse mapping from causes to effect corresponds to inferring the causes of sensations.

So

In a way, we repeat ourself many times with this inversion in both directions at once.

And I hope it's just not redundant for those who are familiar, nor...

ambiguous overly for those who are unfamiliar but this is sort of at the core of it is that there's modeling of both the sensations and the underlying causes and sometimes it goes from one to the other and backwards and variational inference is like a toolbox or a toolkit that helps deal with both of those directions and compute them in an attractable way and here's the thing it's if if


SPEAKER_00:
If you think you can analogize this to I've always walked around on my feet and now I'm going to walk around on my hands, that's not what's actually happening here.

That's not the type of inversion that's actually going on here.

There's something to do with effect and cause that doesn't just necessarily translate to what's up and what's down.

You have to take a little bit more dimensionality into that

And so that's why it remains at sort of this mathematical statistical level, as opposed to, oh, if it was just as simple as, oh, you're telling me now to walk around in my hands and that's going to change my perspective?

No, that's not what we're saying here.


SPEAKER_01:
just to give kind of one reading of equation two.

So this f, it's very much spaced out, but you can think of it as being like f of x, like a function f of the variable x, like with x as an argument, but you could think about that f being like right here.

It's a functional, it's a function of,

states that are sensations, S, and mu, the internal states.

And like, it's kind of like here, the eta is the external.

It's like an upside down mu.

So mu is internal and then eta is external.

And so that free energy value for a given combination of sensation and internal, which are to say cognitive states, is the divergence between

the truth, the true posterior, which is the actual distribution of causes given sensations, and this Q distribution, Q sub mu.

So it's a Q distribution that we control as a cognitive state that takes only a single argument, which is just eta.

And then that KL divergence, which is trying to minimize the difference between like the Q distribution that we control and the true posterior and subtracting out just how surprising given states should be.

We talk about it also other times, but many touches, many coats of paint.

So we'll continue on.

What does this variational inference approach allow?

That takes us to equation three.

Formally, variational inference converts an inference problem

into an optimization problem as articulated by equation three and figure one.

So here's our figure two, which was stated as like an inference problem.

And then this is going to move to an optimization problem using this arg min, which just means like choose the minimum, choose the minimum of that argument over Q. And then that is gonna be applied to this inverse mapping.

They also connect it here to some discussion of Bayes optimal updating when learning that cause sensation relationship and about how it's tied to biological cognitive mechanisms like experience dependent plasticity.

And then they tie that to several specific mechanisms of cognitive updating like the millisecond timescale

the minutes to hours timescale, and then the months to years.

And then when we think about that forest, that's where we think about the intergenerational selective extended niche.

Anything else you'd add on this one?


SPEAKER_00:
This is kind of the in-between.

We're going to get to the other side here shortly when we go further in the slides, but...

If you started thinking that if it was a simple matter of inverting from walking on feet to walking on hands, this is kind of the in-between between, okay, so to me, it makes perfect sense.

It's unsurprising that my skin is on the outside and everything else is sort of the bones and the organs and all the blood is on the inside.

But to the environment, it has an inside and an outside as well.

And what is my outside could necessarily be the environments inside.

And this is kind of transitioning us to that idea of, yes, it would be surprising if everything that's now currently inside of me was on the outside, but stop looking at it as inversion in that sort of centric or cellular way.

Think of it now in terms of the bigger picture.

And that's where this, I think this slide starts transitioning us to that other perspective.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Okay.

Continuing on in section two to figure one.

All right.

Why don't you give a first pass description on what you see in the figure or what you think is important about it, Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I'm going to read first before I sort of throw my own comment in.

Actions are selected if they bring about expected outcomes while being geared toward minimizing expected surprise or uncertainty about the future.

That's if you've been reading enough stuff in active inference that you've read that a few times.

Hence, in active inference, motor and autonomic functions, autonomic, work hand in hand with a perceptual inference to resolve uncertainty through the active sampling

of salient uncertainty reducing sensations, back to the feeling piece, while allowing for preferred unsurprising outcomes.

Free energy is minimized with respect to counterfactual outcomes.

And we've spoken a few times of what is a counterfactual in this context.

But now it's very clear that the counterfactual is embedded in a context.

It doesn't just free float.

There are times when it is supposed to now extend into something or is already embedded within something.

By taking the expectation of free energy under future outcomes, given the action being evaluated.

Now, both Daniel's copy and my copy of the paper didn't do a good job of reproducing the purple and the greenness of this

these two worlds.

And there's actually a third world going to be introduced as well.

But in order to be able to get to the idea of extending, the first thing that they want to do is kind of create this idea of surprise minimization within a tighter loop.

There's going to be a concentric loop that they're going to introduce around this shortly.

And that's what all this is, is just basically setting up, I think, for the next figure.

But what do you think, Daniel?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, just a few pieces to highlight and then just describing it.

This is a key piece of active inference that there's a relative comparison of expected futures, not just in the abstract, but always conditioned upon policy affordances.

And that helps us understand.

determine whether to trim tab or steer the ship to the left or to the right, because that's our affordances with our hand on the rudder.

Okay, now if you're modeling the hand on the rudder and a hand on the gas and brake, that's another control situation that you might be in, but there is no such thing as like the neutral non-policy grounded trajectory of the boat.

Or one could do that, but it would actually not be actionable.

It wouldn't be action oriented because there would be like some maximum likelihood boat trajectory implicitly based upon non-action of the captain.

And it's like, okay, but I know that we're going to crash if we don't do anything.

A biological organism is actually always engaged in that action selection.

And so this is both something that's biologically grounding to always condition upon policy affordances, but also is computationally simplifying because we could have uncertainty about both sides of the team A's, but we still need to act.

What do you think about that before we continue?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I think that's fantastic because I think the struggle that people have in writing papers

is the fact that they're talking right now because you have to talk about the psychological niches.

How do you keep in mind the functional niches?

They've said you have to do that, but it's hard to do that when your focus is on the cycle.

So how do you keep that other thing running in parallel, the functional niche, while you're supposedly giving your attentional

energies over to psychological niches, but you got to do it.

So how do you train for that?

That's what, that's a fantastic thing about this paper and what you just kind of explained again about active inference.

It's a minimum of two.

If you lose one, you, the whole thing falls apart.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's run around the Rosie as it were.

So here, even though the paper was quite literally beyond skulls, we're going to have a brain for the internal states.

And so just looking at these four pieces, you could also kind of think about a Markov blanket in the middle, but it's not emphasized in this picture.

What you see, even without knowing what the variables are, is that these two on the bottom right, the internal states and the action selection have this arg min.

So those are, as per this discussion, it means that it's an optimization problem.

So these two, there's this active and act of optimization and selection and choice.

Here's the external states, which it's a stochastic differential equation.

So it's doing some dynamics that's a function of, well, omega noise term, but also a function of the current external states as well as the actions.

So if external states were influenced in some way by action, it would be for naught.

Here's the sense states.

They're a function of external states and noise.

So you don't get to directly, in the instant of perception, select sense states.

However, actions like eye-siccating, ocular motor choices, can be selected that result in changed sensory output.

You can walk to a different part of the room where you get a different sensation of temperature, but

without special appeals, one can't just change their sensory inputs.

And so this is like framing, here's the particular entity, the blankets and the internal states as partitioned off from the external states.

And even within the entity,

we see that it's not enough just to talk about the set of undirected nodes that makes the internal and the external states conditionally independent from each other, the Markov blanket.

This is where we kind of get towards the Friston blanket, where we're thinking about incoming sensory dependencies and treating those as perception.

And then there's this free energy function that is doing perception as divergence minimization without the ability to directly control those sensations.

We also have action as minimizing a divergence and minimizing a bound on surprisal.

But this is also framed as an optimization that we actually get to choose based upon our affordances.

And so this one is kind of like you're selecting the sensory, perceptive, interpretive lens that is minimizing something.

It's minimizing surprisal.

And then in a different way, choosing from the action selection affordances, there's also a minimization of surprisal through action.

And so these two are like choice-driven, optimization-like.

And then there also is this optimization happening with perception, but it's like slightly different.


SPEAKER_00:
Can I just add something to that?

We spend, in all of these live streams,

to go again and again back to the active piece and the inference piece or the action piece and the perception piece.

But what I really liked about this figure was if you actually, again, do a little shift in terms of what you want to pay attention to, back to the way uploading or way up finding or whatever, right?

You could say the bound as minimized, or you could say the bound as optimized.

And I think that's really critical as well.

We can put all of our attention on the perception and the action, or we could look at the bound.

And what are the two meanings of binding?

And again, if we're going to look at this imaginatively, what is the Hudson River telling us today?

because that's now the bound as optimized, doesn't necessarily have to have a plane land on it, and the bound as minimized.

And I'll let you use your imagination of what that means in that context, right?

But again,

There's multiple ways that this can be parsed.

Arbitrarily, what we tend to focus on is the action and the inference.

But we could also look at, so how does this bound behave?

Do we just assume it's stationary, it's static, it doesn't change?

Or is it malleable as well?

I guess it just depends on what you want to pay attention to, right?

So again,

This is going to lead to the next figure, which I really love.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, we'll get to figure two in a second.

Yep.

They continue in section 2.1 discussing the cognitive niche.

And this, there's a lot to say.

People could, you know, pause the video and read these quotations or they could read the paper.

What would be the one or few things that you would highlight from this?

And then I'll give a thought.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I took from the paper the thing on the right bottom in red, which I really like.

We do not claim that the formal symmetry between brain and niche dynamics entails a symmetry and construal.

Fantastic.

I'll let people, if they don't know what construal is, they can look that up.

Rather, we employ the notion of symmetry epistemically as a modeling analog.

to make sense of niche dynamics as learning dynamics under active inference.

They're just reassuring us that this is true active inference, okay?

The notion of symmetry is merely an assumption.

I think that that's, and if you read the paper and you read that statement, you'll go, okay, they're not overfitting anything here.

which I love because it would be real easy to just go completely off and start thinking we've solved every riddle.

They haven't done that.

They've done a brilliant job of just sort of keeping it in its lane.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

So to pick up on one of their quotes,

They write, the environment is the generative process that is modeled by the generative model.

Generative process, forest.

Generative model, wayfinding, hiking, team.

Entailed by the phenotype.

In virtue of the mathematical symmetry imposed by a Markov blanket that separates or makes conditionally independent the internal and external states, it's like, hey, whose side are you on?

Internal is external.

They're just two sides.


SPEAKER_00:
Don't provoke me.


SPEAKER_01:
The environment can also be construed as a generative model of its denizens.

who now become the processes generating outcomes for the environment.

So in figure one, we had this sort of like argument on the internal states, but then it's a different qualitative structure for those generative processes.

So this might be appropriate for a world where there's some active entity that's doing strategy and cognition

And the rest of the world is like chains of dominoes.

Like there are exogenous dynamics that could happen without the cognitive entity pushing them, but it's a mere active inference entity in a sense.

This formalism also could extend to other cases, but this is just sort of at a first pass.

And where we're headed and where we're going to go in figure two in the next slide is this symmetry as an assumption

and saying well actually let's put rich dynamics on both sides of the blanket let's allow this thinking where um one active state of this entity is the sense state of the other entity and vice versa so

That means that niche construction is a form of environmental learning about the organisms hosted by the environment.

So it's like the field that's getting the pleasure path burnt into it by footsteps.

It's actually, in a sense, learning where people like to walk.

that's its parameter updating and then there's one case where that pleasure path is just like the stacks of dominoes and so it's like yes it's parameter updating but it's kind of like low-key not learning versus what if that pleasure path was more and more agentic more and more cognitive then there's teaching going both directions and um

then we see a few examples like the two guys on this stream, you know, here's one that you put.

So it's the person in nature and they're in their VR viewing nature.

That's like sort of this one.


SPEAKER_00:
Which is viewing, like that's the strange loop part, right?

And the other thing too is, I mean, if there was some way that you could have put little VRs on every one of those ants, that would have been kind of fascinating as well.

And again, it goes back to,

When we look at slices in time, we can nest, and we're looking at a nest of ants, but is that the same thing?

So, again, it comes back to, okay, so I'm just going to say this at this point.

I'll probably have a ton of bricks fall down on me, but you can look at things as opposite sides of the same coin, or you can look at twins, right?

In both cases, the question is, is one better than the other?

Or is it our ability to see both that is the thing that matters?


SPEAKER_01:
Here's the plot twist with the ant picture.

You'll notice that this ant has yellow paint on all three of its body parts, and this one has blue paint.

And so it turns out that an experimenter had previously collected these ants and then chilled them on ice.

And then while they were stopped, painted them carefully and then reintroduced them to their colony several hours later.

I did this in Arizona.

So now these painted ants and their behavior, they're like tracers in this collective behavioral system.

And so who's learning and who's teaching from who?

Who's...

training who there's cognitive entities in a shared niche on both sides of the markov blanket or whatever kind of blanket however you draw it and so what does it look like to start to embrace this richness on both sides of the cognitive partition yeah let's see what that looks like in figure two okay so on the right side um we have the old figure one

Way back when, back when the environment was simple, weren't those the days?

And the figure has been updated in a few different ways, which I'll describe.

But first, what did you see in figure two or what would you highlight here?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, well, I'm going to beat the drum about joint self-evidencing.

So I think it's easy enough to find out what self-evidencing is.

But joint self-evidencing is a whole different ant or cat or whatever.

And so when we introduce the niche construction optimizes the bound on surprise.

Now the boundary has a different look.

Why is that different than the first two?

where is the where is the joint like literally the joint in this relationship because relationship is fluid how do we how do we secure exactly where the joint is or is it something that's more in the realm of the twist you know back in the keywords we've got that image of the sort of the Morpheus strip

Is that what's actually going on here as opposed to sort of the more traditional definition of what a joint is?


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Joint, it's funny.

It means both separate, carved nature at the joints and all of that, the joint between the two pieces of plywood, and it literally means together.

They are joint.

It's like the past tense of to join.

It's a joint in the Tensegrity sculpture.

So that's very interesting.

And what is the difference between figure one and figure two?

So the triangle and the star...

So the idea of perception optimizing surprisal, we don't get to directly control sensory states, but we can control our cognitive modeling of sensory states, is bound on a surprisal and bound on survival in the evolutionary sense.

And then action is also this argmin-like process of choosing actions.

So that was in figure one.

Now, rather than this external state just being like a function of external states and action states in a noise term, now there's actually this argmin happening.

Now it's an argmin on those same two arguments.

It's still being influenced by the current state of the external states and the actions, but now the other side of the cognitive partitioning is also doing

action selection.

And so then they write, this effectively closes a circle of causality in which the niche and phenotypes, I mean, it's really just two different phenotypes, the niche and the entity, are trying to learn about each other to minimize their joint free energy or surprise.

An inevitable consequence of this is that the niche and its incumbents become mutually predictable in both directions of fit.

paging the principle of unitarity and the quantum and the entanglement from 40, so that the joint niche phenotype system can be regarded as jointly self-evidencing, which probably also has a few different ways to read it.

But we had the star and the triangle,

as perception and action as in the common game of minimizing surprise for the entity.

And now we have square, which is niche construction, optimizing the bound on surprise of the niche, of the organism's actions, which are sense from the perspective of the niche.

Like what if instead of us trying to minimize our surprise about CO2 readings in the atmosphere, the other side of that coin is

the environment minimizing its surprise about the CO2 that's actually put in.

And that's what we see.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

What about the Siamese twin example?

Like is that two sides of the same coin?

Right?

So again, this is the twist aspect of it.

This is we're looking at the bound.

as opposed to what's on either side of that.

Again, we have this ability to see both.

It's a question of whether we choose to.

That's what's really great about this paper, actually, because it's actually looking at extending a mind.

But in order to be able to do that, it's asking you to, can you delimit from what you're paying attention to?


SPEAKER_01:
Let's unpack the equations with one more level.

So here we are in equation four.

So on the top left, we're going from figure one to figure two, but with equation two to equation four.

So figure one was here, and then we introduced the activity of the niche.

Equation three was the optimization of internal states.

to infer causes between this and now the niche is also going to be doing something similar so equation four has the same form as equation two but with internal sensory and external active states switch around which is like i switched um

which signpost was pointing to each side of the maze and I switched where the food locations were.

So it's still like the sign is still correct, but it's all different now.

This means that the variational density is taken under the external states

not the internal states.

And surprisal is relative to organism's actions.

So from the organism's point of view, the variational density is over internal states, minimizing surprisal about the environment.

From the environment's point of view, the variational distribution is over external states, and it is over...

It is oriented towards reducing surprisal relative to the organism's actions.

But again, environment and organism, it could just be thought of as like side A and side B. Like whichever side you're on, there's going to be this symmetry in the forming.

And so that's what equation four does, is it pretty much just replicates equation two, but instead of it being about the organism doing free energy minimization on sensations and internal states

It's literally the other two pieces of the quadrivium of the fourfold distinction, which is like, it's a free energy minimization of the environment on the actions of the organism and the current state of the environment.

And then there's analogous flippings of all the other pieces.

So that's basically taking this symmetry seriously.

And it shows that this free energy functional structure, it is like, it's enough to hold the yes and the no, or to hold both sides together.


SPEAKER_00:
It's not a Jedi mind trick to say that my outsides can be inside the insides of something else like that.

That's,

That is literally not hard to do, but that's not necessarily how I don't walk around every day identifying myself as the insides of something larger.

Right.

But that's a fact.


SPEAKER_01:
So, yeah.

And it's almost like the inside out view on strategy.

it ends up through thinking through other minds, being like an outside-in strategy.

How will other strategic entities, the other chess player, how will they think about my actions?

And so it's like stepping outside of the entity, considering how other minds will see the entity's actions as sense states.

Yeah, perfect.

All right, great.

2.2, the psychological niche.

So this is where they're going to be unpacking the cognitive niche concept, again, in terms of the functional and the psychological components.

And any things here before I'll just note whatever I see.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and the thing you've just highlighted, the psychological niche can thus be viewed as a state space of invitations to act.

That's the attractor state thing, I think.

I don't want to overstep, but I think that's what it's sort of pointing to.

With peaks and valleys that correspond to the most and least probable and thereby adaptive actions, given the priors and phenotypic preferences of organisms like me, having constructed the niche in the first place.

And I brought those three images in

as examples of why free energy minimized drive niche construction in states they share with these psychological attractors.

Like why does somebody want to paraglide outside of the Monch in Switzerland or do the Ferrata on Mount Norquay in Banff, or I'm not sure where the amusement park is in the States.

But I mean, again, why are these, could be these not just functional places, but psychological

niches right as an extension of the mind that's essentially what this is is is pointing at do we necessarily see the walking along that ferrata as an extension of the mind well people that are probably enjoying it do

And people that are wetting themselves probably don't.


SPEAKER_01:
And all of these cases involve the cognitive niche broadly as having like a functional underlying physical embodied substrate.

Like there is a roller coaster here.

There is a bridge of some kind.

There is the apparatus of the paragliding machinery and it's both functional and it's cognitive.

It's an invitation to,

for an experience and an invitation for being in a certain scenario.

So that's very rich.

And I hope we can explore that a little more in the dot one, two.


SPEAKER_00:
And it's also, it's also, yeah, it's also dense and it's also up and down, which when the previous slide, we saw the, I'm sorry, I think it's the previous slide where we saw the, the waves example of,

One of the, I'm not sure if it's slide 23 or 24.

But anyway, that's the other part of this psychological piece.

It's not necessarily stable.

You don't know who's going to walk into these kind of niche constructions and remain stable and who's going to be completely destabilized by what they find themselves in.

That surprise-o piece causes all kinds of feelings, right?

So, yeah, it's, again, fantastic paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

We come now to section two, three, the functional niche.

So previously we were discussing that psychological niche facet of the cognitive niche.

And then this is coming to the functional niche.

What does dancing with the stars have to do with it?

Or what would you add here?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, do we gear learning towards belonging to or working with or both?

Because I think in, in, in different,

situations that we find ourselves sometimes we're partnered with somebody who has prior experience sometimes we're stepping on one another's toes and either one of those kind of situations can bring us minimize our free energy right and optimize i step on you step on my toes enough times i'll probably communicate to you that we need to maybe change the pattern of your foot movement

Right?

One isn't always done at the exclusion of the other in terms of getting to the place we want to be sooner.

There's also the part where dancing in actual galactic scales just fascinates me.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm going to start with a quote from the paper, but it will end in a joke.

They give us an example of the wax feeling and extended cognitive apparatus of the whole postal chain, the supply chain logistics of the mailing.

And they basically say the point here is neither...

is that neither of the internal or external sub-components of the brain wax system exists in isolation.

So it's like the fully distributed term.

So what does it look like when instead of just thinking like, well, cognition is about what's happening in the brain, happening in the skull,

and then there's all these extensions of cognition like that get um facilitating what happens in the brain is now going to be done through these extended apparatuses and this is kind of like even going further which is like yeah it's a little odd to depict the wax as doing active modeling of the punch

but actually from the markov partitioning perspective all these different sub components of the cognitive constellation federation are all sense and acting each other they're all doing active on each other back to figure two look at the brain see how it has a star here perception optimizing the balance so how do we dance with the stars

How do we do group dancing with the stars?

How do the brains dance together?

That's not the same thing as one active brain, one star in an extended dead universe.

Dancing with the stars is when cognitive entities are on the other side of the phone.

And so it's a very apt meme that you added here.


SPEAKER_00:
There's another interesting part to this too, and that is the stage tends to be set up so that the cameras can catch all of the choreography.

What happens when the participants

impose on the cameras, right?

Like, when do they extend the stage out into the audience?

That hasn't happened yet, but what would that mean then for the property that we know, conventionally have known as dancing with the stars?

Now the camera has to move to that active inference.

That's imposing, and it's kind of really fascinating.

Again, do you construct it and contain it, or...

What elements of this are actually free and independent?


SPEAKER_01:
That makes me think about, here's figure one, science communication.

Scientists are stars and they're great.

Figure two, science communication.

Now we're dancing with the stars because the fourth wall has been broken and there's rich cognitive activity

not just happening on both sides of the communication partition, but actually in a way where it's irreducible and it's a value add from both sides.

That's when we'll be doing science communication with the stars.

Okay.


UNKNOWN:
2.4.


SPEAKER_01:
We won't go into it that much, but feel free to make any comment that you like.

They give a case study of the common earthworm

Lumberchris terrestris.

So here's that wormy guy.

And they talk about some of the ideas that were brought up in the previous sections, like counterfactuals in the niche and inferential efficiency and uploading of cognitive functions in the context of the worm.

Anything you'd add about this or we can continue on?


SPEAKER_00:
Just real quickly.

I mean, I'm glad that they're introducing the second, not just offloading, but uploading idea.

but again, I'm always sort of, I always get a little sensitive around the idea that expediting is not expedition and we, we are sort of built to do both.

So optimization can sometimes just take, take a longer path.

And so again, I'm not, I'm not critiquing what they're saying here.

I understand what in the context of earthworms, I don't know if there's a,

a Magellan earthworm, or if one has been discovered yet.

So I don't want to sort of drag this off into the wilderness, but I do know that for us, there is that aspect of our curiosity, which we want to make sure that we don't toss away in terms of bringing the example of the case study forward.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Just one note here.

Over multiple generations,

So that's both ecological in terms of the stigmatic niche construction of building the tunnel apparatus, and it's evolutionary because there's a selective niche now inside of the ecological niche that selects for earthworms that are better at, for example, using tunnels and building sometimes rather than being the builder earthworm.

This comes at the cost of being evolutionarily glued to those cognitive extensions.

Put bluntly...

cognitive niche construction smartens the world of the earthworm so that its physiology can remain dumb yet optimal in peace so from 24 years ago clark and so that's interesting to think about and it actually relates to a question that joseph clark asked in the chat they wrote if we can model the environment as a sum of its states and the state's environment

What does this say about our capacity to create a superintelligence, perhaps in an adapted structure to the deep generative model of mental action with the superintelligence acting as attention over its states like people and frogs?

So this is kind of like saying, okay,

well just one thought it's not exactly what is being said is all right so we've talked about how there's this like extended active inference that's happening richly in a distributed way across multiple stars we're doing active with the stars but is that whole system one non-extended super intelligence or what is that extended system and what does that say about our ability to actually construct and work with different intelligences than human

Cool.

Three, extended active inference.

So here's where we get to the EAI parts.

What would you say about this?


SPEAKER_00:
Well...

have a lot to say but honestly i think i want to keep it to the point one and the point two because they're they're i'm not by nature the kind of person who wants to critique and i'm not critiquing this but i can think of lots and lots of examples in my my personal professional uh history where if you don't appreciate put bluntly cognitive niche construction smartens the world of the earthworm

so that its physiology can remain dummy yet optimal in peace.

That's been ignored in a lot of formal education settings.

So if we get there, we'll talk about it.

And if we don't,

No problem.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

They do connect to at least two, minimum of two, of course.

And these are like extended in space and extended in time, through time.

Diachronic as opposed to synchronic.

And so without going too much into the quantum...

wormhole, rabbit hole with space and time being constructs, hashtag livestream 40.

Those are at least just two ways we can think about extended cognition.

Okay, here's the sections that are in three, and it'll be great to talk more about this in dot one and dot two.

In these sections, they introduce three functions or aspects of the extended mind.

So the first of these features, as they call them, is a parity principle.

parity principle states that if a part of the world functions as a process which were it done in the head we would have no hesitation in recognizing it as part of the cognitive process then that part of the world is part of the cognitive process so if you can add two plus two in your head be right or wrong or whatever then it shouldn't be um qualitatively different to think about two plus two on the calculator it's all part of this extended cognitive so parity just means like um

If it's been rendered unto Caesar, then it's equal.

The parity principle, yeah?

Okay.

No, no, that's right, yeah.

The parity principle entails the second feature of the theory of extended mind, which is the notion of a potential functional isomorphism between some internal and external states.

We discussed this a lot in the representations paper and what does active inference tell us about our representations of ourself and all of that.

So there's a lot packed into this notion of functional isomorphism.

What kind of functional isomorphism does the cognitive model have the same structure as the generative process, or can it be just action oriented and of a totally different kind?

but suffice to say there has to be some functional connection.

And then the third piece that they introduce is this epistemic action.

These are actions that ease or optimize cognitive tasks by reducing the memory load required to perform a task.

So that's like space complexity.

By simplifying the computational processing procedure, time complexity.

And by minimizing the probability of error outcomes, success probabilities.

So it's kind of like space, time, and then surprise.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
And that's the cognitive dimension.

Like we always hear about, well, what would it be like when you're on the light beam and when you're on the spaceship and when you're going into the black hole in this objectivist frame, as if the dimensions that mattered were like the objective space and time.

But once we swallow that cognitive pill or decide to let it course through us in our action, all of a sudden there's the surprise dimension.

element of surprise and that's where some of these psychological aspects of the cognitive niche come into play and some of these citations are pretty interesting so as always like reading citations is awesome um so referring to the first of those features that they talk about with the parody principle

It's been suggested that external resources should meet the requirements of glue and trust.

So it's not just for first graders anymore, glue and trust.

So that the resource is available when needed, like biomemory, and not subject to constant agentive scrutiny to ensure it is working as it should.

Again, like biomimicry.

From the point of view of extended active inference, the trust condition is guaranteed by the uploading process whereby the agent learns to engage epistemic cues of the generative process.

This entails trading off.

on-board neurocognitive functions or on-board environmental ones.

I wasn't actually sure if this was meant to be off-boarded environmental ones or if on-board here is still referring to our ship.

It's still on-board our ship, but now the function is also distributed environmentally.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, but I kind of focused on the trade-off.

So it's...

You made a choice.

Now, was it the proper one?

You hope that the stability of the thing that you passed along to remains robust and constant.

So that's why it's a trade-off.

There's an assumption built in, I think.

That's how I read it.


SPEAKER_01:
And they also write, for instance, the earthworm is glued to its inheritance of burrows and moist soil because the constraints of burrows, soils, etc.

have played on the earthworm's evolution.

And then we can imagine how an individual would become glued to their environment in a similar fashion over developmental and also evolutionary timescales.

Like, if we...

don't have fossil fuels tomorrow, it's going to be tough.

But there would have been a time previously in history before we were glued to them like we are now.

And so it's like glue and trust.

And what does that enable?

What does it constrain?

And how does that relate to this core screening and the parity principle?


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Epistemic actions.

So they write a notebook, for instance, can be viewed as supporting and easing the task of making it to your multiple appointments throughout the week because it can encode relevant information.

It can provide structures like a schedule.

and it can increase your chances of making it to those appointments on time.

So it's those same three areas that we discussed earlier, like space, time, and surprise about success.

These intuitions are formalized by the process of uploading from the point of view of extended active inference, but in addition, by accounting for the relation between all these advantages, also between slash among.

Between is for two things, and among is for more than two things.

And then here's a bunch of different kinds of notebooks.

And then here's the computational one.

Anything to add on this?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, traditionally, from a learning standpoint, the epistemic actions tend to be placed into a planning paradigm.

Whereas I see this more as the provisioning, this is part of my kit.

So I kind of tend to step back and say a journal by itself or an assumption that journaling, writing my ideas out in the traditional sense, isn't the same as I'm going to bring a journal along in case.

And the in case being the counterfactual, right?

So again, I'm in agreement with them, but I know that convention follows that you take one of these things along because you're planning.

And I'm not discounting planning.

I'm just saying when it turns into a plan as opposed to it's one more source of or one more example of a provisioning exercise.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

One thought on that would be like the difference between true step-by-step long-term planning, planning as inference, and a sort of nested planning approach where it's like, today, I'm just going to plan to make time to pack my backpack.

And then I'll have a plan in the moment when I'm there with my backpack.

Like I wanna have the best possible plan, but we're like layers of uncertainty away from what actually might be that situation or the specifics, but I wanna have the right affordances then.

And so what are the plans that can be taken right now

so that we can plan to plan instead of just treating planning as like being like before action and being like we're just going to be in the headquarters and we're going to plan out all the alternatives it's like how are we going to plan to plan and then once you go into the nested planning well then how are we going to plan to plan to plan and what should we be doing in the headquarters maybe we should be on the road by now yeah well it's just it's different versions


SPEAKER_00:
And I think as long as you can see them as being different, you're probably ahead of the person who automatically jumps to one conclusion of what this means.

So that's all.


SPEAKER_01:
Great.

And then one other term that they talked about is diachronic cognition.

So they wrote, the standard example used to explain diachronic cognition is that of Elizabethan theater companies.

in the work of Tribble, 2005, Evelyn Tribble, Distributing Cognition in the Globe Theater.

And this paper is about how members of theater companies during the 16th century A.D.

would manage to perform multiple plays per week without being able to rehearse due to time limitations.

So...

too real too real and the ability of the actors to memorize how to perform those plays depended on all kinds of embodied enacted and cultured etc etc etc like all the richness was there and is there and um then like this is just one quote from Tribble's paper and then love to hear what you think about it so here's from King Lear which is a Shakespeare play that I love um

And it's just interesting in this extended cognitive discussion

to see the artifact of the text, the written part, that's like the trace that we see.

And that's when, when Fristin speaks of singing from the same hymn sheet, this is kind of like, this is the script.

I mean, isn't the script like the DNA, isn't it the blueprint?

And then this actually reminds us that no, there's actually hundreds of years of discourse and discussion around the enactments and what the trace means.

And so like,

Meagher argues what has eluded generations of editors is not likely to have been instantly grasped by the company originally mobilizing the play.

Meagher argues that Shakespeare was expected, probably and preferred, to be available, plan to plan to speak to will.

Get in the boat.

Able to explain and install such designs as this.

Yeah.

Captain Shakespeare was expected to be there.

And so that's why the trace isn't instructions.


SPEAKER_00:
It's kind of interesting, too, if you think about this, because what does this say about a lot of stuff that goes on at the post-secondary level now, which you put a loop on it or put a bow on it when you have a conversation with somebody about your poster or your trifold?

What has that got to do with a diachronic cognition?

Interesting, right?

Because it's not the same thing.

What they're essentially saying here is there's the context of how you would present a poster, but then there's this, which appears, I guess, to the current viewer, not the one 500 years ago, as being this thing taking up a lot more time.

But back then, that was the default for those people who were time constrained.

So again, have we come up with a way of being able to demonstrate cognition today that enables this view?

I don't know.

Again, I'm not criticizing.

I'm just saying, what if, counterfactually, this were the way that we were able to now give people an opportunity to say, this was my niche construction, as opposed to, I got X number of answers correct on this form of filter.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, when this paper talks about patterned sociocultural practices mediated by material artifacts populating the stage and a cross-generational apprenticeship system, and what you just said about education, this makes me think about the PhD system and the idea that it could happen without the materiality or the intergenerational mentorship and apprenticeship systems.

it just wouldn't be the same cognitive system.

And then I really liked what you said there, like the brain based instructionist paradigm, it wants to put the student in the cubicle into a different niche, a different learning environment, and then test them on the recall, on the ability to like be that API on the other side of the question response hotline.

and what else does it look like when we invite each student to create a cognitive Niche which as we're discussing here is psychological and it's offloaded it's uploaded into the environment which could be digital and then it's like

I want to know that you spent the time and attention.

I want to see your Coda page with the questions that you wrote.

And I want to see some components of your cognitive niche and see where you're developing it and how you're developing it.

And public goods like parks, there's people who prune the roses and there's people who mow the grass.

There's people who

Make sure the trees are all good to go.

And those are all different kinds of niche maintenance practices.

And so in our broader cognitive niche, how do we navigate?


SPEAKER_02:
Amen.


SPEAKER_01:
Here's their whole concluding remark.

Better stage, right?

Yeah.

Here's their whole concluding remark.

The model of cognitive niche construction proposed in this paper offers a formal apparatus for the study of non-brain based factors in cognition.

So extended cognition as a starting point for modeling, not as a conclusion, not like, well, there's all these things in the niche and there's the apprenticeship and then there's the ambiguity.

And so the conclusion of my paper is it's extended.

invert that.

So that is starting with the notion of this extended distributed cognitive process, and then apply the sensemaking to the modeling process in this holistic way.

The point stressed in the paper was that cognitive niche construction can be studied as a shared cognitive functioning, enabling organisms to track

fractal often implicitly and at low cost and fractal cause effect relationships otherwise difficult if not impossible to track semicolon notably relationships where the causal structure is volatile or too complex to be learned

by a single entity, by a single nest mate.

And so as they close from the point of view of extended active inference, EAI, all cognitive functions are in the game of tracking causal regularities, and there's no principled reason to restrict this process to the boundaries of skin, skull, or even individual agents.


SPEAKER_00:
So then how do we put it all into practice?


SPEAKER_01:
What does applied extended active inference looks like?

Yes.

The 4EA cognitive, extended embedded encultured inactive applied cognition.

And so definitely when we're in 41.1, we can talk about applied slash applying.


SPEAKER_00:
And taking initiative.

That's a really critical thing.

Like it's hard to do.

You always hear people in post-secondary education say, well, it's what you do with it.

It's right.

Like there's a bit of a hand wiping aspect.

What's what you do with it.

But what this is saying is, I think it's a little bit more than what I do with it.

So how do we set that stage so that it's not quite so daunting to take the initiative?


SPEAKER_01:
What you do with it is the hands-on.

You're the active person.

It's what you make of it.

It's the energy you put in.

You're going to get back what you put into your PhD.

That's...

you're the star of the show, you're the main and only character in this dead extended cognitive world.

But what about when we're dancing with the PhDs and non-PhDs and we're actually applying together in a shared cognitive niche and that cognitive niche includes other stars who are also like sensing and acting and cognizing about us.

So applied thinking through other minds and ways of knowing.

and then another question that we'll discuss in dot one dave was that there's often a point in these active papers about the um different kinds of partitioning and blankets there's anatomical mechanical there's functional psychological but there's a lot of different partitionings and different kinds of things coming into play so what is the relation

between the anatomical mechanical blankets, so the skin and skull, and the functional psychological blankets.

This is kind of like brain and mind.

So how is that distinction related to nesting of similar or different kinds of blankets?

And then, oh yeah, where does the niche and the niches and the niches of each other and the laterally interacting and the nested niches, how does that all come together?

So what are your penultimate thoughts, Dean?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, first of all, I really appreciate the paper.

I think it's a fantastic paper.

I love inverting because I think we're capable of doing that.

To Dave's point, I think we have this ability to see the difference between process and product or up and down or whatever, dynamic and stable.

And arbitrariness seems to...

bother the people who want things to be stable and stability seems to bother those people that want things to be creative.

And I think that's a perfect world.

And so every time I read one of these papers by Axel and the other authors, but in particular, the two papers recently that we've now given a treatment to that, I think Axel was the primary author, first author.


SPEAKER_01:
Only author on 34.

Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

I mean, he, he, he brings things that,

at first might seem counterintuitive compared to the way things traditionally have been viewed.

And he makes a very compelling case for why we might want to open a second eye to this.

He doesn't throw out the first thing.

He says, maybe there's a new entailment

that we might want to consider in this partitioning exercise.

We all seem to participate in just different levels of degrees of sophistication.

So again, I'm not a fanboy or putting people up on pedestals, but I certainly respect the way that he's able to share this information and make it more accessible.

I think we can make it even more accessible if we can find real-life on-the-ground examples.

And I think that's what we'll try to do in the 41.1 and 2.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Agreed.

Axel gets those cogs spinning.

So as always, Axel, thanks for the collaboration directly and indirectly.

And yeah, this should be a great...

set of discussions in the dot one and dot two so dean thanks a ton for all the assistance before during and after here and uh to anyone else who's listening now or in the future or whatever just come get involved and enact with us all the world's a stage everyone's a critic we're all stars here etc thanks daniel really appreciate it bye

## H6rjjPZE5hs

SPEAKER_01:
all right hello everyone thanks for joining actinflab live stream number 41.1 it's april 6 2022. welcome to the actinflab we're a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference this is a recorded and an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so we can improve on our work

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live stream.

If you want to learn more about any actinflab activities, head over to activeinference.org, and you can learn more there.

All right, today in stream number 41.1, we are continuing to learn and discuss the paper, Extended Active Inference,

Constructing Predictive Cognition Beyond Skulls by Constant, Clark, Kirchhoff, and Friston from 2020.

And today in the dot one, we're going to have some introductions, revisit the roadmap, and some of the big questions of the paper,

and then we can have an open discussion around the figures formalism anything else that people think is relevant and for those who are watching live feel free to add any questions or comments in the live chat so we can start just by

saying hello, hearing perhaps Blue's first thoughts on the paper.

And from Dean and I, we can revisit what we've been thinking about potentially since the dot zero, which I'll save for soon.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Daniel.

I'm Dean.

I'm up here in Calgary.

I'm a little nasally today because I'm fighting off a bit of a cold.

What I've been thinking about since we did the dot zero is the sort of the idea around how cognition is maybe cultural.

And I'll just leave it at that because maybe we can have a bit of a conversation about that today.

I'll pass it to Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm Blue.

I'm an independent research consultant in New Mexico.

And I, yeah, okay, so I'll give some first thoughts on the paper.

One thing that really stuck out to me was the idea of glue and truth.

So that gave a whole new level.

So in order for you to have extended cognition, you have to believe in it, and you have to be glued to it.

You have to have access to it whenever you need it, and you have to believe that it's valid.

So that's the glue and truth idea that they unpacked in the paper.

And it gave a whole new...

meaning of like being glued to your phone to me like I was like oh this is why we're always glued to our phone there's glue and there's truth right um so that was kind of interesting and then um definitely like uh to touch on what Dean was saying I think that

the cognition and bedding and culture is a super interesting aspect.

And like in the very last section of the paper, they were talking about like the ability to give like theater plays without being able to rehearse just based on cultural cues and knowing the context and,

just being so well-versed in how to cue off of each other or this kind of thing.

And it reminded me like of maybe like a jazz improv, like we know like what's acceptable or like when you're playing, when you have like a jam band and you're playing all the time, like you kind of just know where to pick off or, or, you know, Daniel and I are constantly leaving stigmatic traces.

Like, like there's like this extended cognition that I see happen.

Like we'll both be doing the same thing at the same time.

Like I was just doing that.

Like it's hard to eliminate redundancy.

in those kinds of circumstances.

So, so there is like the shared culture and how like central, like even because culture, yes, we have culture as a human society, but like within the Elizabethan theater companies, there's their own culture, right.

Of, I don't know how many people were in the theater company, 20.

So like there's that and being able to cue off of each other and like, you know, the active inference lab, which is growing every day, reach out if you

so like within the active inference lab, like where we have our community and we have like, you know, some people we interact with on a very regular basis and then others less so.

And so we're kind of able to cue off of each other in that kind of way.

And so how does this go out to like your religious culture, your state culture, like your country culture, like let alone society at large.

So, so this idea of cultural cognition, I think is very, um,

like salience and also like really speaks to the IQ tests or not IQ tests, but even like childhood development and learning.

Like in some cultures, when you give a child, you know, some pieces and do a demonstration for them of how to like, you know, stack blocks together or how to like make a Lego thing.

In some cultures, like, I mean, especially in the West, we see like a child who assembles the blocks, like maybe starts off how the demonstration happened, but then like does some new innovative stuff.

Like we see a child like that.

Oh, that's so like creative.

And what an ingenious way to use these, you know, tools in a novel way.

But in some cultures, like that child must be an idiot.

Why isn't he just replicating like what the adults showed him how to do?

And that's a legit like cultural phenomenon that speaks to intelligence.

And yeah.

Okay.

Sorry, I rambled enough.

You've got my thoughts.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Well, at least we know there'll be a lot to jump into.

let's uh return to the big question so for more background of course people can read the paper or check out the dot zero but let's just pick up with the big question and then the roadmap and then we'll kind of jump into the more unstructured slides um as we

uh framed it here the question of this paper about extended cognition is about how cognition is extended and the way that the authors approach that is this perspective of the cognitive niche which they develop from the perspectives that are focused on here in this paper with this dialectic of the cognitive niche consisting of a psychological habit

from ecological psychology one can think of, as well as a functional habit, like a neurobehavioral habit.

And they also have a selective behavior

ecological evolutionary perspective on the cognitive niche that Axel Constant and others have developed in other work.

But in this paper, they were focused mostly on the psychological and the functional and the timescale of behavioral ecology rather than evolutionary ecology.

But this is all kind of in the background.

So they focus on the psychological and functional dimensions of the cognitive niche and use that to sort of navigate and triangulate

cognitive extensions so any other ways to think about it or just what did other people think of were just like a big question that would maybe mention active inference or not but what is the kind of question that leads somebody to want to read this paper and understand what they're conveying yeah


SPEAKER_03:
I think one of the interesting things here is that if you encounter something that you don't believe is an extension or a continuation of the prior culture, so you're walking into a new habitat, we'll just call it that, what does that then imply in terms of your ability to, as a newbie, cognitively extend into that situation?

I think that's what this paper is really interesting in terms of discussing because not so long ago, there were a couple of researchers, writers, Lave and Wagner, who talked about experiential learning and how you'd be on the periphery

of a of a culture and you would slowly move your way closer and closer to whatever the core of that culture is this doesn't speak to the the cultural aspects of cognitive extension in that way so my question is when you when you walk into a new culture or something that you don't feel that you're necessarily um familiar with how does how does your cognitive extension get taken up in that new culture

As opposed to the participants in the culture, right?

There's two components to this.

It's how the people will treat you, for example, but it's how the culture treats you as well.

So there's two parts to that, and I think that's really interesting.

They haven't broken it out in this paper per se, but they certainly lead to that kind of question because of the research and the argument that they've been able to put forward.


SPEAKER_01:
nice um three researchers walk into a new habit is it a psychological habit is it a functional habit and then that makes me think about like the culture of a music festival or something when you're at the periphery there's people who are just joining like you are or people who are leaving or people who want a little bit of a space away from the main action but using that sort of inner and outer culture idea very interesting yeah blue


SPEAKER_00:
So the idea of being like a newcomer is pretty interesting in, in this context because there has to be some kind of reciprocity that like you are expecting the niche to be a certain way, or maybe you learn the ways of the niche.

You don't really have an expectation or, or, you know, like how your old niche was and you carry that forward with some prediction.

But as the niche is updating you,

you are also updating the niche.

And so as the culture is updating you, singular you, you are also updating the culture and it goes around and around like that.

And I think, or I wonder what degree we all update our culture.

Like what is the single characteristic?

Maybe it's like a big five personality trait or maybe it's a,

You know, some kind of Enneagram type or maybe there's a single dominating thing that makes you have a strong influence on the culture around you.

Or is it just like the rate at which you transmit information or the number of people that you transmit information to?

I mean, we all know that like those nodes that are hotspots in like, you know, social networks are, you know, like they're the influential nodes that have the bazillions of connections.

So is it just the number of connections that you have, the level of information that you transmit or the quantity of information that you transmit?

Or is there something like some personality trait that actually gives you the ability to update your culture more influentially than others?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
One last quick point.

I want to kind of build on Blue's point there.

So part of this, and I'm using terminology that's not part of the paper, but I think we could look at enculturation.

as a form of domesticate, right?

And so I'm not sure when a person walks into a new culture, whether they're perceived as sort of non-domesticated, and then we're gonna get them caught up or brought up to speed in terms of what the culture is.

And I agree with you, Blue, it is a circular thing.

I just wonder whether there's a certain amount of wildness that's brought in when somebody new is sort of thrown into the,

the bigger cultural uh pot and whether there's an effort to try to bring them to be more influential on the on the one than the one being influential on the many so i always always i'm always curious about those things and i don't think that this is going to get answered right now but i think that's an important point to sort of remember especially when we get into the flipping part here which i can see dan has already got the uh the graph up so let's go there


SPEAKER_01:
we will come there it just made me think about when the niche is um not other people so going on a walk through the forest and the niche is going to be like other trees or just the path itself um this kind of figure two representation

where there's an active process by which not just as the entity doing action selection with respect to the niche, but the niche is basically being agentified and it is taking some sort of active process by which it is doing an inference on the entity.

And in the forest, it's like, whoa, are the trees alive?

Is this Lord of the Rings?

But if this is another group of people and this is your social niche,

and your psychological and functional habitat is other people, then it is like quite literal.

This could be two people in conversation, or this could be one versus multiple.

And so in the social and cognitive and cultural niche,

it is like less of a leap to talk about how there's cognitive processes on both sides, but then that helps us recognize that actually it is a continuum and it's like, okay, so if we can very clearly see how in the conversation, there's this optimization happening on both sides, then what does that look like when we're in the forest?

Okay, cool.

So some of those big questions have been raised and then let's just revise the roadmap

see where they went on their little forest journey and then we'll jump back into the slides and um the go from there so they introduced the cognitive niche active inference and extended mind concepts and then discussed the argument that they're going to lead us down and the way in which active inference plays into it

As we mentioned just recently, they're focusing on the functional and psychological aspects of the cognitive niche, leaving for later that eco evolutionary perspective.

And they're using active inference as an integrative framework and set of formalisms to help address that.

go through cognitive psychological and functional niches provide a case study with earthworms and have several figures that we spent a lot of time in the dot zero looking at where in figure one there was somewhat of an active entity in a niche that could have its own dynamics but then figure two

introduce the idea that the niche is also doing something like what the entity is doing, but with a symmetry.

So same, same, but different.

And then after that discussion, they take the full turn towards extended active inference, EAI.

And they recognize, well, if the niche or whatever is on the other side of the entity in the way that we're modeling it is doing something cognitive,

Is that a way in which we can recognize boundaries and interfaces as well as distributed or extended cognitive processes?

And they approached that from a few different angles, like extension through space, spatial extension, as well as extension through time, temporal extension related to diachronic cognition through time.

And then they also discussed a few pieces related to, for example, epistemic actions and the relevance of how distributed cognitive systems use epistemic actions, for example, knowing where to look to find some piece of information in the niche.

That's kind of how they went through this paper.

Any comments on the roadmap or we can now turn to the blank slides.


SPEAKER_00:
Don't forget about the spiced food.

Cause that was also part of the case case study.


SPEAKER_01:
What about it?


SPEAKER_00:
Um, I mean, that was like, there was the earthworm case, but then there was also like the case of, um, spicing food as like a cultural practice.

And, um,

how like potentially, I mean, even the act of cooking food or how we prepare food overall, like some parts of food are poisonous or like, I mean, you're going to eat blowfish.

Like that's a very precise, very mentor mentee transmitted practice.

So, but, but I mean, more than that, just also like the spices that we use can sometimes be like, you know, poisonous agents and they're slightly toxic to us, but not in small amounts.

And

But they also like help to get rid of any parasites that might be residing in the meat that we're eating.

But yeah, they use that as a case study also, not just the earthworm with the kidney.


SPEAKER_01:
This is a book that we've been reading at home recently, Much Depends on Dinner.

It's kind of in the culinary writing genre, not something we talk about too much directly here, but it's a very interesting approach that really does some deep dives on what we could see from our active lab vantage point of extended and encultured cognitive processes and

thinking about how food gets to the table in all of the ways that it gets to the table.

How do people get to the table?

How do we show up?

And how does that differ through time?

So it's kind of a cool book.


SPEAKER_00:
Similarly, like the omnivore's dilemma, which I just read was also like, how does your food get to the table?

Where does it come from?

And yeah, that's a whole, there's a whole set of practices.

And like, not only that, but it's actually, I mean, you go back to thinking about Serval and thinking like a state, thinking about thinking like a state,

There's a whole set of practices that actually construct our society based on the way that we get food, which is really pretty remarkable.


SPEAKER_01:
It's a distributed metabolism with bringing resources and nutrients to and from.

And so it is very related.

okay so here's a few of the options people can um take a quick little vote or state their preference we can talk about walking into new cognitive niches talk a little bit about glue and truth in the context of extended cognitive processes and culture about applying extended active inference

and how that is modeled in its deployment, as well as maybe from a experiential perspective, what does it feel like to be applying active inference in the extended way?

We have the question from Dave about thinking about partitions, and there's a few other ways we could go, but any preferences from these?


SPEAKER_00:
So when we talk about applying active inference, are we talking about this from a realist or instrumentalist perspective?

I just need to know.

Determines my vote.


SPEAKER_01:
I think you've already said enough.

What would it mean?

Why does it matter about realism and instrumentalism if we're talking about applying extended active inference?

What are those as you're seeing it now?

And what would the realism flavor or instrumentalist flavor look like?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, are we talking about actually what is it like to apply active inference in an extended way?

Like what is that actually, like it takes on a very realist flavor when we're thinking about extending active inference beyond our own skull?

Or are we modeling, what are we actually doing here?

Are we modeling collective cognition, collective predictive processing as extended active inference?

Or what are we actually doing here?

I would like to know what you guys think.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, Dean.

My curiosity around this is always to do with things that have actually happened, but I still think there's a sort of a tool or instrumentalist part around it too.

When I first joined this community,

I don't know that I could have become part of whatever the community is evolving into without having both a kind of a realism perspective and an instrumentalism perspective.

I'm always kind of curious when people want to break it out into those two things.

I'm a minimum of two thing guy.

I think both of them exist.

And I don't think we can actually do anything without having both of them.

So let's say we drop one of the other blue.

What happens in terms of our ability to sort of get a real grip on or optimize or do any of the things that we want to do in terms of becoming enculturated?

Like if we drop one of the two,

and just put all of our resources in the other domain, do we do that naturally or do we do that in those domesticated situations, right?

If we're doing it in the wild, if we're truly having to go out there and forage, don't we use both?

That's my question.


SPEAKER_00:
So I will respond to that.

I do think we use both.

I drop the instrumentalist perspective all the time.

I drop it when I think about extending my cognition into my niche environment and I think about extending my cognition into my group of active inference people or whatever.

I drop the instrumentalist perspective frequently in language, in thought.

I think about, oh, what is it like to actively infer XYZ?

But I never lose sight of

the instrumentalist perspective as the real way things are.

Does that make sense?

Like, so the instrumentalist perspective is the real way things are like, this is a tool.

I talk about it as if it's not, I think about it as if it's not, but essentially in my generative model, like from the realist perspective in my model, when I talk about my model, I am modeling my model and I'm doing it with the instrument of active inference.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Well, again, that's where I find this really interesting.

If we're going to extend, it's hard enough to talk about building a niche or constructing a niche without tools or without realism.

But if you're going to do that as an extended cognition exercise, now it's even more complicated, even more complex.

How do you drop one of the two and continue to feel like you're accomplishing something?

I don't want to get into debate.

I don't think we're getting into debates about it's one or the other.

But I think when you're trying to figure things out, to just say, okay, I'm automatically going to blind one eye just because I want the other eye to grow bigger.

The other eye doesn't grow bigger.

So why are you doing that to yourself?

That's what I always ask.


SPEAKER_01:
So we can think about applying extended active inference.

And as Blue initially asked, are we approaching this in what ways from a realism and in what ways from an instrumentalism perspective?

So the realist question, just we're at the DMV, we're getting our driver's license renewed, and they ask us to cover one of our eyes.

because they actually do want to understand that one of the eyes has a certain visual capacity.

So we're closing the instrumentalism eye, and it's like, to the extent that we can even talk about the real,

cognitive systems actually really do have functional dependencies that extend beyond any actual boundary in the world or that we state.

So however many philosophical caveats you need to add about realism, this eye has no problem seeing that the functional components of cognition are distributed.

So that is realism or really extended active inference.

So R-E-A.

The instrumentalism eye is how are we going to utilize Act-Inf in a way that is useful.

And so here with this eye, we can see that

no matter what, we're gonna have to model along with compromises like accuracy minus complexity, the ways in which our models of the cognitive systems, they actually do require in the model, the as if influence of influences beyond their neural system.

So whether those influences beyond the actual boundaries are real, or whether those influences beyond the statistical boundaries are statistically real,

we can oscillate and like look at something because we're the one who's generating those visuals and integrating those perspectives into like a single coherent generative model.

And one last thought on this, a lot of times somebody will think, well, what does a bug see?

What does an insect see?

And it has like a thousand different views of the world.

But of course we have two eyes and see just one vision of the world.

there's reason to think that no matter how many facets of the insect eye there are, they're still having just a single coherent visual generative model.

So maybe there's even other perspectives, but that won't mean that we are

not having a singular underlying coherent generative experience so okay that um bridge being crossed or burnt depending on what you think what are some situations where we would be applying extended active inference so and also to distinguish that question from just like where would we want to be extending active inference

Where would specifically extended perspectives on active inference be really important as opposed to just non-extended?

And maybe it'd be helpful there to look at figure one and two just to remind ourself of those differences.

So think about the examples while we... Yes, blue first, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
So...

In the spirit of active inference being a scale-free framework, like I think about extended active inference as very critical to this scale-friendly slash scale-free way that we think about active inference, just because as a biological system, we're layers and layers and layers and layers and layers deep.

So like I, this like, whatever my ego perceives as me, Blue,

I am an embodied image of extended active inference.

I mean, so, so I don't see it happening anywhere.

I don't see it extended active inference, not happening anywhere.

Like I see what happens in my skull, a function as of what's happening in my cells and my tissues and my organs, et cetera, because all of those subunits of blue are doing this extended active inference with one another.

But if we want to look specifically at like a group function, which may be necessary or maybe not, I mean, to go beyond our skull, are we looking at like how organizations function, which maybe Dean wants to talk about more or how, you know, states function or how institutions function at large?

So do we have to get actually beyond the physical body to go beyond our skull or can we go within our physical body?

body to talk about extended active inference beyond skulls?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So we can think about like

that great point, which is that nested systems of which we often talk about can actually be thought of as extended active inference systems.

So we've talked about like ant nest mates in the ant colony.

And so there's the sense in which the lateral interactions from one nest mate's point of view

because those lateral interactions are with other nest mates, there's cognition on both sides of the interaction.

So it is like an extended active inference process.

And then also there's the

extended active inference with the physical substrate and the stigmergy and the building of the nest architecture and the pheromone deposition and that kind of physical substrate is more on the mere active inference rather than adaptive active inference end of the spectrum and the physical substrate reminds us more of figure one where you have an active cognitive entity

that's doing some sort of free energy minimizing process that's helping it select policy.

That's the arg min.

And then it's feeding into the dynamics of the external niche, which can be complex.

And they have their own endogenous change dynamics, which is seen by the fact that the rate of change on the external states is a function of...

something involving the current state of those world states plus a noise term.

So this can be a complex recursive non-linear function, but that could still be a mere act-dimp entity because it's not actually engaged in a policy selection, rather just a complex dynamical unfolding.

And then in contrast, in figure two, we see that the external states are still taking similar arguments.

eta and a so the current states at that time and actions feeding into it that's what's influencing external states and we see those arguments are still here actions feeding in from the entity and the current state of the external states except what it's doing is no longer just the rate of change is a function of plus noise but an active policy selection

more like the kind that the entity is involved in.

So maybe figure two is reminding us more of like two nest mates interacting with each other.

And figure one is more like a nest mate interacting with the physical stigmergic niche.

And so in that way, it opens up all of the discussions we've had about multi-scale act-inf and nested systems and thinking about them as extended active inference.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

In the paper, I'll just read one sentence from the paper.

It says here, the concept of the cognitive niche that we refer to here is a sort of hybrid between the concepts of the selective, developmental, and cognitive niches.

It's right near the beginning, Dan.

Yeah, right there.

Yeah, you got it.

So in the context of what were those two figures there,

When we're talking hybrid, what are we really talking about?

We're talking about the comparison of say the electric component of the engine and the internal combustion engine that are both in one car.

Would that be a good analogy in terms of being able to figure out what part of this is the...

Is the vessel, what part of this is the electric motor and what part of this is the internal combustion motor?

Would that be a good metaphor for what we're talking about?

What's the car?

Right.

Well, is that the culture piece?

I'm not sure.

Yeah, I don't know what a cognitive niche is here.

Like, I don't know if I want to entail culture with a cognitive niche, because this is what this paper is about, or whether I want to entail cognitive niche with culture, which is something that we've talked about in a whole bunch of papers, right?

So that's a good question.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_01:
It reminds me of your earlier statements about how if a pizza is something with toppings on top, and then if you put it upside down, is it still a pizza?

So is car the total functional phenomena involving vehicular transport?

or at what point does that also require like gravity and a road and all these other pieces that are part of the extended process by which cars come to be like is the factory that made the car part of the car i mean it would be interesting if they just blinked into existence but because things are part of process ontologies how can we uh

connect this question of extended function to the process and object ontology angle.

Okay, cool.

Blue, I see some Stigma G happening.

Okay.

So to kind of close this little thread on applying extended active inference, though, of course, we welcome a thousand more specific contributions and we hope to continue building these actual models and examples and interactive dashboards and everything out.

There are multiple ways to think about what is extended and probably even for consensus on the same

perspective on the world as it really is, or even on the same choice of models, there would still be a lot of degrees of freedom in how we actually apply extended active inference.

But one tantalizing cue there from Blue was like connecting it to the scale-free, scale-friendly components and potentially connecting what we've been talking about with active inference in nested multi-scale systems to this perspective on thinking about their niche as consisting of other mere

figure one, or adaptive, figure two, active entities.

What do we see with the termites?


SPEAKER_00:
So I just was thinking about like the literal pushing off into the niche in kind of like this scale-free slash scale-friendly way.

I saw the last author of

these papers give a talk at the mathematics of collective intelligence workshop.

And it was so cool, like really literally like the termite mound.

And I'm sure that the ants nests do the same thing, Daniel, but I think that the, they're not very studyable because as soon as you go in to start to try to figure them out, like they fall apart.

Is that, that's true.

So we kind of get a better understanding.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, many termites build underground and in logs, so it can be hard to assess.

Above ground termite architecture is, of course, amazing.

And more ant architecture is happening underground, which makes it really hard to study unless you have like a high resolution landmine sweeping device.


SPEAKER_00:
landmine sweeping device so like are there like images i mean yeah i don't see how to do it really without destroying it because they're like made of sand right so how do you like i mean i remember like when we were kids there was like the frame the two glass panes and you would get some ants and like throw them in there and watch them like dig tunnels but like other than this like very artificial environment um like the deer on the trampoline right other than this very artificial environment you know in what way do we know about the ant architecture but but

my point was actually just that, that the termites, um, really like you can predict the behavior of the termites based on like the velocity of the wind and how hot or cool, or like they build all these different structures and you can predict like, and they not only build these different structures, but they will actually like deconstruct their mound and then reconstruct it like based on whatever is shifting in the environment.

And so, um,

this latest paper is cool.

Like really shows the, it gets into like the math behind how termites, termite mounds are constructed, like under what, you know, wind velocity and so forth.

But I just thought that that was a really neat example of literally putting the offloading into the, I mean, we literally do that as humans.

And so we're pretty familiar with like, you know, the smartphone and the different ways in which we do cognitive uploading and

But this idea of cognitive uploading, which I've always used cognitive offloading, cognitive uploading into the niche can kind of tell others, even future others, what was happening to you in your life.

It's like you're writing your own little, you know, history book as we are cognitively uploading these videos onto YouTube.

You know, this will be here after we're gone.

But the termites do this too in a very cool, like physical way.

I just thought it was neat.


SPEAKER_01:
Tucker has corrected me in chat.

It's not a landmine sweeping device.

It's an ant mind sweeping device.

So thank you, Tucker.

Cool.

Yes, I think extended active inference systems to study could include starting with colony-like systems or various other systems.

what would be another good place to now jump in as we sort of walk back to the midden pile, walk back to the trash heap of ideas and then figure out where to repurpose and go back in.

Um, maybe you meant, yes, Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I just have a question for both of you.

Cause so when I think of offloading and they give the example, and I think I put the image up there of the brain on top of the, of the phone, um,

If we upload and we're talking about intergenerational stuff, are we uploading into culture?

And is that the primary difference between offloading something so I don't have to remember it

and uploading something so that rules are introduced that you will sort of be swept up by if you join this culture?

I'm asking because I'm not really sure.

I was trying to figure that out myself.

Is there an arbitrariness to this or is it really kind of clear what the line is in terms of they tried to explain it.

They said it's akin to cognitive uploading.

but it's different.

So where did you guys come away on that question of what's different about it?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, great question.

Thank you, Dean.

Let's look at what they wrote and then let's see where we can take it.

So they wrote, cognitive uploading is akin to cognitive offloading in the original theory of the extended mind.

However, in contrast to the traditional notion of offloading,

The notion of uploading refers to the creation of novel cognitive functions that are taken on board by the cognitive niche per se, instead of being merely managed by the cognitive niche.

A function's offloaded when individual agents restructure their world,

so as to minimize internal processing costs and or increase reliability.

So offloading, like you could offload your heavy, heavy backpack and just drop it on the floor.

So offloading has more of a sense, at least hopefully this is aligned with as they're describing it, of like it is allowing the shelves in the world

to you're offloading what you're carrying into places in the world.

And so the cognitive onus and the imperative for epistemic action is still resting in the entity of interest.

So cognitive offloading could be consistent with a worldview that's like solipsistic.

Like there's just this one cognitive entity and they're like offloading, they're off gassing, it's their exhaust thermal waste.

They're offloading cognition to the niche.

Cognitive uploading takes on more of a sense that there's actually something active on the other side.

Because if you're going to upload a file to a cloud folder, there has to be another server that's actually recognizing your packets as you're uploading that file.

So uploading is more consistent with the framing that they have, for example, in figure two.

Surprise, surprise.

Whereas the cognitive offloading

um could be consistent with figure one like i'm trying to have this cognitive function of this symphony of bells being played and so i'm gonna set up these dominoes and these delays in the niche and where to put the sheet music and where to put the post-it notes offloading the cognitive requirements making it extended making it distributed

figure two it goes even a step further and that's what they're trying to highlight the distinction with with their usage of the word uploading because there's actually something that's cognitive that's accepting the download or the upload from the entity is the download from the server so to speak so sorry if that's repetitive but i think it's a subtle and important point dean


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think it's a super important point, too.

So then, then for me, the question is, so let's say that I have an academic culture that I could upload to.

And I also have a professional culture that I could upload to, let's say they're two different things.

Right?

So I'm a part-time student and I'm also working full-time at my job every day.

Is there some way of being able to find myself or find examples of myself

not being downloaded on per se by each one of those different cultures, but me uploading into both of those and retaining my sort of hybridized sense of the world.

So from a psychological and a functional niche perspective, what does that entail for me as the person who's now kind of doing this oscillation back and forth between these two niche constructions, right?

Now, again, they don't go to that length here, but I think it's important, based on what you just said, Daniel, for us to remember it isn't just a single culture examination here.

The whole point is that there are multiple niche constructions happening all the time, and it's just a matter of whether or not we recognize the differences.

Right.

So I don't know.

Again, I'm not sure that they answer that here, but I think we're getting closer to being able to find that answer because of what they're what they're bringing to our attention.


SPEAKER_01:
Lou, go for it.

I'll spin up some slides for you, Dean.


SPEAKER_00:
So just on that on that point.

When I really was thinking about cognitive uploading, it's like.

it's like putting something into the niche and,

for others to use and reuse and maybe interact with or like remix.

And what you're saying about like this hybridization between academic and professional really makes me think about complex systems and like the Santa Fe Institute where Daniel and I met and the kind of siloed academic experience that maybe people are still having, unfortunately,

but that people have had.

So if you are in mechanical engineering versus biology versus economics, you have very different knowledge acquisition and a very different culture and a very different way of interacting with your peers.

And there's this kind of siloed culture, even within an academic culture.

So even subsections of academia tend to be siloed.

And when you

bring people into a complex systems kind of environment there's this amazing like ability for new ideas to generate right it's like this cross-fertilization or cross-pollination people call it different things but but when people come together with academic expertise some you know shared ability to read write and do some mathematics so when people come together with and intermix their own siloed knowledge which is deep like it tends to be very very deep like if you've got

you know, PhD or bachelor's degree or master's degree in your field, like, you know, a whole lot about that field and probably not a lot like about the other field.

So when you come together in a complex systems kind of way, it enables people with this deep, deep knowledge and understanding of their own thing to then interact.

And it's exciting.

And it builds new things.

Like I think exponentially, like, like, you know, if I get together with a bunch of other data scientists or a bunch of other bio people or neuro people, I don't have that same kind of excited brainstorming.

jittery idea, gosh, that was so professional.

But generally, I think that that happens in this cross-fertilization or cross-pollination way.

And when I think about cognitive uploading, I think about you push it in so that other people can interact with it, so that it can do

the cross-fertilization thing.

And maybe that's just kind of my naive interpretation of what they were saying in the paper, but that's kind of what I got.

And then Daniel made us slides.

So perfect, I talked enough.


SPEAKER_01:
I totally agree.

One slide's worth in Kairos time.

Totally agreed though, like uploading as opposed to, or as distinguished from offloading.

Offloading, you just need to trust that the shelf isn't gonna break and someone's not gonna steal your backpack while you're gone.

But cognitive uploading, like you gotta trust that file is being stored and that that is gonna be able to be executed potentially even outside of your awareness or control.

So when we're in like a interdisciplinary context or just sharing like cognition in a team, we're getting it done as a team,

The uploading brings in this whole element of like trust and culture and glue that others are gonna be able to do things that you don't want to do, that you can't do, that you wouldn't see of doing, all these different ways in which their active cognitive model is different

and importantly aligned and importantly contrasting and complimentary.

It's all of those things.

So here's a few visualizations of borders between or interfaces between entities and each other or entities in the niche.

So on the left side, it's like the overlap between two systems, whether we think about them as like, oh, that block in the city, it's part of little Italy and downtown.

So there could be like a block, there's a border region, but it is both included in the two sets.

Or it can be a little bit more blurry or fuzzy around what those orange and blue sets are, but still there's like a region that is overlapping and claimed by both.

There's another case where the border or the interface is something that is like overlapping to both, but also a distinct region.

perhaps like a cell membrane, or in the full separation case, it becomes its own separate region.

And that entails now this recursive boundary setting, because now there's Wall Street, there's the street in front of the wall.

And so this just made me wonder when we were talking about academic and professional,

What kind of synthesis or what kind of integration are we looking for?

Which one of these setups is predisposed towards effective extended active inference?

Or is this something that we determine about how it really is in the world?

Hashtag realism.

Is this a model selection choice from an instrumentalist point of view?


SPEAKER_03:
Can I just speak to that for a sec, Dan?

I think this is interesting because in this example and also in the paper where they talk about desire lines, we do have a tendency to sort of see these things be at the border or the artifact of the number of humans or animals that walked to the watering hole and the result on that.

And they speak to that clearly in the paper that

So sometimes that is not acting, the environment's not acting in a surprising way.

That's the result of what ends up happening when a whole bunch of people follow the same path or use the same stones to break the nuts.

That's the capuchin monkey example.

Or use the same spices, right, in a particular thing.

One of the things that we kind of just touched on briefly in this dot zero was, so what if you took all of those examples that you had of boundary

And you used green as one of the things to sort of show it in the rectangular shape.

But what if you were able to twist that and do with it what we have when we, for example, use the Mobius strip in the keywords?

Do you have a representation of that here?

And why would that matter?

Because I think that actually really does matter.

And I think it's something that we tend to overlook.

So if we're talking about transdisciplinary and blues point, I think this fits really, really well.

But if you wanted to talk about people walking into a situation who are creating a new cognitive niche, they don't come from a place of knowing.

They basically come from a place of not knowing.

And they're going to build that new boundary or that new border, and they're not going to be restricted to the oval shape.

might be able to put a single twist on it and come up with like like i said the example that we have that that we put up as a representation behind our keywords or maybe they'll do a mandelbrotty and two cranks of the system and they'll come up with the um two loops that are

orthogonal to one another, right?

And what does that mean in terms of a representation around uploading as opposed to offloading?

And I think that that's, yeah, exactly, as you're building it out here.

This is where it actually gets interesting because I think that's where, again, if we always see ourselves as where does my cognition end and begin, right?

we will get one, out will kick a certain number of representations, all conforming to that pre-desire to keep the cognition contained and framed and stabilized.

Now, if we look at this from the environment position and the argument flip or inversion of that, can we just limit the inversions to the two sides on either side of the Markov blanket?

Or could we actually look at the Markov blanket twisting and reforming itself?

Because, I mean, it opens up the space for that possibility.

Now, whether we choose to give any attention over to that or make ourselves available to that, it gets really, really interesting in a hurry.


SPEAKER_00:
so i think it is really interesting and where we put the boundary um maybe depends on what we feel that we are uploading or offloading like by us uploading these video series into the niche environment of the internet um we other people are able to

cognitively offload like they're offloading their need to delve into deep read and unpack this paper like they could just you know they've offloaded it to us and they're just watching the youtube video not everybody sorry if you if you're really actually reading the paper and really into it and just want to want to hear someone else reflect but in many ways you know we provide a summary of

that in today's information-laden age, it's really impossible to just read all the papers, even in your own field, when there's five papers released a day.

So I don't blame you for doing some cognitive offloading there.

But by us uploading, that enables someone else to offload.

Is that always the case?

Is there this interplay with upload and offload?

I think about Google Maps.

That is the biggest cognitive offload that I've seen in technologically advanced

in technological advancements in my lifetime.

Like I no longer remember how to get anywhere.

Like maybe if I drive there 15 times, maybe then, but, or maybe if I know someplace next to it, like, like, but as far as driving to a new place, a place I've never been, a new housing development, for example, like I have a friend that moves in and I've never been there before.

I'm at their house 15 times before I remember how to get back and forth.

And I Google about myself the whole way every time.

It's massive cognitive offloading.

but only because Google was so kind to upload the information only due to uploading.

Can I then offload?

And then does that also work culturally?

Like in terms of, I think about institutional or hierarchical organizations, or even thinking like a state, I have someone who will make shoes for me.

I don't need to know how to make shoes.

I just need to know how to access shoes.

I don't know how to make shoes.

So, but because someone else is uploading that,

information technology their product to our culture cognitively but it's like the output of their cognition actually i get it maybe they could actually teach someone else how to make shoes if they had to but but my point is is that there's like this interchange does upload somewhat because you upload it to someone else download it and then they can offload because of their ability to download sorry if that was rambly


SPEAKER_03:
No, I think that's perfect.

And my question then is, from a learning standpoint, are we more adept at accepting other people's information?

Because that expedites, we can follow and use that.

Your first example, right?

Here's somebody, Google, I mean, for Google, it's great for them.

They went and figured out how to become the go-to source for uploading.

But what are we doing in terms of giving people a sense of their agency over uploading as opposed to simply just following and being consumed by the Googles?

If we're going to invert this, we need to ask that question around what we're giving people in terms of agency and knowing the difference between the trade-offs

that happened with offloading, as you described, you're not building any desire lines.

Your GPS is doing it for you.

Now you feel completely dependent upon that thing and

You don't have to be able to make shoes to be able to understand the difference between what you might need in one set of circumstances on your feet and what you might need in another set of circumstances on your feet.

But are we drifting to that place that says, I don't even know what shoes to put on today.

I better go and find out from Google.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, very interesting question.

keeping with the uploading, offloading desire paths and Google, thanks YouTube, by the way, for the affordance.

What if each person were only seeing locally which paths were attractive to them, which search results were appealing to them.

But then there was an eye in the sky that could see the statistical distributions of everyone else in their uploading and offloading that would actually make that

tremendous resource for the eye in the sky.

And so that's a little bit of the asymmetry, but the challenge and opportunity.

Also the caption of figure one does explicitly mention like action, perception and learning.

So that's very interesting.

And it does raise the question of what is the difference between perception and learning, which is discussed a ton in Act-Inf and in the textbook, what the similarities and difference are, like with perception being over faster timescales, but being fundamentally similar to learning, but learning being about cognitive parameters and usually updating over slower timescales.

And then what does learning look like in a cognitive offload world?

In the no offload world, then in the cognitive offload world, and then in the cognitive upload world.

So just to kind of maybe just give one example, the no offload world is the test where you can't bring any notes in.

In that case, it's like what you know about organic chemistry is in your skull.

One could go a little bit broader than that, but you can't take in your notes.

The cognitive offloading, which is going to beg the question of like epistemic action is you're allowed to bring in your own notes or even the textbook.

So it's a dead artifact in the niche.

It's a mere active entity.

It's an epistemic resource in AOS.

We would call it an informational entity in the niche and it can be referenced and you might only have to learn where to look.

learn where you put your backpack learn which chapter to look to when you want to resolve a certain kind of uncertainty so it's an affordance you didn't have in the no offload case to have the textbook or the notes what's the cognitive upload is it phone a friend is it go in with the chemicals and have a lab kit like what does it look like to go one step beyond yes you can take your notes into that organic chemistry test what is the upload what do you think dean


SPEAKER_03:
I think the upload is when you are taking the information that you've received here and finding yourself migrating in a completely different culture.

And somebody in that completely different culture says, I want you to solve this problem for me.

Before I can hire you, can you do this thing first?

Show me that you can do this thing or resolve this issue for me.

So it's taking information from one context and finding yourself in a completely different context, not from the person who's decided this is the amount of material that we've covered in these past 13 weeks.

And now I'm going to select out the points that I want you to, as you said, load into your bucket and carry into the testing situation.

I want you actually now to take what you've learned and I want you to go out back into the wild now.

where you're going to have to be able to solve something as a result of you loading up your quiver or your 13 weeks worth of information, right?

That's literally finding yourself now working with a new culture and that new culture taking on all the properties that they're talking about in this paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Another angle on that.

Oh, yes, please.


SPEAKER_00:
So my take on that would be to like, say you have all of the material that you learned, you have all the books, you have all the notes, you then go teach it to someone else and they go in and take the test for you.

So that would be uploading.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
Is that what you were going to say?

Yeah.

So we have too much.

We do too much.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
I was thinking of a driver's exam.

It's the difference between the no notes driver's exam, taking the test at the DMV.

Can people tell that I just renewed my license?

And then there's the having the notes and then there's the actual driving.

And so that is where the functions are no longer hypothetical and in a testing scenario, but they're enacted.

And that means that it's different to say you should do this when you're parallel parking and it is going to be 15 feet versus the actual enacting of it.

And that cognitive function really or instrumentally is happening in this extended way with the visual components of the car and the proprioception of the car.

So that is one angle is towards the practice bent and then blue awesome point with taking it towards the teaching, which is like if you had to send a proxy,

And what if we all had to train a proxy test taker?

It would take like, well, you know it when you can teach it to another level because that would entail many, many aspects of making sure that you could upload it in a way where then they could offload or not.

And then of course the infinite regress is, well, what if they had to go train somebody else?

And then you would have reinvented academia from scratch.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I find that what you guys are describing, I find that it kind of is an intermediary step.

If you can teach it to somebody else, you know it.

And I think it does a good job of blending sort of the procedural knowledge and the declarative part if you can teach it to somebody else.

But I think if you're talking about uploading, I think you actually need to find yourself in a completely different cultural setting.

as opposed to the offloading aspect of it.

So I think you actually have to move outside of the teaching realm.

I find that if you can teach it to somebody else as a nice sort of middle ground between where you would eventually have to go if you're gonna niche construct in the wild,

as opposed to the setting, which is somewhat contained and framed, which is teaching, right?

Learning in that setting.

So I'm not saying you guys aren't moving in that direction.

I just think that the ultimate end game of uploading is different than the one that's offloading, which there's way more offloading in the teaching realm than we probably care to acknowledge.


SPEAKER_01:
Or for the plot embedding, offloading is more like instructionalism.

You're offloading the recipe.

And then interactionism requires the other interact ant to be a cognitive entity.

And so that's more like the figure two.

It's more like cognitive uploading.

And the more interactionism is at play, the more figure two-like we're in a space of,

the more it is like a question that Dave has just asked in the chat, which is, isn't the result of offloading a new goal-seeking, self-maintaining, autopoetic thing, all caps, and telky.

That's kind of Aristotelian a little bit, I believe.

Yes, and that's a little bit like our progression here.

Here was two things and their interface, and then it got more and more shared or delineated or less until at some level of interfacing and interactionism and extended cognition

from a functional or psychological perspective, which is what they explore in this paper, or from an ecological and an evolutionary perspective, like Constant et al explore elsewhere, it does become a new kind of thing.

The eukaryotic cell is a thing, and it's a thing that involves these nested and interfacing systems.

And then I took the colors that we had here and overlaid them from this abstract space

into this kind of space that we've seen with the figure one and two representations.

And isn't that interesting that the blanket states are the interface, the border states.

And so, as we discussed,

The dynamics, even in the mere-act-inf case, could be very chaotic or very difficult for the entity to predict.

So mere-act-inf shouldn't be seen as meaning that it's simple or it doesn't have rich dynamics.

How do we know which of these settings we're in?

Or how do we make the best of these settings?


SPEAKER_03:
Wasn't there, Daniel, can you find the slide in the 41 deck where we talked about the joint?

Yes, there we go.

The joint self-evidencing.

I guess what I'm saying is that joint self-evidencing on the one level of instructionalism or the joint self-evidencing in terms of the interaction piece

I think that that's, you can decide how big, how sophisticated, how complicated you want that joint to be.

But I think that that's what this is essentially saying is, can we get ourselves to a place of this closest, like the closing of the circle of causality part, right?

That's sort of circularity piece of this.

When do we realize that it's circular?

Is it when we're at the instructionalist level or when we're at the interactionist level?


SPEAKER_01:
Lou, do you have a thought?

Or there's a little bit more slide play that could happen, I think, to resolve Dean's question.


SPEAKER_00:
Go ahead and give it over to Dean.

I'm just thinking.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's say that we were in a forest of F2s.

so we're no longer thinking about just nest mates interacting but now we're thinking about like each one of these orange the so we're gonna our system of interest is going to be the orange um guys we got f2a f2b and f2c and they're like different evolutionary replicators of a similar kind they're different organisms

The blue could be the same physical niche.

It could be each other in an adaptive niche.

They could each be in their own battles, but their fitness is being relatively compared in terms of their success.

Now, what does it mean when on that slide that we were just on, on figure two, when they mentioned

This closes the circle of causality in which the niche and phenotypes are trying to learn about each other to minimize their joint free energy or surprise.

Okay.

So what does that mean that the causality has been closed?

So one worldview would be, well, let's just look at how the three orange entities are connected and think about how they're in competition.

And so that might be a totally valid and important way to look at it.

But

um this is kind of like there's various statements i'm sure various phrasings but i won't even try but what is the good in doing so well in the orange f2a free energy minimization such that this whole system is actually maladaptive so that would be like this entity being greedy

in this new kind of interaction or thing.

And so the one, the orange A, B, or C that's going to persist the best or have the highest fitness is going to be involved in the best free energy minimization of this whole system where there's sense and action coming both ways, because just to short-term do a free energy minimization here,

at the cost of maladaptive actions coming in the future back from the niche is not a sustainable strategy.

And so that's like where they tuck the little bit, the last thread gets tucked back into the ecology and evolution and the selective niche, which is the one that actually provides at least an adaptive starting point for the cognitive functional and psychological habitats that they're discussing.


SPEAKER_03:
you think dude well so so again here's the thing if we're talking about just the perception piece and we've got three three versions of perception is that what you're you're trying to bring out here three similar kinds of entities that are involved in


SPEAKER_01:
fitness.


SPEAKER_03:
But we're focusing in on the perception aspect of that, are you not?

Are we looking at the cultural piece of this when three perceivers are proximal to one another in the

in an environmental cluster or in a cognitive niche?

How do those perceptions align with one another?

And what's the timeframe, right?

What's the diachronic of this?

I just want to make sure I'm clear about what you're trying to show here.


SPEAKER_01:
There's probably multiple ways to think about it or show it.

Let's try to make it one little bit clearer.

Here's going to be the blue niche.

And now we're going to have those cognitive entities sharing a niche.

So here's going to be a bunch of brains that are going to be sharing the same blue niche.

So how does this affect what you're discussing?

They're all being interfaced with a common niche.

And so in what way can we say that they're involved in joint action perception loops?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, that's where I'm curious because I think what this does is it shows that there is something called an extended loop.

Aspect of this of this active inference frame, but I wouldn't I don't know how each one of those perceivers realizes What the others are perceiving as well?

I think

the environment or the niche itself knows collectively what that is.

But I don't know that each one of those individual representations of the brain necessarily does know.

And I think this is where this, it trips up a lot of people because, oh, I don't believe in extended, extended cognition because you can't possibly, Daniel, you can't possibly know what Dean's thinking and Dean can't possibly know what Blue's thinking.

But eventually as we work out,

together through communication, through some sort of signaling processes, eventually we kind of land on some sort of generally agreed to sense.

There's a collective sense around this as well.

And so do we say, well, that collective sense isn't cognition.

We don't know what it is, but it's not cognition.

But of course, it's all based on cognition, but we're not going to call it cognition because we can't possibly know everything that's going on in that other perceiver, cognizant,

way of looking at blue, at this blue rectangle, right?

So, sorry, sorry, blue night, blue rectangle, right?

So, again, this is, that's, yeah, thinking through other minds.

I don't know how we, I don't know how we quantify it, but also recognize that it is, it does exist, right?

And if we get too concerned that if we can't measure it, it's not a thing, then we'll just pretend like it's not there.

But it's there.

Not all things are necessarily measurable.

The way that we can hook up the cap and make sure that it's picking up everything in the whatever the heck of the one is that is the cap as opposed to the fMRI, I don't know.


SPEAKER_01:
EEG.

Thank you, sir.

Yes.

I just looked up like opposite of extended.

And so there's like retracted, reduced, shrunk, narrowed, shortened.

It's interesting how extended cognition feels like a reach, yet defending the other position...

is almost too narrow.


SPEAKER_00:
So I just was going back and reading the author's definition of uploading versus offloading.

And they said, in contrast to the traditional notion of offloading, the notion of uploading refers to the creation of novel cognitive functions that are taken on board by the cognitive niche per se.

instead of being merely managed by the cognitive niche.

A function is offloaded when individual agents restructure the world so as to minimize internal processing costs and or increase reliability.

For example, by posting a yellow sticky note as a reminder, for example, that a function is uploaded when social and technological change means that it's now taken care of by the niche rather than the individual.

For example, most agents store phone numbers in smartphones instead of by memory.

So the whole number storage function has been assimilated into the niche.

The niche into which the function has been uploaded can then be passed on to future generations for them to leverage, share, and finesse that function.

And so I wonder if the difference between offloading and uploading is a transgenerational difference.

So like I do offloading,

like, you know, with my yellow sticky note or like my notes in my little pad, but I do offloading when I, you know, create a publication from those notes and publish it into something that's then archived that the future generations can access.


SPEAKER_01:
that's that's awesome um here's a thought on that uh connecting it to the epistemic actions so offloading just like they describe it says um a yellow stick note on the front door to remind them to pick up milk next time they are out

It doesn't say this means pick up milk.

They've offloaded their cognitive backpack, but only they know their recovery seed.

Only they know the password to speak friend and enter into that extended cognitive function.

Whereas if it were cognitively uploaded, I made an app that reminds people to get their milk when they're low.

that is actually something that because of its intrinsic and more integrated actual cognitive function, like the ability to assess information, like the level of milk in the fridge, and then take an action, like remind the person or not, it's a bona fide cognitive entity

It's more like figure two, more like uploading than it is like figure one offloading.

And then that app can be leveraged and shared and intergenerational in a way where it would be extremely difficult and only through like implicit learning and seeing it many times would somebody be like, ah, yes, we put the yellow post-it note when we want to remind ourself later.

So interesting example.

And it's very true what they say about future generations.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, and I think when we get into that diachronic piece, we're not just offloading remember to get milk.

What we're doing is when we're uploading, we're talking about rules, especially if we're talking about culture.

It's the old, that's not the way we do things around here kind of thing.

So I think

There are differences between offloading and uploading, and I do believe that

rules because rules are always kind of flexible they're always a limit around where when we talk about scale friendliness there's an effective limit around how a rule will be able to function at scale so there's there is going to be a certain amount of arbitrariness when we get up to that rules place and as we pass rules down from one generation to the next i'm sure both of you can think of the times when your parents told you this is the rule and you both looked at them and went

What the, why is that the rule?

Oh, okay.

So now when we're talking about rules and we're talking about uploaded things, I think there has to be a certain amount of participation in that rule setting.

It's not always the case, but I think in order for it to be adopted and actually to be a part of the cognitive niche, we're not just talking about content here.

We're talking about consequences here as well.

And so I think that's where this gets really, really interesting in terms of building or constructing that psychological and functional niche, but also appreciating that it's kind of rules-based and it's joint self-evidencing as opposed to, well, Daniel believes in Jitsi, right?

So everybody's got to follow Daniel's rule.

But that's not kind of how it works when you bring a bunch of people together and you're trying to come up with some sense of where are the cognitive limits here.

That arbitrariness aspect of it is actually a part of the game.


SPEAKER_01:
So that is awesome.

It connects the intergenerational niche inheritance to the interactionism and to that idea of having to teach somebody else to take your organic chemistry test.

Is the point of rule following in the short term from the age of zero to six years old to minimize the perceived number of times that a rule is violated?

Or is it to minimize the amount of times that your grandchildren

violate that rule or for example and so the further one looks into the future the more interactionist it looks and the more autonomy potentially provided to the recipient and that might also connect back to mike levin the discussion on training and learning

Because the trainer and the trains, that may be a functional dyad, but it may not be able to result in the trainee being able to be training somebody else.

Whereas somebody who has learned has a generative model update.

And so they may be able to teach.

And then also to connect to Dean's, it was academic and professional settings, right?

And we talked about like the hybrid models and about, okay, so we had the,

had walking into new niches then we had the professional okay here is us and now we're engaging we can think of this in of course multiple ways so one of this would be diachronic so the diachronic interpretation would be grandparent parent child

The synchronic but extended spatial interpretation would be this could all be happening in the same time.

Here's the academic context, academic niche, me in the academic niche, professional niche, other professionals in the niche.

So we have through space and through time, just like they explored some of those dimensions in the paper.

What do either of you think about that?


SPEAKER_03:
The representation, I think it's like this extended active inference.

It grows, right?

It blossoms.

So I'm liking where it's going.


SPEAKER_00:
So it just made me think about, like, so I had brought up the temporal, you know, maybe to be uploading versus offloading.

There's some kind of temporal persistence.

But also, like, what if...

to be uploading, it has to be accessible even in the same time, because we don't really know if our YouTube video is going to be around in 10 years or watched by anyone else except us, or we don't really know.

But we do know that it's watched by, like Tucker was watching it, I guess, and Dave, and so there are some people watching it.

So if uploading just means beyond personal use...

would that be fair?

Like, is that, is that uploading versus offloading?

I don't know.

But then if I, if I remind my daughter, like, so, so it just makes me think of like, but what about this?

But what about this?

So if I remind my daughter, like, Hey, don't forget your lunch or Hey, you know, you need to study for your spelling test.

If I remind her or if I create a reminder for her, is that uploading or offloading?


SPEAKER_01:
Here's your lunch.

Here's a post-it.

to remind of lunch.

How will you remind yourself of your lunch?

And it probably, there's probably ones that we could add above, here is your lunch.

Here's the food in your mouth.

Here's the airplane flying in, the food in your mouth.


SPEAKER_00:
All the way up to, yeah.

well, before here's your lunch, I need to remember to remind my daughter to get her lunch.

So there's like, how am I going to remember to remind my daughter to get her lunch?

Like there's that whole like second tier of that.


SPEAKER_01:
yes yes um and this is kind of like a continuum on um well this is a preparatory uh preamble but then it's like a continuum again from the more instructionalist to the more interactionist um and it probably gets more allegorical and it gets more flexible it gets more empowering but if you say and you mean it how um

I'm going to let you decide how to remind yourself of how to get your lunch.

But also if you forget your lunch, you know, it's going to be really bad.

Then that creates a cognitive tension.

And so that's kind of like where it's okay to experiment and fail and interaction, you know, to improvise one must like make some notes they didn't intend and then continue to roll with it as their new, uh,

and just continue on like in improv versus if it was just about playing the sheet music as written, then every time a mistake is made, one could just push the rails back in.


SPEAKER_00:
So I think what you're saying is I need to let my daughter go hungry when she forgets her lunch, because right now, if she forgets her lunch, it's really bad for me because I have to drive like an extra hour to go home and get the lunch or it's either way.

It's an hour out of my day.

I've got to stop at the grocery store and assemble a lunch.

It's not just lunch.

It's like lunch.

Plus like six different snacks that she eats throughout the day.

So she has to bring all the food with her every day.

So it's really bad for me if she forgets.

So because I end up taking care of it for her, I should just let her starve.

And then I will have uploaded that task.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.


SPEAKER_03:
Without getting between mother and daughter, can I just say one quick thing here?

I think, again, if we're just trying to figure out what the extended cognition, if there's evidence for extended cognition, it's probably in the rule and the consequence.

So it's to your point, Blue, if there's a consequence here, who has to take that consequence on?

the older person who maybe whose prospective memory didn't work out that day and didn't provide all the reminders, or the younger person who now has the effect of not having something to eat.

But I think the point here in terms of can we

The argument, because they call it an argument, this paper is an argument, the argument for extended cognition would be one where if we upload, we're probably going to be uploading rules and the consequences of those rules are implied versus the uploading of content and material that tends to overwhelm us

and that we use devices then to act as a way of being able to store, because our own memorial capacities are somewhat limited.

Like, I mean, when I compare my memorial capacity to you and Daniel, I can't hold a candle to that, right?

So I should be the one using all of the instruments for that.

But what I do is I have my own way of sort of compensating for that by developing my own rules sooner and with a more consequential nature to that, right?

So that's what one of the things we could possibly be teaching six to eight year olds, not just here are the rules,

But what can you do in terms of helping me, who's probably got less capacity as I get older, for remembering all the content?

So there's consequences for me now, and there's consequences for you.

We both suffer a certain consequence in this new environmental niche that we're constructing.

Now, maybe the eight-year-old doesn't give a rat's backside about that.

She's just hangry now.

But oh, well, right?

I mean, there's going to be some learning one way or another.

And it could be through guilt or it can be through some kind of a conversation where you actually do introduce the rules and the consequences.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_01:
In comparison to memorizing the RGB values of an image, like the pixel colors, none of us have memories that hold a candle to even the smallest JPEG.

So render onto the JPEG that which is JPEGable, and then what will that leave humans to do?

And we hear about cognitive overload, cognitive security, of course.

What does that actually mean for designing informational niches, cognitive niches from the psychological, functional, ecological, selective perspectives that are not overwhelming or that are accessible or that are resilient or that do stabilize function?

There's so many awesome...


SPEAKER_03:
questions that this like brings us totally towards daniel i'm sorry but i'm gonna have to bounce out now because uh i've just kind of used up all my energy anyway close this swing i hope you guys can close this thing off for me and i look forward to the point too so thanks thank you dean peace all right all right cool blue


SPEAKER_01:
Let's think for a few more minutes what could be fun for Dot 2 and just how we can go from some of the rhetoric and perspectives they share towards all of these extremely relevant scenarios that we've been discussing.

Like, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
So for me, I think I'd like to touch back onto...

what other situations are like the Elizabethan play people, like the Elizabethan cast, um, the theater company, that's what it is.

Sorry.

Uh, so what other situations are like this Elizabethan theater company in that the culture is so strong and so vital to participation that, um,

you can just wing it.

Like you can know a lot of things just by queuing off of others.

So I had mentioned jazz.

I don't know what else, um, what other, I'd like to look at that a little bit more because it's that, that was the example that they gave, right?

This, this diachronic cognition.

So it would be cool to look at that a little more deeply.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

Especially in like the kind of online context.

Um,

yes um agreed about that yeah you brought up music and jazz and about culture where does what is culture of different kinds and where does that fit into this ability of people to have joint action in what ways or in what senses is culture about shared ways of thinking


SPEAKER_00:
orthodoxy heterodoxy in what ways is culture about joint action orthopraxis and heteropraxis so i was thinking also about action um and like action offloading uh uh because just like in terms of a scaled system like sure cells do their own actions like they eat food and they you know secrete nutrients and you know they like communicate with each other and whatever but

But in terms of, like, a nested system, like, the cells don't have to go find water.

The water just comes to them.

Right?

Like, whereas a human, it's, like, one of the most vital things that we could ever do is find water.

Like, clean drinking water, super necessary for life.

So...

We have to do that.

I mean, we've offloaded that into our culture with running water, but not every human.

But I just think about we're acting on behalf of organ systems, cell systems, organelles, et cetera.

So I think about action offloading.

So what does that look like?

Yes.

And how akin to cognitive offloading or uploading is that?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

In what ways is the cognitive offloading and uploading different?

that of perception in what ways is it offloading action like if you write a script that then does some daily task that could be seen as like offloading a repetitive action and that's something that we're only unlocking with computers

but it's kind of like a, and it's even referenced in the idea of a daemon in computers.

It's like the magician's familiar.

It's this little trainable or learning entity that is able to carry things out according to the will of the magician in a semi-autonomous way.


SPEAKER_00:
it's not just computers though.

We've automated some tasks for us through the years, through the ways of like, even just with running water, like we, you know, that's an automated task that used to be a big portion of your daily life as a human, like going to find water.

Um,

And I mean, washing machines, dishwasher, we have all the things.

I mean, we've been automating life for forever.

So now it's just becoming more sophisticated.

Now, perhaps we're automating our cognitive life, like with GPT-3.

I think that that's like a different kind of...


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, it's approaching automation at the semantic and linguistic level.

Whereas previously it could be like at the task, the physical task performance level could be off-sourced or uploaded in a sense.

This is like rapidly rising in its cognitive complexity, right?

like a typewriter is a mere active entity.

It's part of extended cognition, type, type, type, type, type, but unless it gets jammed, one is not gonna be too surprised by how it performs.

And that's like the famous Turing quote from back in the day.

And someone said, like, how can it have intelligence or if it can't give a surprising answer?

And then Turing said something like, computers surprise me every day.

So is that going to be your measure?

How surprised you are?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
What do you want to look at?

What do you want to look at, though, in the next one?


SPEAKER_01:
I want to look at the partition question that Dave raised and also the earlier question from Dave when he wrote about the result of cognitive offloading.

It was more about cognitive uploading.

He clarified in the chat.


SPEAKER_00:
So I was thinking about the partition, too, like when I was talking about – I meant to say partition in there because it's a temporal partition –

going from this generation to the next?

Or is it like a cognitive or like a organismal partition between like me and you or me and my daughter or this group and that group?

The partition is, the fuzziness of the partition always makes it interesting.

What else?


SPEAKER_01:
That's it.

Let's read his question.

So in some papers other than this one, so here's the niche of papers citing each other.

in an adjacent regime of an attention but it's it's relevant the point comes up and this comes up indeed in discussion anatomical or mechanical blankets so at the cellular level this would be like the lipid bilayer cell membrane at the organismal level this would be like the epithelial so anatomical gross or micro mechanical blankets sometimes

coincide with functional psychological blankets and sometimes not.

So two brain regions that are separated but have an interface

It might be the case that their function could be ascribed with a certain partition that reflected the partitioning topologically of the anatomical components, or it could totally not be that way.

So sometimes anatomical mechanical blankets coincide with functional psychological blankets, and sometimes not.

Insert all the asterisks that we've ever had about realism and instrumentalism, but just, we're going to plunge ahead.

What is the relation among...

that distinction between the two kinds of blanketing this one more of a embodied enacted realist flavor and this one more of a functionalist flavor so what is the relation among a b and c here so what is

It's a relation of relation of relations as per usual.

We're relating A, B, and C, where A is the relationship between these kinds of blankets.

B is the hierarchical and heterarchical nesting of blankets.

And C is the relations between or among niches

and the particles that upload functionality to those niches.

What do you think, Blue, about when they say that the answer is in the question?

Like the way that the question is asked contains the seeds of an answer.

What do you think about that?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, are you talking about, like, how I would, you know, cognitive offload information as an undergraduate just because I could tell by the way that the question was asked?

Yeah, like, I think I did that.

Like, I think I looked for the answer in the question quite often.

As long as it's a multiple choice question, that was pretty simple.

Or if it wasn't there, it was often somewhere else in the test in a different question.

So, like, okay.

So, yeah, I did that.

But I think here...

There's definitely some answering here happening.

Like, that distinction.

What is that?

Like, I hate those.

I hate those words.

I hate those words as I use, like, the similar, like, referential.

What is the name of, like, the part of speech that it is?

This, that, those, these, you know, those words.

Words that are referential.


SPEAKER_02:
It's a pronoun.

It's an article.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

It's an article because the pronoun is like he, she, it.

So it's the articles.

So the articles really bother me.

I think that that distinction, the distinction between anatomical and mechanical blankets or the functional psychological blankets.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

I'll write it out.

I believe it's the distinction between anatomical and mechanical and functional psychological.


SPEAKER_00:
Those.

So it should be a plural article.

That's what was throwing me.

Yeah, anyway, the nesting of blankets is always something I am down to talk about.

But here, I don't know.

Does the distinction need to be drawn?

If you're talking about nesting of blankets, how can you make distinctions between different types of blankets?

I don't know.

Maybe that's just me.


SPEAKER_01:
What do you think?

We explored some aspects of it when...

you mentioned the multi-scale approach where like we can think of nesting as the the bigger nested system whether it hosts only one active entity within it or multiple laterally interacting entities the bigger nesting so putting a aside for now the bigger nested system

can be seen of as the niche for the subunit or subunits inside of it.

So for sure, this B and C can be connected because the nested system, its niche, its environment, what its actions are going into and what it is getting sense information from is the niche and that is like the larger nested system.

Now, how do nested systems, using that as a shorthand for both B and C, connect to this structural and functional perspective on systems?

Are nested systems, when we talk about nested systems, in what ways, give me a yes and, is it a structural nesting

like the word is inside the sentence inside of the paragraph or in what ways is it a functional nesting where the functional nesting of concepts doesn't necessarily have to follow from the nesting of like sentences on the page i think that's a very

challenging but important question.

And then also when you mentioned like the undergrad example, and we've been talking a lot about test taking right here, it made me think about how in undergrad or potentially even earlier, yes, it was possible to like kind of reverse engineer.

And so like the answer is in the seeds of the question is kind of like a game to play where you're just trying to maximize your score on some test.

But then you get rugged in grad school where it is still true that the question that you're asking to nature to the system contains the seeds of the answer.

Like you're only going to get the data for your experiment of the kind that you measure on the number that you actually measure it from with the conditions that you set them up to be in.

But.

if one tries to p hack nature or if one tries to do that sort of undergrad I'm going to maximize I mean these two groups must be different right so I'm going to try to measure them with a thumb on the scale so that they come out to be different that becomes

tantamount to basically non-rigorous, non-reproducible science.

So it just shows, I think also to Dean's continued themes of like in the lab, in the classroom, and then out.

So the highest test score

is not necessarily the highest performer on that.

Out in the wild, that's towards the application side, nor necessarily the best teacher as we've been discussing.

And so it's sort of like, there's like learning and development, and sometimes it feeds back on itself with teaching, and other times it just plunges ahead with application to all these different phenomena of learning, teaching, and applying.

Do those all use the same partitioning?

Are they featuring or highlighting their regime of attention on different parts of the partitioning?


SPEAKER_00:
So that's like where I can't ever close my instrumentalist eye.

It is in the partition point because the partition is just wherever you put it.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, it's how you see it slash model it.

Unless one specifically wants to make claims about realism.

I see what you're saying.


SPEAKER_00:
But even if you want, like when I investigate realist claims, like if I look for a partition, like what partitions me from the rest of the world, it's like my skin, right?

So like my skin is the boundary.

It's the Markov blanket that holds me in and the world out.

But like I'm losing pieces of my skin every day.

It gets cut open.

And so then am I, is my partition broken or like, you know, am I somehow not the same person?

I don't know.

So for me finding this, like,

boundary that's like solid and never changes is not doesn't sit right so that's why like i always have to remind myself it's an instrument so i can never ever lose my instrumentalist perspective and get into full realism when i think about the blanket so um it's it's non-non-separability it's you know this is goes back to the quantum chris fields you know we're non-separable


SPEAKER_01:
on time so i think in uh dot two let's just write a few notes down and then close out so i think in dot two we can look over some formalisms and see how the equations connected we can think about what we discussed about the fastest time scale is perception

Action, learning, teaching, applying, etc.

How do these different modes of engagement with extended active inference systems differ?


SPEAKER_00:
Or what about finding?

Discovering?

So like when you're not taught, you know, when you don't know the path and you find the stack of rocks.


SPEAKER_01:
How do we go from a verb ending in ing to an appropriate or useful active model?

How do we go from negotiating, trusting,

Discomforting.


SPEAKER_00:
Communicating.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, communicating to the right graphical structure of a generative model that we can use in our standard academic routines.

As patiently reminded, we all are by Carl on those points.


SPEAKER_00:
Very cool.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Fun times.

Thanks a lot, Dean, for joining.

Yeah, Dean, hope you feel better.

Yep, absolutely.

And Blue, thanks a ton.

It was a fun discussion.

Thanks, everybody who's in the live chat.

Dave and Tucker and Stephen.

And everybody is welcome to join us next week for 41.2.

On 13th and in the papers beyond.

So thank you all.

See you later.


SPEAKER_00:
Peace.


SPEAKER_01:
Bye.

## RB2axUYnE8I

SPEAKER_03:
All right.

Hello, everyone.

Welcome to ActInflab live stream number 41.2.

It's April 13th, 2022.

So welcome to the ActInflab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so that we can be improving on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following good video etiquette for livestream.

And Dean and Blue, thanks a ton for joining.

Check out ActiveInference.org to learn more about what the Active Lab is up to and how you can participate.

Today in number 41.2, we are going to have our third discussion on the paper Extended Active Inference, Constructing Predictive Cognition Beyond Skulls by Axel Constant, Andy Clark, Michael Kirchhoff, and Carl Friston.

We had a dot zero video where we took a first pass, a first coat of paint on this paper, overviewed some of their distinctions and their background and some context.

And then we had a fun dot one last week with all of us here.

And we went down a few different paths.

And all I can say is with trust and glue of all of us,

Us here and those who are watching live who are welcome to write questions in the live chat.

I think we'll get somewhere pretty cool in the next two hours, but can't even know what shape it will be then.

So we can just start by saying hello and then we can pick up where we've left off

or we can go in any other direction.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California, and I think the part that I'm looking most forward to exploring today is that, trust and glue, and how do we trust and glue appropriately or adaptively?

And I'll pass to Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Daniel.

I'm Dean.

I'm in British Columbia at the moment.

I really like where you and Blue were going with this once I signed off last week.

I was particularly interested in the idea of is the answer in the question because I thought that was an interesting way of maybe looking at is there an extended active inference component to that.

So maybe you'll pick that thread up again today.

I'll pass it to Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, I'm blue.

I'm a researcher in New Mexico.

And yeah, trust and glue or, you know, what kind of improvisational context do we use this extended active inference?

Like, where is this kind of thing necessary, functional?

Where do we see it?

Like what kinds of environments maybe highlight extended active inference?

That'd be interesting for me to explore.


SPEAKER_03:
awesome so we have a few different

aspects we can talk and return to some formalisms about how are the equations connected internally how are the formalisms connected to one another how are the extended active inference formalisms framed in this paper connected to earlier or now that some time has passed since the publication later formalisms in active inference how are they connected to the ideas that we've been discussing we have questions and answers

or answers and questions.

What does that look like in the context of extended active inference?

Perception action, learning, teaching, applying, finding, discovering, a lot of ING verbs, and that is hiding or

somehow intertwined with this question which is always in the backdrop or the pre-drop or stage right or something like that with what takes us from a regime of attention or a regime of intention towards active inference itself and some specific model so

where to go.

I think the most structured of the options here is to remind ourselves of the formalisms and the figures, and then maybe we can come back to any of these as we see.

Does that sound good?


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

There, equation one is a

fairly typical restatement of Bayes' theorem.

So we won't dwell too much on that, but it is relating to the decomposition of a joint model of both observations and inferred latent causes, and the total model contains both of those, yet it's able to be decomposed in some amenable ways.

Equation 2.

Using variational inference, one can invert the likelihood in equation 1, the probability of the hidden states conditioned on observation,

to approximate the posterior probability of causes once a sensation has been sampled.

So is this a twist, Dean?

Or what kind of inversion are we talking about here when we go from thinking about the likelihood, which is like the probability of there being a lightning strike conditioned upon what we actually observed, and that is now flipping to what are the causes given the sensation.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, here's a question for both of you.

Is there such a thing as a group sensation?

I mean, if we think of it, it's seldom that we would consider ourselves as a proportion of a larger volume of energy.

But when we find ourselves in these contexts and in these cultures, so what happens when we invert that idea of

I'm one pie in a whole collection of pies at a pie shop to I'm some proportion of a larger energy set.

And then what are the implications of that in terms of the kind of evidence that I can or cannot gather?

So that's my question for both of you, because you guys probably can answer that better than I can.


SPEAKER_00:
So I think we definitely experience group sensation.

I think about like the countries that are being bombed right now.

And I think about like the countries that when a tsunami hits, like there is definitely a group felt sense of like terror.

That's like a group sensation, but also even on like a positive note, like I think about like huge concerts and it's like a bunch of people really having fun.

And that's kind of another like group sensation.

Like even like, yeah, those kinds of,

group things or even like large meditation retreats is like another good example of like a group sensation.

And it does kind of get like amplified or it feels like the sensation is like going through a megaphone when you know you're experiencing it with 5,000 people or something like that.

So in my experience.


SPEAKER_01:
And does that change the formalism?

I think we can identify it, but does that change the math or the way that we measure that based on the source of affective sensing within one agent versus that collective measure?


SPEAKER_00:
I think it just changes where we put the blanket.


SPEAKER_01:
Doesn't change the math, though?


SPEAKER_00:
I think it just changes where we put the blanket.

So if you have a bigger blanket, there's more components.

um, you know, like you would separate the group of people that are experiencing the concert from a group of people that are about to experience a tsunami.

You know, there's like a huge partition and it's, it's the same as separating two different people.

Mathematically, it's just separating groups of people.

Like as mathematically, we are groups of cells, tissues, organs.

So I think that the, the only difference is just what's under that Markov blanket.

Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
All right, a few cool points to make.

So you asked about group sensations.

And if we were in a unidirectional signal processing paradigm,

question could be approached like what are the outside signals that come in and how do those diffuse through the group what does that look like when we've taken a step towards thinking about perception as inference as a generative inference so what are groups expecting so what is the same way that we talk about perception cognition and affect and memory anticipation planning as inference of entities

what does it mean for the group to not just be passively receiving sensations, but to be engaged in active inference?

So that's going to be a, um, uh,

big question and I'll leave it for another brief break to write out a few more options here.

But I think what Blue said about it depends on where the blanket is drawn or how the model is phrased relates to the composability of active inference and the way that it's kind of like blocks that play nice together laterally.

as well as in a nested fashion, including a nice little tuck at the end.

So let me explain by what I mean there.

The way that they interact laterally is it's a framework that allows you to simulate one ant or many ants, because one can just have,

more and more entities in the same lateral level or scale that are interacting with the same environment and or with each other, whether that's like direct contact or with communication, because all that one needs to specify is the entity model and then their perception, their umwelt basically, and their action selection, like their affordances.

So if we know where the blanket is,

that was the system of interest that's the entity the ant and then what goes both directions that allows composability of a thousand ants just like one but then the key piece with the nesting is even if we only write down a single layer active model so the mouse in the t maze or just a single layer it's not a deep nested hierarchical model

we can actually still interpret that graphical model as abstracting or receiving other models that we didn't directly formalize.

So it was discussed in the textbook and in other sources of like, we could make an active inference model of one brain region with the inputs as sense states and the outputs as action states.

And then in that single brain region model, those input states, it can just be like, that's where the black box is.

There's just...

an inability to actually do modeling on the details of what's coming in.

We're just going to leave it at some sort of stochastic process coming in.

So it kind of like tucks all the uncertainty away into this hidden little corner.

And then we're going to interface with that uncertainty as it becomes

recognized by the system of interest.

Or one could make another model of that second brain region, and it could have its own perception and action states, but then that too would have inputs coming from elsewhere and actions going elsewhere.

So I think there's probably more to unpack and explore here, but this

hopefully speaks to the composability of active inference models to implicitly contain nested subsystems.

Like we could do an active inference model of a person and recognize that they consist of organs and cells and organelles and go all the way down to however small.

And we can compose down and dig down or compose up as the extended perspective hopefully will have us look at.

But

we get to be making our single layer model implicitly within a more composable structure than many other families of modeling might allow for so that might give an ability to compare alternative ways of looking at multi-scale extended systems but it will be more like a comparison of

relative free energies or relative model fits rather than some sort of ad hoc comparison that we're applying based upon a desire for simplicity or desire to see this many levels.


SPEAKER_01:
I wonder in the sense that I understand that you can have the single ant and you can find the average in the eco, evo, devo, as you pointed out in earlier versions of this set of live streams.

And you can also look at the entire colony and look at it and find an average of its behavior over eco, evo, and devo as well.

But that's why I'm not questioning whether or not the... If you use one type of math and you just decide which partition you're going to make, that that's going to kick out a certain expected kind of...

What I'm kind of curious about is in the synchronicity question, so we all go to the concert, for example, and we all anticipate, because this is the anticipatory part, we all anticipate having a good time.

How do we build that into what the actual result is when we all start singing along to the chorus?

Because I don't know if there's a math for that quite yet.

that's all I make basically ask I'm not I'm not questioning the formalism per se I'm just saying if we build up how does that affect what the equations are telling us versus if we as you said Daniel maybe collapse down and what the math tells us there there's going to be an average it gets kicked out so not arguing

I'm not ignoring that.

I'm just saying I think there is an anticipatory piece to this when we're talking about extended active inference and what we should be able to anticipate, what that surprise should be, and what ends up happening when

those external controls in terms of rules play their part and what each individual's heuristics that they bring to the collective play their part and what that, how that all sort of transpires into something which can be measured and other parts of which may still be way too untractable.

That's all.


SPEAKER_03:
Hello, any thoughts?


SPEAKER_00:
No, I think, I don't know, I said what I needed to say.

I think it scales differently for me than how Dean perceives it, I think.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm going to bring in another resource here.

So this is from the...

The 2021 paper, Felix Scholler, Mark Miller, Roy Salomon, and Carl Friston.

And it's trust as extended control, human-machine interactions as active inference.

So staying on this trust and glue and extended anticipatory theme.

So here is one figure that they have.

Okay.

the left side is a uni-dimensional scalar perspective on trust so this is like from zero to ten or one could think that zero is the threshold pass through zero rather than passing through five do not collect two hundred dollars on your way through five but you might on the way through zero and we have negative trust as well as like positive complete trust with

various associations we can make like having aligned interest or shared affection they then expand that uni-dimensional perspective into like a two-dimensional perspective on trust and they separate out the x-axis and the y-axis as being trustworthiness and trust and we've been talking about glue and trust so let's keep the glue and trust

rattling around as we think about this later work, which undoubtedly is building upon the current paper we're discussing.

And so on the Y equals X line, where the trust and the trustworthiness evaluations are equivalent,

that is where you have justified trust, meaning like high sense of trust, felt sense of trust in a trustworthy system.

I believe the glue is strong and the glue is manifestly strong.

I believe the glue is weak and it's breaking all the time.

So that's on the Y equals X line.

And that's like a manifold, right?

which is to say a lower dimensional line in a higher dimensional state space that actually is this unidimensional one.

So we can imagine that being like at an angle and being the y equals x line.

What does opening it up into multiple dimensions allow us to talk about?

Well, it's allowing other quadrants to be explored where the perceived sense of trust may differ

from the objective or the relational trust.

And so it's sort of like separating out cognitive versus the behavioral dimensions of trust.

Like, would you rather...

be the person that people behaviorally trust, like they give their keys to you, but then they're always having the sentiment or having the communications that that person's untrustworthy, or would you rather have the lip service or the cognitive lip service of people thinking and feeling and maybe even speaking like they trust you, but then when it comes down to it, there's no actual behavioral trust there.

So they explored that in the context of

human robotic interactions and technology.

So then let's just look at the second one and then it'll be awesome to hear what you two think or anyone in the chat.

Here, they're looking at generations of technology along with their adoption curves and the ways in which they enable empowerment.

And so the three rows here are like the sort of mobility,

Genre.

of the legs embodied moving into the extended and then cultured with like the horses and the cars.

There's like a weaponry genre or a sport hunting for those who want to.

And then there's a navigation and orientation, which even came up in our discussion last time about cloud-based map services and how that leads to changes like in our spatial navigation.

And especially as we'll be exploring in 42 upcoming, what if the neurobiology of navigation changes

is deeply intrinsic to ourselves.

So what is actually happening to ourselves as the navigational technology becomes something that we trust, something that we glue to.

And so here they're just showing that there's this spiral of increasing empowerment, like an individual who's in the V3 tech stack here has certain

constraints and affordances and just simply differences not even better except on specifically defined axes than those in the v1 tech stack so where do some of these representations or points that are raised in the later Scholler paper speak to either of you


SPEAKER_01:
Do you have something to add to that, Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
So I'm not really getting this empowerment time adoption.

Without reading the paper, it's just not clicking for me.

So I have to, I guess, catch up in this trust versus extended control.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, totally agree.

And definitely the real-time interpretation is non-trivial.

So let's just look at what they defined there.

measure the amount of control or influence an agent has and perceives kluben et al propose the concept of empowerment empowerment is a property of self-organized adaptive systems and is a function of the agent perception action loop more specifically the relation between sensors and actuators of the organism as induced by interactions between the environment and the agent's morphology


SPEAKER_00:
So this goes back to like the definition of agency and where we were talking about empowerment as like a definable measurable metric on a live stream recently.

You remember that now it's starting to kind of click in, um,


SPEAKER_03:
but but we were talking about that like the um capacity of an entity to realize their preferences like you can have all the preferences in the world on a given on the temperature of the that day but on that dimension one's empowerment like their capacity for action selection to have impact a causal impact on

what is being preferred that is minimal versus one could be empowered and not even care.

And they could have the power to, to modify something and yet not approach that potentially seriously.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So it's clicking now it's making a little bit more sense, but I'm still not really getting this graph.

The, the I understand like empowerment over time, I guess.

I mean,

Like, if you think about a graph of a human, we become more empowered.

We're like a inverted parabola, right?

So like we become more empowered as time goes on and then less empowered as we, you know, age and become less able to care for ourselves.

We're unable at the beginning and then we max empowerment and then like least empowerment towards the end of our life.

Or, or if we live to be, you know, 110 or, or whatever, not always true.

The end of life gets a little weird.

It's a wiggly trail offline.


SPEAKER_03:
That reminds me of the classic riddle.

What has four legs in the morning, two legs in the midday, and then three legs at night?

It's a person.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
And then also let's look at what they mean by these like flex, because there's a few other pieces, of course, that this paper is bringing in, and then we'll kind of return to the trust and glue of the constant et al.

So of course it's a simplification.

The important idea here is that the inflection point, flex, indicating the start of technological decay

reflects the abandoned rate of a practice as the experience of better predicted slopes of extended technological engagement lead to disengagement of non-extended approaches.

Cars replace horses replacing legs.

Old slopes are less than expected and so unsatisfactory as compared to new ones.

So it's a technology adoption

model and often we just see the s curve part of the adoption and people will say like well here's how fast telegraph was adopted then the radio then the tv then the internet and so one can look at these s curves of adoption and sometimes they like start low they go up and then they flatten out and then it's sort of like what the technology's got 100 adoption

this is also showing not just the rise of empire but the decline where we're seeing the retraction of use from a given technology and isn't it funny that we may have actually you know used our legs less as other technologies come into play like just the steps per day

So we have each of these technologies stacks that they're modeling here have like a curve of adoption and also a curve by which they're no longer in use with many simplifications as people can hopefully charitably interpret.

And what they're pointing to is actually that the inflection point of the next generation

when things are like, when it's moving as fast, adoption is increasing as fast as it's going to increase for this new tech, occurs, basically, it must be occurring during the decline, the peak or the decline phase of the previous generation of glue.

Because unless the technologies can be

coexisting in use, but they're looking a little bit more like technologies that replace one another.


SPEAKER_00:
So it's interesting here because legs are actually glued to you.

Whereas like horses can wander away or be stolen.

So there's like an intermediate level of glue, but like cars are like, you know, or horses are like the most likely to go away.

And then cars are, you know, not, they have no agency themselves.

So they can kind of be glued a little bit more tightly.

So horses are like the least amount of glue and cars are like the most amount of glue.

It's interesting.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

Like, yes, Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
So I have relatives who have a ranch in the wine growing part of British Columbia.

And in a strange conversation,

I asked my relative who has a number of horses, would he ever consider instead of people being carted around in minibuses from winery to winery on a wine tour, given the proximity to a number of vineyards, would he ever consider taking his

his horses and putting a business plan together around having people go from vineyard to vineyard on horseback.

And he laughed me off in a heartbeat because he said, no, I think that would be very dangerous, people with drinking too much wine and trying to stay on their horse.

But then he came back to me later on and said, maybe I was too dismissive of that.

because of the novelty aspect of it.

And if you could actually control the nature of it, because he's got great horses.

I've ridden on his horses a lot.

But if you could actually control that situation, the novelty of that means that the people that would participate in that would actually be doing something very unique and very novel.

And so that reversion back to something that's not necessarily seen as being something super efficient

is actually something that can be something that's very attractive and extend that generative model.

Now, we haven't followed through on that.

That was mid-pandemic.

But just this conversation right here, I find it really, well, I find it kind of disturbing because to have all of that now come rushing back a year and five months later kind of tells me, whoa, what's going on here?

But it's that

It's that sense that in the collective extended active inference, in that probability of what portion of a population would actually find this interesting, instead of just dismissing it out of hand and saying, no, that would be a logistical nightmare.

You incorporate bays, right?

You actually see as, well, maybe there is a percentage of the population that would actually see this as something really unique, as long as it's not something that's unmanageable, right?

So I had no idea that you were going to bring this up.

I'd have no idea what the comparison is of empowerment to the adoption uptake of that particular offering, but I do find it really curious right now that it

Here it comes again.

It's popping up again.

And it's not a constructivist thing so much as it's holding open the idea that there is not necessarily a whole bunch of people that just want to be housed in a minivan.

What's the possibility then?

So it's actually pretty interesting in terms of this extended active inference, right?

It's not optimization in the conventional sense.

sense of, well, we can now hit nine wineries in four hours.

Maybe it's an all-day thing, and people actually tell all their friends what a great experience they had.

So you look at the model a little.

The regenerative model is inverted.


SPEAKER_00:
I hate to break it to you, Dean, but the idea is not that novel.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, there you go.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, so where I live, I live really pretty far out in the middle of nowhere, and there's one bar within maybe a 25-mile radius.

And people ride their horse to the bar, and there's hitches for the horse where you can tie the horses outside.

I drove Daniel up that road, so he knows.

He's driven right past it.

So there's hitches where you can tie your horse and go to the bar and drink.

And people actually have been cited for DWI on horseback after leaving the bar.

But also the Cinque Terre is amazing.

A little series of five towns in Italy and there's no cars.

I mean, they say that no cars.

There are these tiny little baby like trash trucks and like FedEx delivery trucks.

But like there's no roads that a car could actually drive on.

Just these little tiny like cars.

car-like things, but you have to get, you have to arrive by boat or by train and people take horseback from, you know, through these five little towns.

It's, they do horse tours and wine.

It's a five little towns that what they do is make wine.

So like, that's a definitely like a winery tour and there's a beautiful beach and yeah, it's really kind of nice.

So, so maybe novel in the area and there's some value always to that, but yeah, had to bring up the

the closest bar to my house where there's horse hitches.

I'm actually at the family dollar, which is like also the only store near where I live.

I've seen people tie their horse to like the handicapped parking signs in the front of the store.

Classic.


SPEAKER_01:
Two things.

One shout out for the gelato in Rio Maggiore.

And two, I could just see, cause I've been to the, to the, well, I haven't been in the French laundry, but that famous restaurant in Napa, that's up from that Napa bit.

But, but I never saw like,


SPEAKER_03:
dozen people riding by on their horses but i could just imagine for the people who are going there that wouldn't seem out of place so yeah two shutouts here's an interesting pattern so let's review figure one and two just briefly because that's that's one of the key contributions it's also some of the formalism so um we are taking it fast but then we'll take it slow

In figure one, we saw the standard action perception loop that we've seen in different guises where we have perception and cognition as being a process of optimization.

And that is what the variational approach enables.

So that's what they write here.

Variational inference converts an inference problem into an optimization problem articulated by equation three.

So that's where we went from

the Bayesian decomposition into this variational approach, variational because there's this Q distribution that we control and we're minimizing a divergence between a distribution that we're in control of that's simplified from a family that's very tractable to study from this true posterior, which is inferred.

And then we go from that variational phrasing of this inversion to an optimization that helps us solve it.

that's what we're seeing in figure one there's optimization happening at the cognitive part of the partition and at the action part

the sensory inputs are not being chosen by the entity directly.

They can engage in active inference to take action selection that then brings predictability and control to sensations, perceptual control theory.

However, those are not directly being controlled or optimized.

So that was figure one.

And we talked about how on the other side of the table, there still is this stochastic dynamical equation reflecting how external states depend on their prior behavior.

states and on action so we still have this interactive external states with potentially complex and self-reinforcing dynamics that's emitting sense states and so it goes in figure two that gets brought into the extended active inference space because now on the other side of the table from our star system of interest the brain here is also something looking more like an arg min

of previous external states and action selection rather than looking more like a stochastic differential equation so now we have extended active inference because there's like an adaptive cognitive process happening on both sides of the blanket

and that provides this new interpretation of what is crossing the boundary as being joint self-evidencing and part of a joint optimization process even if these two different arguments are quite different from each other okay so that's also where figure four came into play

same way that figure one developed into figure two from the mirror active inference on the other side of the table to the adaptive on the other side of the table in equation two we were looking at the variational optimizable approximation of figure one and in equation four we're looking at the variational optimizable equation describing basically figure two let's return to our discussion on

trusting control and glue and tech and all of this.

Even before there was Spears, if we were going to have V zero, we could have legs, hands, and legs.

some embodied navigational onboard perspective.

So that's the pure BioWare stack V zero.

And then we can think about, and it's not so clean across these different verticals of technology, but the horse for sure is like an adaptive active entity.

Like there is an intelligence on the other side of the table when somebody is riding a horse.

What's interesting is that cars may be complex and however simple early cars were more like a mere active inference entity.

I'm sure they still brought surprise and they broke and did things that were like wacky and stuff, but it was kind of like operating a motor.

Now,

cars and technologies are actually becoming increasingly adaptive on the other side.

So let's replace horses in V2.

What if it was a map, like a paper map, a bow and arrow and a skateboard?

So those are all non-living extended entities.

And those are one stack.

And then the next level is like the technology is developing

but it still is like that offloading rather than the uploading.

Like you can't punch the person from 500 feet, but you can use the crossbow to do basically the same transfer of kinetic energy.

And with digital technology and digital models of cognition, we're moving into a place where like the car, the gun, the GPS system,

They might just say, you can't do that.

So that is changing the nature of interaction with technology.

Whereas like a trusty bow was one that can be relied upon to behave predictably in a certain way.

What is trust and glue when we're in the figure two world with everything?

Here's the bow and skateboard worlds in figure one.

And now this is in like a adaptive active setting, but yeah, blue.


SPEAKER_00:
So I'm really reminded of, um,

The pay phones, and, like, I know, you know, Dean is old enough to remember, but, like, Daniel, what were you, like, five when they had pay phones?

I'm just kidding.

Fuck what?

Exactly.

So, I mean, we, you know, everywhere, so we had a telephone, we had a telephone at home, right?

Like, we could trust it that if we were at home, we could connect with whoever we would want to connect with.

um and then you know there was all these payphone technologies like if you were somewhere where there were people where there was a gas station you could always find a payphone and it's interesting like the you know so we we were okay being away from our home phone but we had some trust that somewhere we could find a phone to connect with people if we needed to right um but we still couldn't connect with them unless they were at their house there was this other weird like

looped component and then you know you don't see a payphone now at all like the last time i saw one i took a picture of it because it's like such an anomalous thing i mean they just don't exist anymore because there's some you know everyone trusts that they'll have a phone and yeah if your phone battery dies it's okay you trust that you'll be able to charge it you know in your car or you get a battery pack or you have a solar battery pack i have one of those it's great um but so so you trust that you'll be able to connect even if you don't have your phone

someone will have a phone, right?

So like, you know, if you're in a car accident and have no cell phone, someone will stop and you can use their phone.

So there's always this, but it's, it's interesting, this level of, of, you know, trust and the ability to communicate with others.

And then what does that do to us cognitively?

Like if we, you know, can you check the fridge, hon?

Did I leave, do we need milk?

Like, you know, can you call your house?

and find out, like, it's interesting.

So I wonder how much more preparation we used to do without this ability to communicate broadly, like at the push of a button or, you know, 10 buttons or whatever.


SPEAKER_01:
Can I just build on that for a second?

So a couple of things.

If we're going to do an around the world thing, there are places still in the world where

although there's a whole bunch of people that have got their own device, there's still lots and lots of pay phones, right?

So we don't see them necessarily in our cognitive niche, but I can think of Central American countries that I visited recently, and I'm going to be visiting later this year, where if there wasn't a pay phone on every second corner, that will have changed only since 2017, right?

So some cognitive niches still require that.

In this diagram here, I think it's interesting that when we look at the verticals, we could probably see the offloading, the idea that why would you need a payphone anymore, that being sort of resolved depending on which niche you're in.

But the horizontals, which is really the diachronic part, that's what kind of frees us up to go and look at a turntable again, even though most people have got that same capacity

to access whatever the media is on their phone, right?

So I think, again, I'm going to beat the same drum.

When we look at these kind of representations, it's a minimum of two.

Do we look at the verticals and the horizontals?

Do we see the stacks and the diachronics?

Because when we incorporate the diachronics, then that looking back, I still probably won't go to a phone booth in Costa Rica because I just

don't need to, but I can certainly understand why it still exists.

And it isn't just a novelty.

It exists like you were talking about last live stream about why we've automated water access.

Those people in those cognitive niches are still finding those tools useful.

So yeah, I think it's...

Again, I keep bragging about this Axel Constant character who writes these papers, but man, is he ever touching on important stuff in terms of us sort of being aware, not just in terms of what we're dealing with in the here and now, but how that environment necessarily partitions us as much as we actively partition it.

And so, yeah, I mean, go to Costa Rica.

It's a pretty modern place, but they still have lots and lots of payphones, and they still really matter.


SPEAKER_00:
They're in that second hump, right?

As we're transitioning from house phone to payphone to cell phone, they're still in V2 there.


SPEAKER_03:
Or, yeah, some point where there's overlapping waves of tech.

So very interesting about...

trust and glue at different levels or types.

Like, do you trust that you'll be able to simply make the call or do you trust that they're going to be able to hear you on the call?

Do they, do you have trust that you'll be understood?

Do you have trust that that will have action?

Like if you call an emergency hotline number, that's like, um,

It's probably a bunch of active jokes that one can imagine because one is providing a sense stimuli for that operator.

so that they undertake some action and you trust that a certain kind of action will be taken though not directly knowing all the details like we may not understand how an ambulance gets called or where the location of the ambuli are but then we expect that upon a certain type of signal a call

that one will be arriving shortly.

So that is very interesting.

And then also Dean, like you said, we're partitioning technology.

Like if you install Linux on a computer and it's the disk partition, and there's so many times where technology is about partitioning.

and about putting the technology in the box and technology is often in a box.

It's like wrapped in a box and then it's in like another plastic box or metal box.

But then that actually changes our cognitive partitioning.

And then we've explored in this paper, a sort of low bar and then a high bar where more is different.

And the low bar was the offloading was where the technology is going to merely remind you of something.

And so the offloading can be freeing up cognitive thought cycles and

and allowing for future epistemic action.

Writing something down on the post-it and putting it on the doorway and it says, get milk, or it's yellow and you know that yellow means get milk, but you're offloading it to this sort of relatively passive, more like a crossbow, more like a skateboard kind of technology.

What starts to happen when technology becomes adaptive and anticipatory?

And so we are not just offloading,

That's the low bar, but we're uploading.

And there's an active entity on both sides of the table now, and they're anticipating and expecting each other.

What is happening when our technology use and modifications in the niche change our cognitive partitioning?


SPEAKER_01:
I got a question maybe for both of you.

So in that

under that sort of the spirit of what you're just saying Daniel so you get some platforms where you want to do some you want to take all your photos and all your images from your holiday and you make an iMovie or you go to Final Cut Pro now both of those platforms perform essentially the same function in terms of you being able to stitch together a bunch of images but the

iMovie, in its effort to be adaptive, says how much of this would you like me to do?

Would you like me to sync the music for you?

Would you like me to apply the Ken Burns effect?

Whereas the Final Cut Pro, the assumption is that you have a much more control

aspect of this in terms of what you want to be able to fine-tune and continue to operate.

So I think it's interesting, the technology question and the environment question, because yes, it can be framed as freeing up, but I think at some point we have to ask whether it's option removing, because it's trying to help us, but it's not necessarily generating more possibilities.

which is, again, another form of optimization.

Optimization isn't always removing uncertainty.

Lots and tons of times, optimization is having more possibilities that are valid, that are viable.

And that's the harder of those two things to determine.

What's a viable alternative here as opposed to, am I getting closer and closer to being able to regenerate the copy?


SPEAKER_03:
It makes me think about optimization when we're in the world of figure one and when we're in the world of figure two.

So human on the bike and optimizing has to do with like speed on the bike.

Okay.

But now we're in figure two world and we're all going on a walk together, like the three of us.

What is the optimum speed?

It may have some of the same considerations as the bicycle, like we want to get there, we want to be safe, we don't want to break anything.

But then there is this relational layer where the optimum speed may be a pure group decision.

And then what you said about optimization, how is optimization related to reducing uncertainty as well as, or in what cases, reducing options, which can be a one way to reduce uncertainty.

Like you have equal uncertainty about a hundred options.

Let's just reduce it to two.

You're still uncertain, but there's only two options.

But then you also mentioned adding more options and of what kind.

So let's think about choosing a cereal.

So there's a hundred cereals there in the store.

and we're in the figure one world it's just the dead cereals and they are uh passive recipients of our action selection maybe they're wiggling around a little bit on the shelves trying to escape but basically they're dead and we're taking adaptive decisions and so there can be uncertainty about which actions to take so yes we could increase our precision by having for for example fewer alternatives

then again you said what about optimization via more acceptable alternatives what if there was a friend or a parent or a adaptive computer system that said would you like me to make some suggestions that's actually another option of a totally different type than serial one through 100. so you've added another option another affordance for action

And in doing so, it's part of a trajectory that does minimize free energy and find some sort of satisficing solution.

Or like, can I ask a question?

It's actually an opportunity for an open-endedness.

It puts a new affordance on the table when the adaptive entity asks like, okay, could I make a suggestion about your serial choice?

Yes.

Are you interested in this or that?

Like it's actually adding more uncertainty about potentially even a novel introduction of now there's this dialogue.

It's like, wait, I thought we were choosing a serial.

Why are we now engaging in dialogue?

But then it could be on the path to selecting a good serial.


SPEAKER_01:
Can I just quote something?

You just reminded me of something in the paper under the diachronic cognition of EAI in the 314.

I'll just read it because I think it's spot on to what you were just describing.

Cognitive assemblies are formed and maintained diachronically beyond the local organism-centered boundaries of individuals.

Kirchhoff, Malafouris, and Stotz.

Cognitive assemblies are decentralized systems or networks of human and non-human agencies, which is what you were just describing, the tour in 1993, whose causal constitutive relationship

depends upon self-organized processes distributed across the network that they constitute.

So, yeah, I mean, I think the authors would agree with what you were just describing.

I remember reading that the first time and thinking to myself, again, of Paul Kahn's book, The Origins of Order.

So you have...

assemblies within, and then you have assemblies in terms of a larger energy package, a constitution.

And so how does that ebb and flow relative to your own homeostatic and allostatic heuristics that you're following, right?

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
that's again back to the witness piece right i don't know if this is exactly how to say it but i see this paper and line of research and thinking as being sort of the upswing of thinking about for e-cognition extended enacted embedded etc etc etc

What does it look like to be on the upswing of taking 4E cognition as a starting point?

So no longer does non-4E have to be straw-personed or discussed pejoratively.

Car companies today are not doing slam pieces on horses.

There's a recognized place and time for people who are horses, and it's now in a different tech vertical than people who are now doing the differentiation between different cars that they might like to buy.

when a technology actually does threaten it, like, hey, maybe you don't need to own a car.

Maybe there's going to be something you can trust on that will take you where you need to go.

That is where you start to see the threatening and the responses and things like that, when there actually is a possibility to have a technological replacement.

But there isn't a attack

on non-extended, non-embedded, non-encultured cognition.

The paper does not spend a massive amount of time describing that cultural priors influence cognitive process of individuals.

In descriptive and concise positive language, it is recouping and restating

an extended perspective and taking that as a starting point for moving forward and for modeling kinds of systems that previously had ineffective or incomplete models.

Because hardly could it be said that this paper answers anything about extended cognitive process.

In fact, we keep on coming back to the figure one, figure two, equation two, equation four step

because it's subtle, but it is the contribution of this paper because they took active inference, which was always framed this way, extended it and showed, well, actually like this is a special case.

Figure one of active inference was a special case of where there could be a more adaptive entity on the other side.

And then that becomes reabsorbed into active inference and is a starting point for what I hope that we'll continue to discuss in some of the rest of this discussion.

what is active inference and extended active inference particularly as a starting point look like rather than, well, we've done all of these attack ads versus earlier models of cybernetics or of ecological psychology.

We've decimated the opposition.

And now the only model that you can go forward with is active or is extended cognition.

People who don't believe in extended cognition, just what are they thinking about?

that isn't where our regime of attention or linguistics is let the record show so what does it look like when we actually do start to take steps forward in this figure two kind of world dean can i ask a question on that then would it not make sense


SPEAKER_01:
to at least momentarily suspend many of the typical hierarchies that we apply.

We can keep things nested.

Those things continue to exist, but isn't extended active influence asking us to start from a place of not knowing?

I mentioned this in the last live stream.

I mean, if both people are willing to take that risk and face down that consequence, or if the entire audience has taken on that risk and taken that question on collectively,

Is that not the beginning of extended active inference, where now the environment access the scrutinizer as opposed to, oh, there's somebody who now judges all people who don't believe in extended active inference as being...

not legitimate.

The first thing that we have to do is allow the environment to be the scrutinizer as opposed to somebody else who's given that role.

And I'm sincerely asking that question.

I'm not questioning whether that's even possible.

But if we're going to start down that road of applying extended active inference, then who's the judge here?

And for how long?

If it's extended, it's extended active inference as opposed to mere active inference.


SPEAKER_03:
Lou, you have a thought or I'll go?

Okay.

it makes me look in the bottom right corner of our video for act infer serve as we sometimes do and uh before the action potentially there's like this stop wait listen perceive that is silence and it's important to also recognize like a silence before and after a word so

Where the action perception loop begins and ends, no one knows.

But you said, what happens when we start with not knowing?

What if we start or intend for the environment to be the scrutinizer?

How do we let the environment be the scrutinizer?

Whether it's short, long, transient, we have to act because, hashtag figure two, our actions are the observations of the environment.

So if we withhold action or act in a way that the scrutinizer is going to get the wrong impressions from, like we're the adversarial demon, it's like, oh, I prefer lower CO2, but then tee hee hee, I'm just putting a ton out.

What could one ask the environment to make its inferences on?

Only the Markov blanket, only the holograph.

only the quantum experiment.

And so action is how we allow the environment to make inferences.

Like two people, I don't know, operating on a saw or a tree, one person's pushing while the other one is pulling

what are the consequences of our actions we don't know but we have expectations preferences and we reduce our uncertainty about all of that but when we don't know which is to say our cognitive process doesn't have precision and precision could also be a false belief so we have not knowing

in our non-extended act-inf, in our cognitive process, do we infer first and wait until we have higher precision, which again can be a false perception, and then that is actually implicitly putting one into the position of the central scrutinizer.

It's like saying, when I'm ready to act, then I'll act.

but I'm going to wait until then.

These are all of course simplifications and I know there's counterexamples that people can think of and that's rich and those counterexamples are in a yes and spirit because these are only some of the actions that I or you could take.

But when we empower the environment, that doesn't mean that we don't act.


SPEAKER_01:
Does it not mean we interact more and we get out more often?

Isn't that the first assumption?

If we actually want the environment to become more involved in whatever it is, whatever the joint self-evidencing is, don't we have to actually allow the environment in by getting out more and interacting more?


SPEAKER_03:
Luke?


SPEAKER_00:
So I kind of find this like, if a tree falls in the forest and no one heard it, did the tree really fall?

So if there's no action, and I guess a tree falling down is also a tree doing action, maybe whether it's, you know, reactive inference or not, it doesn't really matter.

But I do think that...

You know, something has to happen for the environment to perceive it.

Otherwise, what is the environment perceiving?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I think we're navigating on it, but I think it's harder for us to perceive in our minds how it might be navigating on us.

I mean, we pick ourselves up, put ourselves on an airplane and fly somewhere.

So that's pretty easy to track.

But I don't know that we necessarily know until we bump into that payphone in that foreign niche how that's going to necessarily navigate on us.

We don't know until we actually put ourselves in that position and then decide what that interaction will or will not be.

Do I take a picture of it because, whoa, I just found something I haven't seen in a long time?

Or do I actually pick it up?

and have its affordances play on me.

That's the harder part to get your mind around.

It seems like it's imaginal and philosophical, but it's really navigational and wayfinding and reorienting, updating, updating, updating.


SPEAKER_00:
So can I just respond really quick?

I think that you are...

dealing with or thinking about when you're thinking about cognitive uploading and this has like been consistent through this stream and the last stream you're talking about putting yourself in a foreign environment right so like i would have to

by leaving my office getting on a plane arriving in Switzerland and getting off the plane and now I'm in a foreign environment right and so what do I perceive in this foreign or in this novel environment but but simply the act of moving from a familiar environment to a novel environment is also an action right mm-hmm


SPEAKER_03:
completely it's an epistemic forging action to be in a new informational niche to jump into a new paper to listen to a live stream that somebody might not otherwise like take a little journey with us and it is definitely one of the most important kinds of action to study

just like they bring up epistemic actions at the end of this paper, like knowing where to look, like what is on page 50 of this book?

One has to have precision in an action policy to know where to look, that's an epistemic action.

And Dean, you've brought together the spatial navigation elements,

with the epistemic aspect.

And then even in that example of the payphone, we see epistemic and pragmatic value.

Like if it's high novelty, high epistemic value, that might induce a certain kind of action, like taking a picture maybe to document it.

But then also there's the pragmatics of the phone, like using it to make a call.

So this type of action to have the initiative just to get up,

and to do something and to have bounded modeling and just knowing that one will know enough when they're in that situation or that it's low stakes enough that it doesn't really matter.

That's very interesting.

So let me read something that is in live chat.

So Steven wrote,

This paper extends towards the mind body spirit environments dynamic by starting in terms of what most active models focus on generative models.

How can we start bigger, bolder and work back in.

So I'll just give a first thought.

Thanks for the question, Steven.

So I believe that when Steven is saying where most active models focus on or start on, which is like the generative model of the particular entity.

And the particular entity, the thing, which is the thing as distinguished from the environment, is this.

That is...

the blanket states and the cognitive states.

Blanket and internal states constitute the thing.

Like the car...

Of course, here we would take the car as process and the car includes the roads and the stop signs, but the car as a thing partitioned from its environment is the blanket and internal states of the car.

And so extended, the idea that this is the thing, but that it's extending its function in a more distributed way, in a way, as I think we may have even talked about last week, reifies that as the thing.

Like when the person puts the post-it note and we call that extended organismal cognition, do we not reify and maybe even implicitly constrain what organismal cognition is?

Because we're saying, well, an organism with a post-it note is extended organismal cognition.

So that means that regular organismal cognition isn't that.

So when we go to the figure two world, we can then ask about, well,

there's now a generative model on both sides.

That's what we were looking at with our colorful boxes last time.

Each one of these boxes is a thing.

And then we talked about how they make up a bigger thing together.

They make up a different generative model together.

So this thing, the green thing on the right,

is still a generative model.

So it's not like we're going to escape Act-Inf's highlighting of generative model.

but rather we recognize that generative models can have sub partitionings and that some of the cases that we might want to think about involve like a partitioning between what are classically understood to be autonomous entities and their niche and so it's almost like from the atomic active not the quantum just like sort of a single entity where we're going to put less emphasis on the niche then

With extended act-inf, we start to recognize the niche as an active entity, not of the same type, but of the same structure in terms of performing optimization on both sides.

And then that really moves us to a place of like synthesis, which is it's just like holistic act-inf or it's just, it is extended active inference, but we're not saying who it's extended from.

It's just, we're taking a total modeling perspective on all these activities, as well as all of these activities now with the red line, but then what does that make the purple line?

And what is its niche?

And that comes back to the point about composability, which is like, we could stop with just the black box and say, we're just modeling the entity and we're not gonna think about the environment as a thing.

We're gonna think of it as the heat sink, just like our quantum colleagues reminded us.

Or maybe we want to model both sides of the table as things, but then in doing so, we make them into this joint generative model

So again, we didn't escape generative models.

We actually only reified the need for them because now we've made this fusion generative model, but now we're back to where we were earlier, which is implicitly taking the environment to be the heat sink.

Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
So I have a thought, if you can go back to figure two, that'd be great.

um just about um what happens and this goes back to what dean was talking about earlier when we're talking about scaling and where do you put the markov blanket so here we have the niche and the environment doing this joint self-evidencing um and what happens when like they're trying to fit to each other right but i mean we all have seen circumstances where

someone doesn't quite fit in with the crowd, right?

And so like, this is how like people become school shooters or radicalized or, you know, bullied or, you know, we've all seen someone doesn't matter.

They see their niche environment.

They just can't quite fit like a square peg trying to fit into a round hole.

And this happens, like I just was writing about this, you know, last night when we,

if we were to take an organism and put it in a novel environment, as Dean was suggesting earlier, but like, I mean, take a bacterium that lives in a hot springs and put it in a cold water pond.

It's not going to do very well because it's just, that's the wrong place for it to be.

And I just was really talking with Chris Fields yesterday about what makes you put a Markov blanket in a certain place or what makes things, and this is like one of the fundamental things

the big it's the big question it is the question where do you put the markov blanket like where you can establish conditional independence okay so like i get that answer but but at the same time you can kind of put it wherever you want it

So when there's maladaptive fit to the niche environment, does that make it pop out of the Markov blanket?

And what is the threshold for that maladaptive fit?

These are just the things that I want to know.


SPEAKER_03:
In the Acton textbook and in other sources, there's a discussion of Bayesian brain and of computational approaches to neurophysiology, neurodiversity, psychopathology, all of these different areas.

And by integrating them, we kind of see that just like Axel's bacteria can be doing exact Bayes or variational Bayes free energy minimization right off the cliff.

that hot water bacteria in the cold water is going to continue minimizing its free energy up until it dies.

And so, if systems are always doing free energy descent,

where do we get to say which kinds that we prefer like maybe um we need to bring that purple line back and what's on the other side of the purple line is like the modeler like we've still been thinking about this in a very like entity it's physical environment partitioning

But this comes back to what happens before the graphical model gets drawn.

That's the first Markov blanket where now you in that paper or you in that graphical representation, now there's a blanket between the two of you.

but it's almost like there's this modeling impulse that is not extended.

It's within a cognitive entity, whether that's a person bouncing around their head, whether it's a group that hasn't externalized the model, but they're bouncing it around in each other.

And then when they externalize it, when they externalize this as a model, that is an action.

It's not the only kind of action to take, but then that is the zero to one step.

Yes, Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
And to both of your comments, one of the things in our program that we used to talk about all the time is we don't want your sponsor, the person who is essentially taking you and inviting you into their professional setting, their professional cognitive niche.

We don't want you to turn that person into teacher 2.0.

We don't want you to have the same expectations of that person as you have of the person that's in the classroom.

One of the things that you have to try to do is be adaptive and extend what you then can accommodate in terms of these various formalized cognitive niches that you're now gaining access to.

I just think that that joint self-evidencing part is really, really critical because I think for most of us, it's hard for us to get our heads around the idea that, well, I have a certain agency and then I have other people who have leverage over me and they can tell me what I can and cannot do versus the person who goes into a situation and says, I'm a proportion of a larger energy group

situation, set, volume, whatever you want to call it.

And somebody has been able to find another person who, despite the fact that they have a lot more experience than me, is also able to perceive themselves as a proportion and is prepared to base update.

And now giving that relational composition all the support and resources that you possibly can so that you're actually

generating this possibility of being able to invent together as opposed to one person's downloading to another, which I found traditionally, even in those transdisciplinary settings, which I really like, even those tend to revert back, regress back to an average of, I want to stay in my safe place.

I want to stay with what I know and only share those things that I know.

Rarely will you find a situation like the one we have here where every single time I walk into one of these live streams, I assume I'm going to learn way more than I can bring to the actual conversation.

And if I come into it with that sort of humble sense that,

I can't come from a place of everything that I know.

I have a few experiences that I can share and say, I think that this validates some of the ideas that we have, but I never come at it with a situation of going, well, I'm going to school everybody up today.

I think it's the interaction part, and I think it's the getting into those places of necessary discomfort, because we do...

find ourselves lots of times in these papers, not really knowing where it's going to end up.

And you have to kind of have the strategies and the attitude to be able to handle that.

And so when we develop that in people,

What does that do in terms of giving them a better sense of what applied active inference really means?

We have to go a step back and say, so what strategies do you use right now?

What are your default heuristics?

When you find those heuristics, as Blue pointed out, being applied in certain social settings and getting rejected, now what do you do?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, I'm going to plateau on this slide elaboration to see what this might reflect on either of you about applying active inference.

So now we've added in another layer.

So here's the active inference modeler team.

making figure two model, making a model where there is intelligence on both sides of the table, whereas here they're making something more like figure one.

So in this case, the modeler, in the more figure one-like case, there's more of a tendency, speculating, for the modeler

to just project their cognition into the model as it interfaces with a more passive or non-agentic surrounding.

When we start thinking about making models where there's agency on both sides, then it's like we have that realization

that we're also on the other side of something.

And so that is some of the implicit, esoteric, impactful interfaces of modeling as development and modeling as personal and multi-scale development

Because there is a difference with making these two different types of model in what this individual thinks and their thought loops change how they act and their actions are the environment's sense states.

So it's like,

there's a lot of ways to go with it and a lot of loops of cognition and perception and action.

But again, it's taking those intertwined and nested and laterally interacting perception, cognition, action loops, taking that as a starting point, not as an ending point.

So we don't need to talk about how it's not that way.

We need to talk about applying active inference so that it can be

starting point and it is a starting point and we're on the journey anyone who's paying attention is but what happens as we continue in that journey are either of you gamers like do you do gaming i have a little bit but like as a teenager or something but not not so much anymore


SPEAKER_01:
Because in that environment, I don't do it at all.

But in that virtual environment, I have a number of friends who have picked up the virtual reality gear.

And they absolutely love it.

In that kind of an environment, they are neophilic through and through.

And they want to share that with me.

I mean, they want to invite me in.

They want...

me to kind of join that world of playing virtual tennis with them because

They just have so much fun in there.

So a big part of this, although it's not my cup of tea anymore than robots are, I can see where you can take these basic principles of applying active inference, and it doesn't always have to be pick yourself up physically and board an airplane and whatever.

You can do it virtually as well.

It's just that knowing when those...

when those conditions and circumstances are such that people want to move concentrically and circularly around a certain set of conditions, whether limited by the number of pixels or limited by their wanting to control their carbon footprint.

But again, the applied active influence part isn't necessarily something that's always

I have to get on the big rocket and away we go.


SPEAKER_03:
I think this does take us towards this question of wanting to apply active inference or wanting to be applying active inference.

Expecting and preferring oneself to be applying active inference.

If you don't expect and prefer that, fine.

Do what you expect and prefer, and you will.

But then what brings one

from seeing a phenomena from being curious about payphones and technology adoption in this or that region of the world or wanting to understand how moving a bacteria from one temperature and salt concentration to a different niche how to model that or all of these other processes that come up as examples or as ancillary to some of the discussions that we have

How do we go from that phenomena that has taken our interest, that we've distinguished that phenomena from the other phenomena?

Like I'm talking about the rotating of the hurricane.

I'm not talking about the fact that the clouds are gray or that it's 21,000 feet off the ground.

Like there's a phenomena, not the only phenomena, but there's something, and thing ends with ing too.

So something, ing, that has...

come onto our radar?

And then how do we go from that T-H-I-N-G or other thing towards active inference models?

And that space before the modeler has even written down a Bayes graph

before they in their journey may even know what a Bayes graph is or a way to interpret it, let alone the minimum of two ways to interpret it, what's happening in that space?

And is that applying active inference?

Even if it's only recognized later that it was applying active inference.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I don't have much more to say on it except the fact that I think that a lot of us are trained in formal education settings to never actually really apply active inference in terms of that formality around what we predict we have to do in order to

come out the other side of that particular kind of formalized and structured learning journey.

That's what I know from my own experiences.

I mean, until there was an active inference group, something formally organized around the concept of active inference, I would not have guessed, I would not have predicted

that there would be the kind of interest that we are now trying to evolve and support.

This is still very nascent in terms of its acceptance and its uptake if we're going to talk about uploading in terms of what kinds of alternatives we could at least give


SPEAKER_03:
some consideration too i can show an image from the textbook from the active textbook and kind of reflect on that and this is just this is the appetizer of the appetizer because of course we're going to have the textbook group and multiple cohorts of that where we like go through it and the textbook is an appetizer to the appetizer and so just it's a fractal it's a crumb

We've been talking a lot about graphs that look like the one on the top.

And so this is the same kind of partially observable Markov decision process written in a slightly different way, slightly different labeling, like a three instead of a D and a two instead of an A and a B here and et cetera.

So same, but a little different.

And in this type of model, we talk about like the state at a given time, S of T, and then we talk about the transitions of it being different at a different time point.

Like here is the past,

and then the transition to the present, the present, the transition to the future.

And then at each of those time steps, there's like the emission of some observation.

So there's the dynamics of the translation of the underlying hidden state, and then there's the emission of observations.

That's the part that makes it like partially observable.

And then there's action in the loop with pi.

Okay, that's the top one.

The bottom one is clearly drawn

if we can have a theory of mind of the authors to reflect some isomorphisms or similarities structurally between this top representation and the bottom one.

And they discuss, we're going to appeal to these throughout the remainder of the book.

Okay, so the tops, the POMDP sequence of states evolving through time indexed by the subscript.

bottom continuous time model of the sort implied by stochastic differential equations with prime notation indicating temporal derivatives so here x

is like the hidden state now.

X prime is the rate of change of the hidden state now.

X double prime is the second derivative, so not just like the velocity, but the acceleration of the hidden state now.

Each of those are emitting observations in this Y prime space, but now three

The B up here does not reflect how things change through time, but rather how derivatives are taken now.

And so this is like time series planning with time series inference.

Where should we be in five time steps?

Well, let's explore and roll out where we could be in five time steps.

The bottom is more like a Taylor series because we're only staying with two feet now.

And then we're just asking, okay, where are we now?

That's our first fundamental frequency.

Then where's the rate of change?

And where's the second derivative of the rate of change?

And so we're approximating a future unfolding

using only the generalized coordinates of motion in one time step.

And so there isn't an explicit modeling of any future time points at all.

It's not x prime of t plus one.

This is all about the derivatives of motion at this time point.

So we've been having some interesting conversations.

What kind of thing allows these representations

and then thinking about what kind of thing that is and actually how different these representations are despite being able to be laid out graphically in a similar way there are more in this family of graphs that we haven't seen even if these two uniquely identified one thing and that one thing was the one thing there still would be other representations we haven't seen so


SPEAKER_00:
So you're way ahead of me in the textbook because you're a good student like that.

I haven't come to that picture yet.

But I think it's interesting that when things are changing rapidly, we notice them more.

And when things are changing slowly, we don't notice them at all.

So what effect do first and second order derivatives have on our perception of

Like a frog being boiled in hot water, right?

Or in tap water.

If you take it room temperature water and slowly increase it, it doesn't really notice that it's being boiled alive.

But if you take it from, you know, it's cold, nice, cool pond into a pot of boiling water, it's going to big time notice.

So, so I wonder, you know, does perception increase with first and second order derivatives or, or the sensation increase the magnitude of the sensation or the perception?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
When some things change so fast, they again become imperceptible.

Like a helicopter blades, and then it becomes again, or like a frequency that just becomes inaudible.


SPEAKER_00:
Is it like parabolic?

Like, you know, we get max perception, like when the rate of change is between this and this, and then no perception and no perception over on the other side.

It's like...


SPEAKER_03:
It's like tuning in and tuning out.

There's some wavelength that's being optimally perceived and then there's trailing off.

So now let's go back to figure two and think about blue like you brought up at the beginning, like improvisation.

Now, when we're doing improvisation, do we, in what ways do we

do time series modeling to explicitly predict how i will be and how they will be in the future at specific future time points and or if we are uploading not just offloading what if we just have to where is their arm is it accelerating is it changing how it's accelerating

rather than where will their arm be in 30 minutes, one can just say in the very short term in a playful space, how can we just listen to how things are, how they're changing and how that's changing and so on.

How does that move from playful contact improv into digital stigmergy that makes useful productive technologies

It's another question.

One of those questions isn't better.

It's awesome that we have a framework that helps us address both of them as well as other questions.

What happens when we think about offloading and uploading using the structures that we've seen?

We won't go into it today, but like we've added this extended perspective

to what will be evoked when we hear about actin in the future it's like charging that term with more and more ways to relate it like it'll be interesting to find out there will be epistemic and pragmatic value in finding out dean


SPEAKER_01:
Daniel, because I haven't seen this before you put it up here today.

You've got the book, but I've just read the introduction.

Do you think going forward, if we're going to get to a place where we're going to feel comfortable in terms of developing the conditions around which active inference is more easily uptaken or adopted,

or given there's a certain confidence around using that methodology to inform what's on the other side of the

yet to be observed.

Is there a Monte Carlo aspect to this in terms of just having to play out a few hands and getting comfortable with the fact that that takes a while?

Is that perhaps why the diachronic piece was introduced and kept right near the end where the remarks are in the sense that we all seem to be time constrained and we want to make sure that we're getting value for our dollar from our

ways of doing things but if we're going to look at it from the perspective of distributing cognition in the globe there was still going to be some ad hoc aspects of this that kind of play out Monte Carlo style like you went to one performance and then you went to the the next performance five hours later and

would you go in with an expectation that you're going to see an exact copy of what you saw before?

And does that change the value of being now part of that collector or that constituted cognitive niche, right?

So maybe one of the things we have to do is ask ourselves, if we...

want people to be able to take this on, the idea of active inference and extended, making it safe for them not to feel as though if they don't come up with the correct answer out of the series of four, that that's not the only way to measure whether or not you're gaining confidences around how your generative model gives you a chance to maybe

decide who the two finalists are in said competition still six weeks away from now, right?

Like, and I don't want everything now to become about online gambling, but I mean, there are actual things that we can find in the niche that are currently there that would give people a better sense of what information they might, may or may not need in order to be able to make, open that, that basal ganglia or close it.

Because there's a lot of times we know that we should close it.

We just should not go forward.

So yeah, again, I think, I think it, um,

It may be some of these things come back to how much time we're willing to spend on it and whether we see the investment of time at the front end paying off exponentially at the back end or whether we just stick with those methods that we are familiar with because we know at the end of the 13-week cycle, we can say we've now accounted for X amount of a download or an offload or a dump.

I wonder if that's part of where we're at.


SPEAKER_03:
blue this is only a partial a partial um alignment just a yes and what you said it's not a direct example or a contradiction or anything but if we think about the tech adoption curve of cars and advanced modern technology extending back infinitely it's like it asymptotes back infinitely

When I hear you talking about 13-week quarter educational paradigm, the instructionist paradigm, which may be able to get you from three out of 10 on the week one assessment, and then we have a strategy that gets this percentage of people to seven out of 10 on the week one assessment in this set of instructions.

The teachers get the instructions and they give different instructions to the learners.

Then you said in contrast, there's putting the time in upfront and receiving super linear reward.

And so it's like the long phase where the technology is developing and that's sort of happening in someone's life.

And then I saw that as connected to the gaming question.

And so we have a lot of the tools for that micro gaming.

Getting people to engage in instructionalist activities has been gamified to a fine art and science, and it will become more intense in the coming years, we can expect, even if we cognitively say we don't prefer that.

So how do we...

interact, not just instruct in a way where somebody who is spending one hour a week on Act-Inf goes to 10 and somebody who's at zero goes to one, but we don't need to take 10 to 100.

probably most of the time.

And how much time should people be spending on Act Dymph?

What should they expect to get out of this?

What do people expect from listening to live streams?

They should comment.

If they're listening, it's a special request.

They should comment for what they do expect.

That would be interesting to know because otherwise it's us acting without that much of a sense back from our environment.

And so that puts us more into a figure one paradigm rather than a figure two paradigm, even if the material is so massively nuanced and interactive itself.

So there's definitely a lot on the table.

Hopefully the table is set such that those who are 5.8 hours in to paper number 41, that they're more intrigued and motivated by rather than

reflexively looking for that two minute explainer video because some of these ideas may occur at a cognitive pace that is slower than that video in its whole and require regimes of attention that are not amenable to being driven in the same way as um

addictive, repetitive behaviors in other like micro mining educational situations.

Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
So there's a whole science behind the gamification of everything.

And I wonder if our ability to do that in an educational setting, but also in a work setting, I mean, they like, you know, have performance metrics and everything.

I mean, we have metrics for posts on Twitter.

How many likes do you get?

How many people liked the photo you put on Facebook?

I mean, we metric, we have metrics for everything.

And so we can gamify.

I mean, we gamify things for ourselves, but things are externally gamified for us.

And I wonder if, if,

it's successful and it's very successful.

I don't know that it's optimal because I think it leads to like other problems, but does the gamification of everything, is that like a replacement of our preferences for just like winning the game?

Like ultimately, like do, like, you know, I would prefer to be happy.

I would prefer to engage meaningfully with my colleagues and, you know, fellow students in the class.

But instead we are like in this weird warped gamified way that we have to like, everything conforms to that.

Even though it's not aligned with my preferences,

I shift like, so, so the preference for taking the game, just like, or for winning the game, just like takes over your entire model with all of your other preferences.

Like, why does that work?

Or how I wonder, like, can we active inference that like the active inference of gamification, that would be super interesting to just look at.

Like what happens is that that one preference for just like winning, ticking up a notch or like gaining more metrics.

Is that, that just overrides all of your other preferences or just like,

hits harder with the dopamine, or what's going on there, right?


SPEAKER_03:
Definitely an important area to model, and it reminds me of Mark Miller et al.

's work on

Yes, podcasts and papers.

So people should for sure listen to how it's framed by him and by colleagues.

But there are the drives and the preferences on thirst, like Blue just enacted, or for temperature.

And so within each drive, there is a pretty clear preference, like to be in a bounded range or more is better.

But then there's a second level process by which one is asking,

are those optimizations across domains happening better or not as well as I'm expecting?

Is this a balanced strategy where every time I get to 98% on my phone's battery, I'm always charging it, but then all of a sudden I'm neglecting all this other stuff.

So I'm too attentive, for example, to the battery drive

to a point of it not being any more adaptive of a policy selection than just waiting until it's at 70% most of the time.

But the uncertainty about those times where you do need that 98% battery is what compels people to make these optimal decisions that may neglect other drives.

So being able to model that, what's called gamification.

And then the other piece that made me think about is,

We don't get to see figure one and figure two.

We don't know what's on the other side of the blanket, if it's mere or adaptive or what it is.

And so it's not like we'll know figure one when we see it and we'll know figure two when we see it and we'll have a super clear strategy for when to engage in the figure one way and when to engage in the figure two way.

It's more like, and potentially this is what learning and applying active inference in a personal capacity may look like for some, what does it look like to engage with figure two as your null hypothesis rather than figure one as your null hypothesis?

And we'll have closing thoughts with none of you having the ultimate phrase.

Dean, please.


SPEAKER_01:
think i think what you're describing both of you are describing is maybe that service piece as gamified which isn't necessarily cooperative games but that's essentially what we're talking about so that's and i'm glad i got it in because i hate the final word blue yeah thanks it's interesting uploading cognitive uploading what uh


SPEAKER_00:
What amount of uploading has been done by gamification?

I wonder that.

That's a curious thing for me to now think about.

I should be thinking about other things, but now I'm going to think about that.

So thanks.


SPEAKER_03:
Stephen wrote in the chat, gamification pushes induction over abduction.

Favors inductive logic and playing within the rules of the game rather than abductive logic, which I hope we'll be able to talk about later.

So the participation is tied into a reinforcement learning paradigm that limits meaningfulness.

Because it's like, if game is about pragmatic value, then mine more.

But if the game includes an epistemic and a pragmatic component, it's already opened up.

Now, what if it contains an improvisational and participatory element, because it's not just like we expanded the pragmatic value into your epistem and your pragmatics, but their service to another.

and to the environment.

And so maybe that is a good place to end slash begin with 41 and we'll head into a whole nother set of topics as we move forward.

So Dean and Blue, thanks a ton.

Great discussion and great and special times and thanks Steven and everyone else in the chat.

So peace out fellows.


SPEAKER_00:
Bye.


SPEAKER_03:
Bye.

Thanks team.