## cLe-rBtRXiQ

Hello and welcome everyone.
It's April 28th, 2022 and we're here in ActInfLab livestream number 43.0 discussing Predictive
Coding, A Theoretical and Experimental Review.
Welcome to the ActInfLab.
We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.
You can find us at links here on the slide.
This is recorded in an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can
improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for
livestreams.
Head over to activeinference.org if you want to learn more about how to participate in the
livestreams or anything else happening in ActInfLab.
Okay.
We're here today to learn and discuss the paper Predictive Coding, A Theoretical and Experimental
Review by Baron Milledge, Anil Seth, and Christopher Buckley.
The video is just an introduction and a contextualization for some of the ideas and some of the details
of the paper in the broad sense.
It's not a review or a final word.
It's, as with some of these other technical, dense papers, it's like an opening for those
who have technical questions at the learning side of things or at the more advanced research
side of things to come get involved because this is a technical paper but also hopefully
as we'll unpack it has a lot of cool biological and philosophical implications.
So in 43.0 we're going to say hello and introduce some big questions, then cover the aims and claims
of the paper, the abstract, and the roadmap.
And then pretty much just jump right in and we're going to focus a lot on the introduction,
the context, and the single layer predictive coding model.
And then we'll go a little bit faster through the later sections of the paper talking about
some generalizations of predictive coding and some important points that the authors
raise.
So if you want to participate in 43.1 or .2 in the coming weeks, just let us know.
Okay, so we can say hello and give any information that we'd like and also just maybe something
that we thought was exciting or something that motivated us to get involved in this quite
involved paper.
So I'm Daniel.
I'm a researcher in California and I was curious to learn more about how predictive coding and
predictive processing related to active inference.
also just about how different models framed anticipatory systems.
So over to you, Maria.
Hello, Daniel and everyone.
I have a bipolar degree in psychology and I am a master's candidate in philosophy of science
in the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil.
And I am researching the relationship between predictive processing and illusionist theories
of consciousness.
And I think what brought me here today was my wish to start learning about the formalisms
because I don't really see it in philosophy.
And I don't actually need it for my dissertation, but eventually I wanted to continue my work on
predictive processing.
So eventually I had to start it and I just thought about maybe that's a good idea to come
here and minimize my uncertainties.
Awesome.
Through inference and or through action.
And also thanks a lot, Brock, for helping in the dot zero.
So we'll just start with the big questions.
And these are the kind of questions that might motivate someone or interest them in this paper
without even mentioning active inference per se.
But these are like some big questions that get touched upon.
What is the formal basis of predictive coding?
How is predictive coding used or useful?
What are some areas of current and future development?
And what is the relationship between predictive coding and active inference?
And hopefully we'll draw out more questions.
Anything else to add about this?
No, not really.
Cool.
Here is Predictive Coding, a Theoretical and Experimental Review.
I think the first version was from 2021, but the second revised version was 22 by Millage,
Seth and Buckley.
And just to review the core claim and then some of the aims and directions they set out,
they write that no comprehensive review of predictive coding theory, and especially of recent developments
in the field exists.
That's their claim.
And then they aim towards providing a comprehensive review both of the core mathematical structure
and logic of predictive coding.
So there's a mathematical review and summarization aspect to the paper.
And then they also review a wide range of classic and recent work within the framework
ranging from biologically realistic microcircuits that could implement predictive coding to the
close relationship between predictive coding and the widely used backpropagation of error
algorithm as well as surveying the close relationship between predictive coding and modern machine
learning techniques.
That's how they set out where they want to go.
So would you like to read the first slide of the abstract?
Okay.
So predictive coding offers a potentially unifying account of cortical function, postulating that
the core function of the brain is to minimize prediction errors with respect to a generative
model of the world.
The theory is closely related to the Bayesian brain framework and over the last two decades has
gained substantial influence in the fields of theoretical and cognitive neuroscience.
A large body of research has a reason based on both empirically testing, improved and extended
theoretical and mathematical models of predictive coding, as well as in evaluating their potential
biological plausibility for implementation in the brain and could create neurophysiological
and psychological predictions made by the theory.
Despite this enduring popularity, however, no comprehensive review of predictive coding theory and especially
of recent developments in this field exists.
They write, here we provide a comprehensive review of both of the core mathematical structure
and logic of predictive coding, thus complementing recent tutorials in the literature.
And we also review a wide range of classic and recent work within the framework, which is what
we had read previously in the aims.
So that's how the authors describe their own work.
And now we're going to see their roadmap, see how they went about getting there.
And then we're going to jump right into the introduction and then the formalisms.
So here we see the roadmap and the rough outline of the paper is as follows.
Section one provides an introduction that contextualizes predictive coding and we'll also be unpacking
it in a philosophical and historical view.
Section two provides an initial pass on the one level predictive coding model, sort of the
kernel or the archetype or the motif of predictive coding and connects it importantly to variational
inference.
In one, predictive coding is generalized or extended or elaborated in a few important directions.
So like in section 2.2, it's generalized into a multi-level case.
In section 2.3, the concept of generalized coordinates are introduced.
In section 4, precision is introduced as a concept.
And in section 2.5, it's connected back to the brain.
Section 3.5 discusses paradigms of predictive coding, both unsupervised and supervised, and
also connects it through those sections and others to some research in machine learning.
And then in section 4, there's connections between predictive coding and some other algorithms.
Both those algorithms that are common in machine learning and computational statistics, like
the error backpropagation, linear predictive coding and common filtering and normalizing
flows and biased competition.
And then in section 4.5, explicit connection is drawn between predictive coding and active
inference, which brings in the cost of action as well as the idea of PID control.
And then the discussion section closes with just a few other thoughts and summaries and
directions and challenges.
And there's several appendices.
So it's a long-ish paper or monograph, but it's an excellent paper.
And we're just going to cover more of an emphasis on the context and the beginning, and then sort
of skip over or trail off over a few things.
But there's a lot to unpack.
So I hope that we can like learn more in the coming weeks if the authors want to join or
if anybody else wants to join.
Anything to add on roadmap or ready for introduction?
Let's go.
All right.
Awesome.
So, I'll just add some notes from this section of the introduction and then Maria, feel free
to add anything.
So how do they introduce predictive coding?
They introduce predictive coding theory as an influential theory in computational and cognitive
neurosciences, which proposes a potential unifying theory of cortical function.
That's like related to the cortex of the brain.
Namely, that the core function of the brain is to minimize prediction error, where the prediction
error signals mismatches between predictive input and the input actually received.
Minimizing the divergence between expectations and observations is going to be a big theme.
And approaching that minimization, it can be achieved in multiple ways.
And they're colored differently here.
Through immediate inference about the hidden states of the world, like, I thought the ball
was over here.
I'm getting evidence it's over here.
So I should just update how I think about the world.
Which can explain perception, like the perception of a ball moving across the visual field.
Through updating a global world model to make better predictions, which could explain learning.
Like learning a little bit higher level than just where the ball is in the visual field,
but like where balls tend to be in the visual field, or how fast they tend to move around.
And finally, through action to sample sensory data from the world that conforms to the predictions.
And that's when we'll introduce action into predictive coding in the latter sections of
the paper.
And then just last point, they say that predictive coding boasts an extremely developed and principled
mathematical framework in terms of variational inference, as well as many empirically tested
computational models that have close links to machine learning.
So that's how they introduced this is as a unifying theory that integrates inference as well as
action, inference of different kinds, more like perceptual and more like learning.
And they're saying that it has a very rich mathematical framework.
And it's been connected to insights in biology and in machine learning.
Anything to add?
Nope.
So they write, predictive coding as a theory also offers a single mechanism that accounts
for diverse perceptual and neurobiological phenomena, such as end stopping by stable perception,
like illusions, repetition suppression, illusory motions, and attentional modulation of neural
activity.
So they're pointing to the integrative nature of this theory or framework to model all of
these diverse phenomena as being an advantage.
Like we could have a special theory for just by stable perception, a special theory for just
repetition suppression, and so on.
But this is a framework by which those outcomes are occurring as kind of outcomes of an underlying
framework, predictive coding, rather than needing special theories.
So that kind of parsimony or consilience is pursued in the areas like cognitive neuroscience.
And they write, as such, and perhaps uniquely among neuroscientific theories, predictive coding
encompasses all three layers of Mars hierarchy by providing well-characterized and importantly,
an empirically supported view of what the brain is doing at all of the computational algorithmic
and implementational levels.
So Mars, very influential hierarchy.
It's kind of like Tinbergen's questions or a little bit like Maslow's hierarchy.
You can think of it as like an organizing or a sense-making framework.
Again, to the question, what are brains doing?
What are brains doing?
And so we're going to have like three different kinds of answers to what brains are doing.
There's going to be an answer at the level of computation, algorithm, and implementation.
And so here with the example of a bird flying, the computational level is like flight.
It's like the why.
What is the algorithm doing?
It's a sorting algorithm.
What is the brain doing in this situation?
It's tracking a moving object.
Then there's the flapping level, which is the algorithm, which is kind of like pseudocode.
And that's suggesting the what of how that why is realized.
Like what is happening in this sorting algorithm?
Well, it's doing this, this, this, this, this.
What is the flight function being realized by?
It's being realized by flapping of the wings.
And then there's the implementation.
So it's not just the flapping of anything.
It's the flapping of something specific.
And so that's the implementational details.
And those levels of analysis have been helpful and provocative in connecting computational
cognitive theories to neurobiological theories.
So it's been a very influential and discussion provoking framework that has helped people connect,
as well as challenge some of the similarities and differences between like computers and
brains.
Great.
This is still in the introduction.
And they're going to kind of give us a qualitative perspective on predictive coding.
And then we're going to be diving into a lot more historical and technical detail.
But how does predictive coding work?
The core intuition behind predictive coding is that the brain is composed of a hierarchy
of layers, which are each making predictions about the activity of the layer immediately
below them in the hierarchy.
So there's two directions in this predictive coding multilayer scheme, which we're just introducing
here as kind of a heuristic.
And then we're going to zoom in to just what's happening at one level.
And then we're going to pull back out to kind of recovering this multilevel formalism.
The downward descending predictions at each level, that's the blue arrow, are compared
with the activity and inputs of each level to form prediction errors.
This is the information in each layer, which could not be successfully predicted.
These prediction errors are then fed upwards, that's the red arrow, to serve as inputs to
higher levels, which can then be utilized to reduce their own prediction error.
So that's kind of the bigger picture.
The idea at the top level is like, I'm tracking a soccer ball that's moving from the left to
the right.
And then that gets transduced in certain ways.
And that is, in this case, resulting in kind of a visual perceptive level prediction about
what one should expect to see.
And this is again, just the multilevel predictive coding scheme that is often used.
But we're going to zoom back to just what's happening at a single level, and then what is
happening at multiple levels.
Awesome.
Here's a fun 2018 paper by Carl Fristen, Does Predictive Coding Have a Future?
And this is going to provide just a little bit of context, and then we're going to jump
more into though.
Carl wrote, in the 20th century, we thought the brain extracted knowledge from sensation.
That's like the recognition model.
And that's sort of the incoming sensory processing model.
The 21st century witnessed a strange inversion in which the brain became an organ of inference,
actively constructing explanations for what's going on out there beyond its sensory epithelia.
One paper played a key role in this paradigm shift.
And Carl goes on to write that a 1999 paper by Rao and Ballard, which we're going to talk more about for him, was one of those papers that's a once in a decade find.
So we're going to talk more about it, but this is just kind of connecting it early to Carl
Fristen's line of research, the connection between active inference and predictive coding, and the idea that sometimes it's these early transdisciplinary papers that can stitch two different fields together, and that that can have long-term consequences for essentially perennial questions like how do perception, learning, attention, and sensation all work together, and under what imperative might they work together?
And then the authors provide a very preliminary discussion that they're going to go into more
later about how predictive coding matters for machine learning.
And so they write, predictive coding proposes that using a simple unsupervised lost function,
such as simply attempting to predict incoming sensory data, is sufficient to develop a complex general and hierarchically rich representations of the world.
They're suggesting that this has found support in the successes of modern machine learning models that are trained on unsupervised predictive or auto regressive objectives.
So here's some of the papers that they cite. This is the Brown et al. and the Kaplan et al.
And these both have to do with the training of what are increasingly becoming important modern machine learning methods, which are the language models.
In contrast to modern machine learning algorithms, which are trained to end with a global loss at the output.
So given the total big dataset, give me the lowest total error on the whole dataset.
In predictive coding, prediction errors are computed at every layer, which means that each layer only has to focus on minimizing local errors than global loss.
This property potentially enables predictive coding to learn in a biologically plausible way using only local and Hebbian learning rules.
And this is going to connect to column and filtering and PID control.
So they're kind of laying out the land and showing where they're going to connect in the introduction very, very qualitatively.
And then again, we're going to zoom back down to find out what's happening at one level of predictive coding and then try to rebuild some of the formalisms related to column and filtering and PID control.
And the bigger questions that people might be curious about asking would be like, what does it mean for computation to be biologically inspired?
What is possible when we're thinking about some of the similarities and differences and complementarities between biological and different kinds of conventional and unconventional computation?
What is possible in this ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
So, while predictive coding as a neuroscientific theory originated in the 80s and 90s with
Monfort, Rao and Ballard, Schoeniverson, Laughlin and Dubs, and was first developed into its
modern mathematical form and comprehensive theory of cortical responses in the mid 2000s with
Friston, it has deep intellectual antecedents. These precursors include Helmholtz's notion of
perception as an unconscious inference and Kant's notion that a priority structure is needed to make
sense of sensory data, okay, and as well as early ideas of compression and feedback control in
cybernetics and information theory. And on the next slides I will be talking a little bit more about
history and philosophy of predictive coding and then some core formalisms and various generalizations
and elaborations of predictive coding. If there is anything you want to say, Daniel, just feel free to
jump in, okay? So, the historical and philosophical background of perception is huge, okay? However,
seen in the context of predictive coding framework authors usually come up with a similar reasoning about
perception. And then we can start thinking with the Greek philosopher Plato on his Allegory of the Cave
Geord Downs in the Cave, which is known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known
them would be the real thing and the only thing for these people. They wouldn't believe that
there is anything outside the cave. So this would be it. These shadows would be the only thing.
Okay, so what Plato would claim here is that our own conscious perceptions are just like these
shadows. Okay, meaning that they are indirect reflections of hidden causes that we can never
directly encounter. And well, a few centuries later, the Arab medieval scholar Al-Hazan wrote
a lot of interesting notes on visual perception. Actually, he wrote
six volumes, if I'm not mistaken, of his book of optics, where he explored the view that human
perception often depends on mechanisms of judgment and inference instead of providing access straight
to the world. So you can see that very early in our Western thinking, we have this notion that we do not
have direct access to the world. Okay, that there is some inference going on.
Okay.
Great.
All right. So jumping to the 18th century, we can find two important philosophers. Okay, the English,
David Hume and the German, Immanuel Kant. Hume in 1739 to 1740, explored the inductive inferences and causation.
The problem of induction that he brought was an analysis of cause and effect in perception. And the
conclusion that he gets is that all our mental life could be traced back to the effects of sense experience.
Because since we do not have direct contact with the world, we could never have one-to-one relationship
with the objects there. And therefore, it is possible to have one effect with many possible causes and one
cause with many effects. The solution here would be then extracting statistical regularities and imagining
what happens when the world is intervening in the pornocontrolled manner, as the philosopher Jacob
Howey developed in his book, The Predictive Mind, in 2014. Equally important, in the critique of pure
reason in 1781, Kant will add an important element to this story, among countless other elements to this
story. He will add that the brain uses existing information regarding space and time to make sense of the chaotic
sensory data it constantly receives, to provide an organism the perception as they know. So, all of these
scholars would tell us right in the early ages that we do not have direct access to the things in the world,
and we need pre-existing information to make sense of all the data we constantly receive. Lots of predictive coding stuff.
It really makes me wonder why it's sometimes still so ineffable or poorly understood or even seen as
controversial, some of these perspectives which have been, as you are describing, thought of and
convergently come to for many thousands of years in different cultures. So really interesting.
Yes. In the late 19th century, the German scientist Hermann von Helmholtz in 1860 depicted perception as
involving probabilistic inference. He is one of our gods in the community.
Yes. And he was really inspired by Kant. Okay. And with that inspiration, he developed the idea of the brain as a hypothesis tester,
and that perception is a process of unconscious inference. Okay. And more specifically, this idea that he developed
in experiments was that perception has to be inferred by combining sensory signals with the brain
expectations and beliefs about their causes. And such inferences happen without the subject's awareness.
I mean, it has to happen without the subject's awareness. Because, you know, imagine all the chaotic
sensory data coming and you open your eyes and you have to try to organize everything. I mean, it doesn't
happen that way. You just open your eyes and everything is still stable. And so,
it's unconscious and it needs to keep track of the causes in the world by updating perceptual best guesses,
or you can say hypothesis, as new sensory signals arrive. So here he built
the idea that we use, we use sensory signals with the brain expectations to, you know, update
the hypothesis we make upon, we make for the causes of the effects we receive in the world. And this means
that he somehow turned Humes and Kant's insights scientific, claiming that we can only infer things
out there in the world behind a sensory veil, which, if I'm not mistaken, will be eventually called Mark of
the brain. And I'm not sure. Maybe on the world. Helmholtz was crucial to many different works in machine learning,
one that was even nicely named as Helmholtz machine. He was crucial in psychology, in neuroscience,
cognitive science, and so on. Particularly in psychology, Helmholtz insights inspired Eurich Neisser in
1967, and later Richard Gregory in 1980, and Eve Arvin Rock in 1983 to develop the analysis by synthesis
approach, which is the process that analyzes a signal or image by reproducing it using a model.
There, there's a picture of NICE's analysis by synthesis approach,
which some schema available in this link. And in fact, Gregory built some kind of neuro hypothesis
testing model based on his Helmholtzian understanding of the brain as continually formulating perceptual
hypotheses about the world and testing them by acquiring data from sensory organs.
So many things happened after the analysis by synthesis stuff, but I will just jump to what we have in
philosophy today because we will touch the formalisms and the computation stuff afterwards. Okay, so I'll just
make a jump and go to what we have in philosophy today. So, uh, recent works in philosophy and cognitive
neuroscience have contributed to the expansive predictive coding framework and the Bayesian paradigm in the
brain. And many of the seminar works we have in the field addresses predictive coding as predictive
processing without, you know, any relevant difference in the first instance. And well, for instance, the philosophy
Jacob Howey that is based in Monash University, Australia, aimed to the, uh, aimed on the improvement of
prediction error minimization mechanism and the concept of winning hypothesis for conscious perception. Uh, also,
he's interested in what PP predictive processing studies can bring to people with mental disorders,
such as autism and schizophrenia. Actually, the three of them, uh, of the philosophers here are interested
in what people can bring to, to improvement in psychiatry and medicine, uh, in general. So in 2014, he published
an important textbook on the matter that is the predictive mind, the red book you can see, where he tries to
solve the problem of perception inspired on humans induction problem with Bayesian inference and predictive
processing. Later in 2016, the philosopher Andy Clark based on University of Sussex, England, carefully
developed what he called action-oriented predictive processing in his book, Surfin uncertainty, where he adds
and advances the crucial role of action in our perception. And he makes a lot of interesting connections
between recent works in computational neuroscience and artificial intelligence and his eclectic philosophy of
mind. And last year, in 2021, the neuroscientist, Aniussef, one of the authors of this paper we're talking here,
uh, and also based in University of Sussex, uh, made an amazing contribution to the fields with his book,
Being You, where he claims that we are beast machines whose perception is a controlled hallucination.
And he improves consciousness descriptions using predictive processing framework and establishing the real
problem of consciousness that in his own words requires explaining why a particular pattern of brain
activity or other physical process maps to a particular kind of conscious experience, not merely establishing
that it's this. To, you know, philosophers and scientists work on. And they, here they are.
Okay. All right. So, I was talking about predictive coding and then I went to predictive processing. Is there a difference?
Well, many authors would use the terms freely, okay? But then I found Clark saying in his book,
uh, the difference that he understands from predictive coding to predictive processing. So he puts, uh, as the fact
that predictive processing is not simply the use of the data compression strategy known as predictive coding,
rather it is the use of that strategy in the very special context of hierarchical, multi-level, systems
deploying probabilistic generative models. Such systems exhibit powerful forms of learning and deliver rich
forms of context sensitive processing and are able, uh, flexibly to combine top-down and bottom-up flows of
information within multi-layer cascade. Predictive processing does combine the use within a multi-level,
bi-directional, bi-directional cascade of top-down probabilistic generative models with the core predictive
coding strategy of efficient encoding and transmission.
Okay. Uh, from this, I'm not sure if you agree with me, Daniel, but reading this, this paragraph makes me
wonder, I mean, okay, predictive coding is a local, uh, bottom-up top-down cascade and stuff, but it also is
multi-layer. Yes. It also has some hierarchy. So I'm not sure what, what he mean. I mean, I'm not sure if I
understand the difference between predictive coding and predictive processing as he puts.
Yeah. Very insightful. And it, it made me think about the difference between like coding, like programming
and like data coding, like Python coding for data and data processing, which is a little bit like it
could be multiple computer languages. And so you're really highlighting something important, which is that
when the data are compressed, according to a strategy where the errors are being transmitted
rather than the actual sort of estimate itself, that's like that information channel is in a
predictive coding way. And then this helps us use predictive processing for like the bigger picture
for systems that implement predictive coding modules, but that's not like the only module they're
deploying. So that that'll be something cool to like hear people's perspective on really nice, um,
distinction here though. Yep. And, um, okay. So, uh, I wrote something here that just like you said that maybe,
uh, coding would be better to use for formalisms and implementations and processing for the philosophical
understanding that prediction is the basis of, uh, uh, signal interpretation, uh, e.g. as opposed to descriptive.
Okay. So, uh, jumping back to formalism, uh, predictive coding and information theory and signal processing.
Okay. So another deep intellectual influence in predictive coding comes from information theory from
channel in 1948 and especially the minimum redundancy principle of Barlow in 1961, 89, and 61, 2. Uh,
information theory tells us that information is inseparable from a lack of predictability. If something is
predictable before observing it, it cannot give us much information. I loved this sentence.
Conversely, to maximize the rate of information transfer, the message must be minimally predictable
and hence minimally redundant. Predictive coding as a means to remove redundancy in a signal was first applied
in signal processing where it was used to reduce transmission bandwidth, uh, for video transmission.
And do you want to say something? I'll just describe this without reading it. It was a, a common, uh, and
effective, although it can be improved on by other methods. It's a method for video encoding known as frame
differencing where basically, uh, one frame gets described and then subsequent frames, only the
pixels that change have to be described. So that is a lot like an analogy to predictive coding in the sense
that it's able to connect the differences between subsequent time steps and use that to give really
only the informative pieces. Like I have a hundred digit number and then I'm just going to tell you the
third digit changed. Now it's an eight instead of having to repeat the same number and then 99 of those
digits, they're informative. Like in the sense that they're good info, it's true, but they're not
informative in the information theory context because they were quite predictable before observing it.
Okay. And so initial schemes used, uh, a simple approach of subtracting the new to be transmitted frame
from the old frame. In effect, using a trivial prediction that the new frame is always the same
as the old frame, which works well in reducing bandwidth in many settings where there are only a
few objects moving in the video against the static background. And more advanced methods often predict
each new frame using a number of past frames weighted by some coefficient, an approach known as linear
predictive coding.
Okay. So now, predictive coding in the eye and brain. The first concrete discussion of predictive coding in
the neural system arose as a model of neural properties of the retina with Shrinivacin, 1982.
Specifically as a model of center-surrounded cells which fire when presented with either a light spot against
a dark background on center of surround or alternatively a dark spot against a light background of center on
surround cells. It was argued that this coding scheme helps to minimize redundancy in the visual scheme,
specifically by removing the spatial redundancy in natural visual scenes. That the intensity of one pixel helps
predict quite well the intensity of neighboring pixels. And then the first picture related to it.
Do you want to talk about it?
We're just going to look at two different tissues of the nervous system that have some predictive elements.
And this is referring to some of the photosensitive cells that are on the retina.
And that's work that had been done qualitatively and empirically for hundreds of years, but then was connected to predictive
perspectives in the 80s. And then we're also going to look, as you'll now unpack, at what's happening in the cortex of the brain amongst different layers.
With Manfred in 1992 was perhaps the first to extend this theory of the retina and the LGN to a fully fledged
general theory of cortical function. His theory was motivated by simple observations about the neurophysiology of cortical
cortical connections, specifically the existence of separate feed forward and feedback paths, where the feed forward path is
originated in the superficial layers of the cortex and the feedback pathways originated primarily in the deep layers.
Great. So we kind of had this philosophy development happening over thousands of years.
And then in the 1900s, people were starting to connect the neuroanatomy and the histology to some of these predictive ideas.
And then now let's kind of close the loop and bring it back to the critical work that Friston highlighted in his 2018 paper.
Yep. And now predictive coding in the brain gets computational, mathematical.
While Manfred's theory contained most aspects of classical predictive coding theory in the cortex,
it was not accompanied by any simulations or empirical work. And so its potential as a framework for
understanding the cortex was not fully appreciated. And so again, the similar work of Rao and Ballard in 1999
had its impact precisely by doing this. And so they created a small predictive coding network according to the
principles. Oh, sorry.
Manfred. And empirically investigated its behavior, demonstrating that the complex and dynamic interplay
of predictions and prediction errors could explain several otherwise perplexing neurophysiological
phenomena, specifically extra-closico receptive field effects such as and stopping neurons.
Yeah, this is pretty interesting because even the idea that the neurons that are active while a
certain stimuli is being presented, that those are neurons that are receptive to that stimuli.
That's within the paradigm of signal reception. And then it's like there's classical signal
reception. You know, the pitcher throws the ball, the catcher catches the ball. It's classic. But
unfortunately, or not, there's all these so-called extra classical effects. And so this paper proposed
a simple architecture that was able to encompass the so-called classical as well as some of the
important extra classical effects under this predictive processing framework. And so that really led to
a lot of developments in neuroscience in the last 20 plus years. And that's exactly what we're going to go
into now. So thanks for providing that awesome context. Like it really helps, I think, situate some
of the details that we're about to look into. Okay, so let's get a little technical.
What happened after Ron Ballard's 1999 synthesis? So remember that Carl Friston said that that was like
one of those once in a decade papers for him. So how did he change his action selection publication policies
after reading that paper? Well, anyone can guess. But what Friston did was that he cast the predictive
coding algorithm as approximate Bayesian inference upon Gaussian generative models. And this is going to be
connected. This is all in the paper for people to read. But this connects basically all of the previous
themes that we had been talking about, like the information theory, minimum redundancy, and the
Helmholtzian idea of perception as inference come together in the Bayesian perspective on the predictive
coding architecture by Rao and Ballard. So the authors write,
Friston's approach reformulates the mostly heuristic Rao and Ballard model in the language of
variational Bayesian inference, which we're going to look more at. And Friston showed that the energy
function in Rao and Ballard can be understood as a variational free energy of the kind that is
minimized through variational inference. So that really connected the dots between predictive coding
architectures and the empirical biological findings to all this work on variational Bayesian inference.
And those are the 2003, 5, and 8 single author papers by Carl.
So what is variational and Bayesian and variational Bayesian approaches? And we're just going to look at
the author's words and there's many, many awesome places to look for educational materials and also check
out some of the live streams like 26, 32, 34, 37, and 39. So to be brief about it, the authors write,
Variational inference approximates an intractable inference problem with a tractable optimization problem.
So like a super hard problem to solve just by thinking about it and then guessing at the right answer
with a tractable optimization problem. So it's like 20 questions. It's going to be hard to guess on your
first question, but if you take this iterative optimization approach, maybe there's a way to
actually resolve it. So it's not exactly like that, but it's like kind of again flipping out something
that's hard to solve in one shot with an approach and this iterative gradient descent type improvement
that actually gets you to a good solution. And so this is where we're going to introduce some of the
variables and the letters that we're going to use. Following a lot of perceptual work in Bayesian
statistics, we're going to use O for observations, which are like data, either the actual data that the
sensor provides us or generated data of the kind that we would expect the sensor to give us. And then X
X are the latent or the unobserved states of the system. So like X would be the temperature in the
room and O is what the thermometer reading is. And that's sort of a Bayesian approach that helps us
have a generative model of the data generating process, which is also known as the joint distribution
because it is jointly over both the observations and the latent states.
Where variational inference comes into play is hinted at in this paragraph on Bayes. So in order to do
exact Bayes, one would have to find this normalizing factor. However, that can be intractable because it
requires basically integrating or summing over all latent variable states. And that's not always easy or
known. So the approach of the variational method is aiming to approximate the posterior using an auxiliary
posterior using a different set of parameters Y. So the Q is going to be reflecting like the distribution,
the variational distribution that we control that is of like a family of functions that is more
amenable to optimization. So P could be like a super messy function, but Q is going to be constructed
by the modeler to be a lot simpler. And so it is going to have its own parameters. And those parameters,
phi are mu and sigma. And so it's kind of like we would be interested in the mean and the variance of the
x, the actual temperature in the room, given the thermometer. But what if it were too hard to even
get that? Well, what we might want to do would be imagine that the temperature were normally distributed
like a Gaussian distribution with this mean mu in the variance sigma. So even if the temperature in the
room weren't actually Gaussian distributed, maybe it's approximatable enough. And so the variational
approach to the Bayesian method is to introduce this variational distribution Q that's going to have
like a lot of good features moving forward. Here's how that Q comes into play. This equation one is
expressing using the variables that we've seen. It's saying and also introducing this divergence D. So first,
just the definition of D and then what this formalism says. So D of P and double line Q. So any double
line means between this and that. D is a function that measures the divergence between two distributions.
So for example, P and Q. And here, the divergence is going to be calculated as the KL divergence,
although other divergences are possible. So when the divergence between the one that we simplified and
controlled Q and that intractable true posterior, if that divergence were minimized to zero, we would be
like fitting P as well as we could with Q. And this is saying in one, it's saying Q star, the best Q
of X, the latent states, given the data and the variational parameters. So the best possible room
temperature prediction given thermometer readings and variational parameters are a minimization over
all the variational parameters of the divergence between the Q distribution that we control of
exactly what we want the best answer for and the P generative model of exactly what would be the best to
compute, like the temperature given the observations on the thermometer. And so that goes a long way
towards rewriting an inference problem as a divergence problem. But they write, however, merely writing
the problem this way does not solve it, because the divergence that we need to optimize still contains
the intractable true posterior. So it's rewritten as a divergence between like something we control and
something that we kind of set out to do this because we couldn't calculate it. So we have prepared it,
but still this is intractable, so this is not usable alone. They write, the beauty of variational inference,
is that it instead optimizes a tractable upper bound on this divergence called the variational free energy,
VFE. To generate the bound, we apply Bayes' rule to the true posterior to rewrite it in the form of the
generative model and the evidence. So here's that P of X given O. That's rewritten as now not of X given O,
but P of O comma X, that's the joint distribution, divided by the observations. So this, by the Bayes' rule,
P of X given O, is equivalent to this. That's why this is the first line here. They provide some rewritings,
and then they write, in the third line, the expectation around P of O, so the actual likelihood
of the observations themselves, like how likely is the thermometer saying 21? It vanishes since the
expectation is over the variable X, which is not in P of O. So it's like, what is the expectation of
this coin flip over the temperature tomorrow? It's like, because they're different variables,
variables, it makes them very easy to separate out if we're only interested in one of them.
And then they write that this F, the free energy, is a very, is a tractable quantity,
since it's a divergence between two quantities, we assume that we as the modeler know. The variational
approximate posterior Q of X given O, that's the distribution that we control, and the generative
joint distribution P of O comma X. So we traded out this intractable true posterior, where it's like,
if we knew it, then we would just stop there. But we don't know it, so we've traded it out for a
divergence between something that we totally control, Q of X conditioned on these other parameters,
and a joint distribution, which we might have uncertainty over, but at least can be modeled.
So that's one of the key pieces of variational Bayes, and that's not specific to predictive
coding, it's just an important way that the authors are introducing it here. Anything to add?
All right, so let's kind of continue on this theme. Since F is an upper bound, by minimizing F,
we drive the variational distribution that we control closer to the true posterior. As an additional bonus,
under certain conditions, F can be used for model selection. So that means it can be used not just to
kind of fine-tune a model that we've already chosen, but it can actually do choosing from
parametrically or structurally different models. They write, we can gain an important intuition about
F by showing it can be decomposed into a likelihood maximization term, and the KL divergence term,
which penalizes deviation from the Bayesian prior. These terms are often called accuracy and complexity,
and this decomposition is often used in different machine learning algorithms. So that's one rewriting
of free energy as this divergence between the Q and the P, and then rewriting that as an accuracy and
a complexity, which we'll go into maybe more another time. And they write, in many practical cases,
we must relax the assumption that we know the generative model P of O and X, the joint distribution.
Luckily, this is not fatal. Instead, it is possible to learn the generative model alongside the
variational posterior on the fly, and in parallel using expectation maximization.
So this is basically the alternation shown by Equations 3 of how we can be setting one side of this
KL divergence fixed and optimizing the other side, and then going back and doing it the other way.
And so that kind of back and forth expectation maximization,
we're going to be reducing this divergence from both sides. And so formalism 3 are saying the
variational parameters phi at the next time step, t plus 1, are an optimization argmin of those parameters
holding the theta constant. And then the second part of formalism 3 is the exact opposite.
Now, the generative model parameters theta at t plus 1 are a minimization over
literally the same thing, but holding the variational parameters constant. So there's a lot more to say
about expectation maximization, but this is like converging to a small divergence by whittling away at
both sides and kind of alternating there. So that's how expectation maximization can be used as a
heuristic algorithm for variational Bayesian optimization.
How do we go from variational inference, which all of those previous slides are things that we've
basically talked about before and that are not applying to predictive coding specifically. So how are
we going to get to predictive coding? They write, having reviewed the general principles of variational
inference, we can see how they relate to predictive coding. First, to make any variational inference
algorithm concrete, we must specify the forms of the variational posterior and the generative model.
It's like if you want to do formalism 3, those are the two pieces you need. You need like the phi stuff
and the theta stuff. And so they specify it here. N means a normal distribution with like a mean comma
variance format. And so they're going to define a Gaussian form for the generative model.
The mean of this likelihood Gaussian is assumed to be some function of hidden states,
which can be parameterized with theta, while the mean of the prior Gaussian distribution is going to be
a g of mu. So we're going to have like f of theta and g of mu. The variances of these two Gaussian
distributions of the generative model are sigma 1 and sigma 2. This is a slight technical detail,
but they're going to assume that the variational posterior is a Dirac delta, which is like a spiking
function distribution that's centered at the mean. However, they explore that differently with Laplace
assumption. So this is basically taking what we discussed about variational inference and preparing
it to be entered into a predictive coding way. So they're setting up the problem with which parameters
you're going to want to do variational inference on in order to implement predictive coding.
And there's of course more to say, but we're just giving a first pass.
In Appendix A is where they describe the difference between using the Laplacian approximation and the
Dirac delta. So it's footnote 8, which suggests moving to Appendix A and looking at the Buckley 2017
for a walkthrough. But this on the bottom right is kind of like a summary of the difference between
the Dirac delta approach and the Laplace method approach. So the Dirac delta is like we're trying to find
the spike that's at the mean or the median, there's some other details in play, that is where the bulk of
the probability distribution mass is. Whereas the Laplace method tries to fit a polynomial, like just a second-degree
polynomial, like a quadratic, over the probability distribution also in the way that is best fitting.
So there's some similarities and some differences and it's explored more in the Buckley 2017 paper
on the FEP for Action Perception Mathematical Review.
So let's continue with our exploration of how we do variational Bayes and make it a predictive coding model.
At the top they write, we define the prediction errors epsilon o, that's like the error on observation,
and epsilon x, that's the error on the mean states. So the epsilon o is like o minus f of some function,
you know, f of some parameters, and then there's also the epsilon x. So how much prediction error do you have
about the observation? How much prediction error do you have about the hidden state? Epsilons are the
prediction errors and they're parameterized by these theta 1 and 2 variances. Given all of this, we can derive
dynamics for all the variables of interest. So that's the actual underlying hidden state, the temperature in
the room that we want to be actually predicting, mu, and then with the variational parameter of it,
and then theta 1 and theta 2, which are the variances. You can think of it as like the variance of the
room temperature and the variance of the term of the thermometer. I hope that's not wrong or an
oversimplification, but those are like the two variances and we want the real temperature of the room.
They write, we can derive dynamics for all these variables of interest by taking the derivatives
of the variational free energy f. The update rules are as follows. And so this is change in mu, theta 1,
and theta 2 over time. d mu, dt, d theta 1 over dt, and d theta 2 over dt. And that has some equivalences
with some f's. So it's going to be going from just the change in the mu estimate through time to
something involving free energy. And then that's defined more formally. Importantly, these update
rules are very similar to the ones derived in Rao and Ballard 1999, and therefore can be interpreted as
recapitulating core predictive coding update rules. For instance, the mu's are typically interpreted as
rapidly changing neural firing rates, while thetas are slowly changing synaptic weight values. So they're
weaving together, connecting the biology with the formalisms here. And they write also that that mu can
be understood as the process of perception. That's like, how hot is it in the room? Since mu is meant to
correspond to the estimate of the latent state of the environment generating the observations on the
thermometer. And by contrast, the dynamics of thetas can be thought of as corresponding to learning.
Since theta effectively defined the mapping between the latent state and the observations.
So it's like, you think you know how the thermometer is related to the temperature in the room,
and then you see your thermometer changing, you're changing how hot you think the room is. That happens
over a shorter timescale. And then over a longer timescale, you might come to learn the variability of
the temperature or how noisy the thermometer is. But that's more like learning than perception. However,
they're on a continuum using this model. So actually, this up to formalism 9 completes the core
formalism of predictive coding, which is it's a variational Bayesian approach to having this ongoing
prediction error minimizing approach to latent state estimation. That is the heart of predictive coding.
And now we're going to jump into like a few different elaborations that we're going to be moving
through a little bit more quickly. Anything to add, Maria? Awesome. The previous examples
focused on predictive coding with a single level of latent variables, mu1. However, the expressiveness of
such a scheme is limited. Deep neural networks in machine learning have demonstrated that having
hierarchical sets of latent variables is a key to enabling methods that learn powerful abstractions,
and handle intrinsically hierarchical dynamics of the sort that humans intuitively perceive.
Predictive coding schemes introduced can be straightforwardly extended to handle hierarchical
dynamics of arbitrary depth, equivalent to deep neural networks in machine learning. This is done through
postulating multiple layers of latent variables, x sub 1 through x sub l, and then defining the generative
model as follows. So like p, the generative model is going to be basically over all the layers.
So just as the generative model and the variational distribution had to be defined for the single layer
model, here they're going to define the p distribution and now they need the q. We define a separate
variational posterior for each layer. So they define the p's and the q's just like they did in the single
layer and then that allows them to calculate the variational free energy, which is a sum of the
prediction errors of each level. And so this is f, now not just over one layer but multiple levels.
So the variational posteriors that need to be calculated are partitioned across the layers,
which allows them to be summed in a very straightforward way. Given that free energy divides nicely into the
sum of layer-wise prediction errors, it comes as no surprise the dynamics of the mu and the theta are
similarly separable across layers. That allows different layers of this prediction hierarchy to be like
precise or imprecise and allow those movements to happen in a way that's uncorrelated.
which is not just because the real world presents itself with settings where there's like
confidence at lower and higher and vice versa, but it makes this calculation of the free energy of the
whole system more like a simple sum. Whereas if there was these like really complex interactions with the
first layer by the third layer, if the fifth layer is this way, then doing the statistics would be a lot
more challenging. So visually, here's what that looks like. We have the mu, which is the mean estimate
of what's happening at that level. And then there's passing of these epsilon error terms.
So they write, this is the architecture of a in figure one multi-layer predictive coding network
shown here with two value and error neurons in each layer. The value neurons project to the error neurons of
the layer below and the error neurons represent the current activity. So this is like starting to walk
us back towards that cortical layout where there's a cortical column where there's some so-called upwards
downwards and downwards signaling, but also there's lateral signaling. So this is a graphical model
that's reflecting the way that predictive coding can be arranged almost like in series and in parallel
to have like wide models and deep models. Just like you could have a neural network where it was
four neurons, four neurons, four neurons, four neurons, or you could have 64 and then 64. That would be like a
shallower but wider model. And so that notion of shallowness and depth is also going to come into play with predictive coding.
Here we're in Formalism 12 and 13. And so now we're looking at the rate of change, the derivative of mu sub l,
the estimate of the mean at that layer, and theta l, the variance at that layer. So these are the update rules,
the gradients for the mean and the variance of different levels, and they're also written as free energy
functionals of those layers. And the dynamics of the variational means depends only on the prediction errors
at their layer and the prediction errors on the layer below. So again, we don't have this epsilon at l minus one
connecting up all the way to mu. It's only through these local connections within and between layers
by which we're needing to calculate anything. We can think of the mu's as trying to compromise between
causing error by deviating from the prediction from the layer above and adjusting their own prediction to
resolve error at the layer below. So it's kind of like a hierarchy of bosses or tasks, and there's like
top down expectations, and there's the bottom up reality, which might be like ahead or behind schedule. And then it
puts each person like in this compromise situation. Crucially for conceptual readings of predictive coding. And
this is where there's like a doorway to the philosophy and some of the broader discussions. This means that sensory data is not
directly transmitted up through the hierarchy as is assumed in much of perceptual neuroscience.
And so it totally returns us to these questions like, what is perception? What is cognition? What is action?
What is coming from the eye to the brain? Or what goes from the brain to the eye? What is the eye doing? What is the
brain doing with respect to the eye? And how does it relate to predictive coding? Any quick answers on those?
Naturally. Cool. So after introducing that kernel of the predictive coding formalism and taking it into
the multilevel context, now we can look at another elaboration or generalization. So they write in 2.3,
we have considered the modeling of just a single static stimulus O. However, most interesting data that the
brain receives comes in temporal sequences O bar, which is O through time. To model such temporal sequences,
it's often useful to split the latent variables into states, which can vary with time, and parameters,
which cannot. In the case of sequences, instead of minimizing the variational free energy, we must instead
minimize the free action, which is the path integral of the variational free energy through time.
We're not going to go into the formalisms related to the generalized coordinates 14, 15, 16, and 17,
but it's something that we can explore later. And just as a reminder, just to kind of
excite somebody who might want to explore it, we explored the idea of the generalized coordinates of
motion a lot in Acton live stream number 26 with DaCosta et al. And so here was a model where we have
from left to right time at different time steps. And then there's the observables of something. And then
it is part of this like column of higher derivatives of its motion. So it's like position, it's
velocity, it's acceleration, and so on. And so at each time step, moving forward, you're computing the
generalized coordinates of motion for like the movement of a baseball. And that is what ties
generalized coordinates of motion to PID control, which will also come back at the end, also known as
integrator chains. And this is all happening within this discussion of Bayesian mechanics. Just like if we
had been talking about the baseball, we would be talking about physical mechanics or statistical
mechanics. Well, it's Bayesian. So it's Bayesian mechanics and the physics of action and control.
That's what they explore in section 2.3. Section 2.4 introduces and goes into a little bit more detail
on precision. One core aspect of predictive coding absent in the original Rao and Ballard 1999 formulation
is the notion of precision or inverse variance. So precision and variance are like one over each
other. So if someone said it's very high precision, that's a very narrow, very sharp distribution,
and one over the variance is another way to write that. So sometimes it's used with like a beta and a
gamma in other models. Precision serves to multiplicatively modulate the importance of the prediction errors,
and thus possess a significant influence in the overall dynamics of the model.
And so we won't go into every detail with how the precisions are themselves fit, but just wanted to
note that this big sigma is the free energy being summed over the layers. So big sigma is a multiplicative
sum. Oh, sorry, it's just a sum. But then this smaller sigma inside is sigma as the precision matrix at a
given level. So it's kind of like different uses of sigma. But this is a way where the variances and
the prediction errors at a given level are being summed across levels, and that's helping fit these
precision terms. Statistical detail, but it's important for making it work in real inference.
Okay. In section 2.5, they pull back from elaborating on predictive coding, and they talk more about
how it has some biologically plausible bases. So this was quite interesting. While technically
predictive coding is simply variational inference and filtering algorithm under Gaussian assumptions,
from the beginning it has been claimed to be biologically plausible theory of cortical computation,
and also for other brain regions like the eye and for other cognitive systems.
The literature has consistently drawn close connections between the theory and potential
computations that may be performed in brains. For example, Rao and Ballard explicitly claimed to
model the early visual cortex, and Fristin explicitly proposed predictive coding as a general theory
of cortical computation. This is like the realism and instrumentalism discussion. Are we just modeling
these systems and the kind of data that they provide us, and it just fits really well as a model,
but we're not saying that the architecture of the statistical model has anything to do with the
architecture of the physical pieces of the brain? Or is it a little bit in the gray zone where it's kind
of like, wow, that model fits so well, and the anatomy looks so good, maybe there's
something there to it. And so in this section, they review empirical work that has attempted to
validate or falsify key tenants of predictive coding in the cortex, as well as some issues with the
approach. So it's mainly focused on the mammalian brain and the neural cell type, but as always, we can sort
of think about what is the adjacent here, like what are the roles of other cell types in predictive coding
in the mammalian brain? And then how might like the insect nervous system or how might other nervous
systems or non-nervous systems perform predictive coding? And then they just provide one example where
they take what they had shown in figure one with this multi-level predictive coding scheme that was sort of
predictively programming, as they say, one to think about cortical cognition, and now they're going to make that
connection clear in figure two. So on the right side is there, figure two, and that's the canonical
microcircuit model of Bostos et al, mapped onto the connectivity of a cortical region. And so then in red
are those parameters that we've been discussing, the mu's and the epsilons, the means and then the
prediction errors. And then here's just a few other representations of what others have written about
like that cortical column. So here's like an evolutionary perspective that connects some of the mammalian
cortex with the avian pallium brain region. And so just the way that people work out these kinds of circuit diagrams,
like by looking at the actual tissue, like by looking at the actual tissue, and then here's the statistics.
And so how does the tissue relate to the statistical model? But that's what they explore in figure two.
Okay, any thoughts?
Okay. In section three, they continue to review empirical work, but with more of a focus on machine learning
of the unsupervised and supervised setting. And they're going to also explore how the predictive
coding architecture can be made more biologically plausible by relaxing certain assumptions implicit
in this canonical model and introduce action into the picture. Bigger three, they summarize a few
different what they call paradigms of predictive coding. Summary of the input-output relationships for
each paradigm of predictive coding. So it's the input and the prediction, the output, of different
paradigms. So here's the classical predictive coding. Observation data are coming in, predictions about those
observations are coming out. It's an instantaneous real-time snapshot. The real-time anticipatory unfolding
is still getting data as input, but it's predicting the observation at the next time step, which is a similar
problem to predicting at this time step, but it's like a little bit different. That can happen not just
through time, but also in the context of space with like a spatial predictive coding. And then these two
on the right, supervised predictive coding in the generative and in the discriminative direction,
have to do with the relationship with reading in labels and giving out observations,
and vice versa. Make me a cat. Here's a picture of a cat. Here's a picture. That's a cat. So these are some
of the ways that predictive coding models have been applied. 3.1, they explore the way that unsupervised
training relates to predictive coding. So that is machine learning on unlabeled data. Like here's
a hundred thousand hours of human speaking, learn how to speak. That's like an unsupervised approach.
Whereas the supervised approach would be, here's a thousand hours of human speaking. Here's a thousand
hours of a river. Here's a thousand hours of, you know, of some other noise. And so by the label,
then the algorithm would learn what is speech versus non-speech versus the unsupervised. But there's
also a lot of like continuum and complexity, and it's a whole topic. In some of the subsections of 3.1,
they go a little bit deeper into the temporal predictive and the auto-encoding aspects, but we're
not going to go into those right now. In figure four, in section 3.2, they look at supervised predictive
coding and look at it in that forwards and backwards direction. And so here they're looking at the
classic MNIST dataset for evaluation, where there's some pictures of handwritten digits,
and then it's predicting. And so here's the generative predictive coding and the discriminative
direction, where here the data are coming in, like the picture of the five with the pixel intensities,
and that is relating to the more high level estimate of it being a five. So this is observation in,
label out. That's a five. Here's label in, pixels reflecting it out.
So that's connecting machine learning to predictive coding.
In section 3.3, they're also exploring some relaxed predictive coding, and it has to do with relaxing
certain mathematical assumptions that they had introduced earlier for simplicity and for clarity.
We're not going to go into it, but it has to do with making it more useful in the real world by
relaxing certain assumptions. And then in 3.4, they explore deep predictive coding.
So they write, so far in this review, we've only considered direct variations on the Friston,
Roud, Bollard models of predictive coding, which are relatively pure, and use only local,
biologically plausible learning rules. There also exists a small literature experimenting with these
models often achieve better performance on more challenging tasks than the purer models can
achieve. So pure again here, meaning that it uses only local, biologically plausible learning rules.
So only connected entities locally. And so these models, they suggest, provide a vital thread of
evidence about scaling properties and performance of deep and complex predictive coding networks.
And they write, the first major work in this area is PREDNET, which uses multiple layers of recurrent
convolutional LSTMs, neural networks, to implement a deep predictive coding network. So here is what PREDNET looked like.
This is the original PREDNET architecture. And so they have convolutional LSTMs that are passing information in a top-down,
way, and in a bottom-up way. So maybe we could look at it more later. And then I also just found this 2019-2020 paper,
where they also explored whether PREDNET actually is doing predictive coding, but again, a whole other rabbit hole.
So Section 3 reviewed through Figure 3, and some discussions on the subsections, a few of the different
paradigms and the ways that this predictive coding architecture has been applied. In Section 4, they're
going to connect it to other algorithms. So we're going to basically speed through all of the connections,
except for active inference.
So first, they connect predictive coding in Section 4.1 to the back propagation of error.
This is really important for neural network training,
but we're not going to talk about it here. But it sounds really interesting to discuss.
One that we'll introduce, but then skip over most of the details, is the relationship between linear
predictive coding and Kalman filtering. So we can remember that the linear predictive coding is not
just the frame differencing, it's where there's like that coefficient of how much you should forget
each of the previous frames. And this is known in signal processing as the Kalman filter.
The Kalman filter, as this slide shows, is an iterative mathematical process to quickly
estimate true values, position, and velocity. So that's also like getting towards the generalized
coordinates of motion. And so the X's are like our observations, that's the thermometer.
And then here's the red is our Kalman filter temperature unfolding through time.
So our initial estimate gets quickly corrected. And then even though there's a lot of noise in the
observations, the Kalman filter is like giving a good prediction on the actual temperature.
And this has been implemented in a ton of Bayesian approaches. It's a totally standard signal processing
Bayesian approach. And in the following sections in 4.2, they have a lot of formalisms about the Kalman
filter. And in Appendix D, they provide even more formalisms on the Kalman filter. So we're not going
to really go into either of those. In section 4.3, they introduced this idea of normalization and
normalizing flows. And so they wrote, the deep link between predictive coding and normalization has been
extended by Merino 2020 by situating predictive coding with a general recipe for building or representing
a complex distribution from a simple and tractable one. So we encourage people to look at this Merino
2020 paper if they want to learn more about predictive coding, variational autoencoders, and biological
connections. But not going to discuss today. One other model that they connect predictive coding to
is known as the biased competition model. And that is unpacked in 4.4, but I just wanted to pull up
one example of this biased competition model. And so this is from the Sprottling paper of 2008.
Within each processing stage, nodes compete to be active in response to the current pattern of
feedforward activity received from the sensory input or previous processing stage. So it's like
there's competitions amongst the subunits to be activated by certain kinds of inputs. And then there's
some technical details. Okay. Now, finally, to active inference as we're near the end of the discussion.
This will be a little fun to explore also in the coming weeks, of course. So they write in 4.5,
predictive coding can also be extended to include action,
allowing for predictive coding agents to undertake adaptive actions without any major change to their
fundamental algorithms. The key insight is to note there are two ways of minimizing prediction errors.
The first is to update predictions to match sensory data, which corresponds to classical perception.
Perception. I thought that the ball was going to be here, but I guess it's over here. Perception.
The second is to take actions in the world to force the incoming sensory data to match the prediction.
I'm going to move the ball to where I expect it to be. Or I expected the ball to be in the left side of
my visual field. So I'm going to move my eyes to the right so that it's in the left side of my visual field.
So it's action is not always like reaching out and moving the ball. It can also be the action of
choosing where to look, for example. And this is what is really fascinating because we spent so long
in the earlier sections in the first 50 equations, you know, without action. So it's like, oh, no,
are there going to be like another 250 equations with action coming into the picture? But actually,
it's quite a simple introduction. The basic approach to including action in predictive coding
is to minimize the variational free energy with respect to action. Although free energy is not
explicitly a function of action, it can be made so implicitly by noticing the dependence of sensory
observations on actions. So what you see is going to depend on where you look. We can make this
implicit dependent dependence explicit using the chain rule of calculus. Active inference,
its inference about action. So here's the rate of change of action through time is the rate of change
of a free energy functional of previously, it was of observations and of states through time. And now,
O is O of A. Observations are a function of action. They're partially or completely dependent on action.
And that is being understood as a derivative of change in action. O of A over A, partial O of A over A,
is a forward model which makes explicit the dependence of the observation upon action and must be provided or
learned by the algorithm. Because that is how do observations, which are a function of action,
change as actions change. So that is like a layer that hadn't been brought up. So they're saying,
because you do need to solve that ratio or that derivative, you do need to learn that or be provided
that. And it's a separate thing to learn in addition to this standard generative model for perception.
So we tuck action as being like a dependency of observations, which is also what connects active
inference to perceptual control theory. So that's how we introduce action into the picture, just from a first
pass. Let's go one more level in and then any thoughts you have would be great. So if we were talking about
just the inference case, prediction error minimization would be like the picture that we're seeing is
exactly the one that we're predicting or vice versa. So what does that look like for action?
The prediction error simply becomes the difference between the current observation and the target or
set point, already bringing in this kind of homeostasis, allostasis perspective. However, this raises the question
of where the set points comes from, where do the targets come from, and how are they computed?
When's priors? A generic answer to the question is that set points can be inherited from evolutionary or
ontogenetic, which are developmental, imperatives, or supplied by other neural circuits involved in
goal-directed behavior and planning. For present purposes, we can simply take them as exogenously
given variables. So what isn't addressed in this review is this big question of priors and learning
on preferences. Like, how do you know what to prefer? How do you know how much to change how you prefer?
How tight should your preferences be? Those are like really, really important areas, but they're just
like opening the door but not going to go into it. In 4.5.1, it's also straightforward to model the
potential costs of action. In biological organisms, there's different costs of action, and so how can
that be modeled mathematically? Well, they say by explicitly including action within the generative
model as follows. And so now they've added in this extra term with a cost of action. So it just shows
how like once action has been introduced as a dependency of the observation function, then there can be like
other things that can be calculated related to action. Any thoughts on action or like in your readings,
where has action been integrated well or not with predictive coding?
Well, I think that from my perspective, predictive coding wasn't really about action before this text.
So it was new to me because I always relate action to predictive processing and active inference, not
really predictive coding. So it was new. And from all of this that we've been through, I found fascinating how
the complexity grows and how many different applications predictive coding can be found on, especially
in machine learning and, you know, all of this mathematical
heaviness brings many, many different solutions to problems that we faced for a long time. So fascinating.
Nice. Yeah, agreed. It's really interesting. So just one more take on active inference, which we explored in 26 as well.
So we're going to look at the model. Like predictive coding, PID control optimizes a system towards a set
point and is ideal for simple regulatory systems like thermostats. Action, A of T. So we're taking that
same notion of A as being like something that influences observations. So that's how we introduce action into the
model is we make observations depend on action. Action is determined by three terms. A proportional term,
which minimizes the distance between the current location and the set point, P. An integral term,
which minimizes the integral of this error over time, I. And a derivative term, which minimizes the
derivative of the error, D. The combination of the three terms produces a robust and simple control
system, which can be applied with some tuning to control almost any simple regulatory process.
And higher coordinates of motion could do even better. But as we explored in 26, like often the PID is
sufficient. And so that's a very common engineering method. And so it connects the Bayesian mechanics
of action and perception and cognition of active inference on generalized coordinates to PID control in the
engineering setting. And then they provide a bunch of other formalisms. In Appendix B, they give some
detail on this idea of natural gradients, which I think we could go into in the dot one and in the dot two.
So we won't talk about it here, but Appendix B is about precision as natural gradients. And Appendix C
are providing some challenges for the neural implementation of back propagation by predictive
coding. So also we're not going to explore it here, but those are both really interesting, short,
and very topical appendices. In Section 5, it's of quite good length, and we're not going to cover
actually any of it today because it's been a great and long enough dot zero. But in the dot one and the
dot two and beyond, we hope to unpack the discussion and the future directions. So we have a lot of room
and space for questions. And I think we both or all walk out of this with more questions than answers.
So we hope to make this ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
here and I'm really excited about the biological part of predictive coding implementation and
predictive processing. So as it is not really developed in this paper, I think that the
author said that it's not really explored actually. I have this idea of looking to it to see what's been
been doing in the past years. Awesome. Yeah, I think it'll be some fun upcoming discussions.
Thanks so much for all the help and for this dot zero and to Brock as well. So see you around.
Thanks a lot. See you. Bye.
Bye.
Bye.

## O4u8PRzk1vY

Thank you.
Hello and welcome everyone. It is just adjusting things. It is May 4th, May the 4th of 22 be with you. And we're here in Acton Flab live stream number 43.1. Blue, I don't know how you do it with always joining during the theme song.
Welcome to the Acton Flab. We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning and practicing applied active inference. You can find us at links on this slide.
This is recorded in an archived live stream. So please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.
Check out activeinference.org if you want to learn more about what's happening in the lab and get involved and participate in the live streams or any other activities.
All right. Well, we're here in live stream number 43.1 and are continuing the discussion of the paper Predictive Coding, a theoretical and experimental review by Baron Milledge, Neil Seth and Christopher Buckley.
In 43.1. In 43.0 with Maria, we went over some of the background and context and did like a first pass on various aspects of the paper, but by no means exhausted it because it's a long and very intricate paper.
And also it touches on a ton of other areas of more general interest. So there's a lot to discuss.
And in the 43.1 today, we'll see where things go. If you're watching live, it would be awesome to have any questions in the live chat.
Otherwise, we will just start with some introductions and pick up with whatever people are finding salient and exciting.
So we'll just start by saying hello and going from there.
I'm Daniel and I'm a researcher in California. And thanks a lot, Blue, for joining.
I'm Blue. I'm a researcher in New Mexico. And yeah, I'm excited to be here today. This paper was
really intricate and detailed and provided a lot of background that I don't have because, you know,
there are so many active papes that I want to read, but I don't have time to get to them all
because I like to read things very thoroughly and slowly and carefully and look up the things that I
don't know and do the back references, travel down the scientific rabbit hole, so to speak.
So yeah, this was a good paper that kind of helped me, you know, shirk all those act in responsibilities
that I have and came out with more like questions than answers, which is always a good sign of a good paper.
Awesome. Well, how about going into the paper? What questions did you have? And maybe we'll get to
how our questions evolved. But what were you expecting to find in the paper? And what questions
were motivating you to seek it?
So I always have had a hard time, like, what is the difference between predictive coding,
variational base and active, right? And like, I was really hoping that the paper would kind of lay
that out for me and like, no. So like, I mean, I kind of got a good historical overview of how they all
are interlocking and overlapping, which I didn't know before. Because, you know, all these things,
none of them are simple. And there are intricate details in all of them, like, you know, that I
don't know all the details ins and outs. But I think that this gave a very good, like historical
overview of how these things kind of layer into a nice little sandwich.
Great, definitely a good starting place. Let's also add Bayesian brain there to the mix, and start to
look at maybe some similarities too, because they're not exactly like addressing the same area, and
they're compatible, often more compatible than not. So getting at what distinguishes them is very
important. And like one way that that happened, and it came up in the dot zero, was so much of the
paper was dealing with inference on the relationship between observations and unobserved latent states.
So think like, trying to infer the temperature of the room given the thermometer readings. And that
was so much of the paper. And then action comes into the picture in section four or five. It's like,
predictive coding, the authors write, can also be extended to include action, allowing for predictive
coding agents to undertake adaptive actions without any major change to their fundamental
algorithms. But that's 50 equations deep. And so it was very interesting to see like,
if those 50 equations are kind of like the stem, I know that the equations are not sequential and
building on each other in all of these cases. But then action gets tucked into a bigger picture very
seamlessly. And I think that speaks to the relevance of distinguishing how they're similar,
the difference and why it matters, I guess. So how should we even begin to look at that?
Well, so even action actually came up earlier in the paper before 4.5. So action came up in
section 2.3 with dynamical predictive coding, and generalized coordinates. And this I thought was a
really good example. Like, like, like, I was craving, and still I'm craving like, a really simple example.
Like, like, it's one thing, you know, we talk about the equations, we go through all the letters,
we compare this and that. But it would be really great to see a super simple example worked through,
like from start to finish, using all of these observable states, latent states, complexity,
accuracy, like, it would be really great to see that at some point. And if you're listening to this
live stream and want to come on and give like, a guest tutorial on like, how do we actually work
these equations into some very simple problem that we can solve in real life, like, I would be more than
happy to facilitate that presentation. Yeah, because I can't even like, I can't jump from like, all these
equations into like, how does that apply? But even in 2.3, this was kind of a good, a good, a goodish
example, a real life example about like, inferring, you know, the velocity and the acceleration and the
jerk, just given the observed coordinates. So that was kind of and it talks here about also free action,
which I've not heard before. So instead of minimizing the variation of free energy, it says we must instead
minimize the free action, which is F bar. And I've not seen or heard it referred to in that way. But
it's modeling like time series of observations. So like, you know, you know, the coordinates at
time one, time two, time three of a swinging pendulum, for example. If you know those coordinates,
then you can kind of guess, you know, how fast is the object moving and you can infer these other,
these other variables. So I haven't seen that free action, but it did even come up before four or five.
Yes. And it speaks to that expected free energy EFE, which is what do you expect the free energy to be?
And then there's the free energy of the expected future, which one of the authors has worked on,
which is kind of a slightly different variant. And then here's another way to look at the free energy
of some future time steps. And, and it speaks to that difference between the variational free energy,
which is like what you're able to calculate right now with the information at hand and looking backwards.
And so the more perceptual aspects of inference can be calculated using the variational free energy
approach. But then anytime the future is coming into play, there's uncertainty about the observations,
as well as even uncertainty about what actions one will take, let alone the consequences of the
action that one will take in the future. So we do need a different way to calculate it. And then as you're
kind of getting at, this is a different way than we've seen it before with a minimization of free action.
But let's return to this page and think about how we can
distinguish with like a Venn diagram or something that helps us understand how these core ideas are linked.
One couple that we can highlight is predictive coding and predictive processing. Do you have any
thoughts or questions or questions on that? Yeah, so maybe not a Venn diagram, but like maybe we should build
perhaps like a pyramid or like a multi-level building. Because I think, you know, based on the,
the, the, what I read in the paper, I think really predictive coding, kind of starts it all off. And also,
it makes sense to make a layer cake, like being that these all kind of start off with the layers of, of
cortical processing that happen quite literally in the brain. So I think making a layer cake maybe makes the most sense.
Okay, so we're in the kitchen, we're in the active restaurant kitchen. And what are we gonna build in?
Or what is the bottom of this layer cake?
So I think the bottom at least, so, so there might be two layers on the bottom. One from Helmholtz. So we
can start with like the, the perception as unconscious inference view of Helmholtz. And then predictive coding,
as described by Rao and Ballard in their description of the visual system and the visual cortex.
Okay. And again, kind of calling back to the dot zero, the two qualitative philosophical ideas
that the authors invoke and that Maria helped us unpack were Helmholtz's notion of perception as unconscious inference
and Kant's, Kant's notion that a priori or beforehand structure, like prior structure, is needed to make sense of
sensory data. So we're gonna have one bottom layer of the cake with Helmholtz and then also with the Kantian.
So this is going to be our qualitative philosophical layer of the cake, these two notions.
And then you mentioned another critical work, which was Raoul and Ballard's 1999 work, building on a
broader history of applying predictive and anticipatory approaches to different neural systems. And in the
dot zero, the two neural systems that we looked at were first the retina system with a Srinivasan,
1982. And this is looking at retinal physiology and like the electrophysiology of photons hitting the retina.
And then another area where predictive approaches, especially early on, were getting built out around
and towards was the cortical hierarchy and the different layers in the mammalian cortex. So these
two anatomical exemplars of some micro circuitry, some histology that is compatible with a predictive
approach. Okay, so we have these two basal layers, but we might even add more basal layers, but we have
biological systems that are doing predictive things. And that includes the retinal as well as the cortex.
Also, of course, if anyone has like questions, we'll get to it in the right way. So please ask any
questions or doing any comments. So we have the retina, the cortex as examples, but there's others.
Okay. And then if there's a third layer that we can add to the bottom, I think it would just be
Bayesian statistics. Because... So I think it comes maybe before that also, or maybe like, maybe now,
Bayesian statistics is like a layer two, but like, I think before the Bayesian statistics, and even before
biological systems doing prediction, there's the information theory component that I think is
important also. Okay. So, well, we have, this is qualitative and philosophical. Then we have biological
and actual. And then we have a formal area. And that'll be information and Bayes.
Information.
Yeah, the information goes under the Bayes, I think, just like the Helmholtz comes under
the Kant, right? I think it's the really the relationship between information and probability.
And that's the one that we have to do, which we started to explore in, or we explored a lot in the
FEP of generic quantum systems, live stream, number 40. That was 40, I think. So many streams ago.
Okay. This is fun. And I think we're going to start building this into a tasty structure. So we have the
philosophical coming in on the left. And that's one on-ramp that just like we had discussed earlier,
like this is something that has been almost imminently available to thinkers for thousands of years.
These are the kinds of qualitative claims that anyone can experience, whether by thinking about the blind
spot or about how they're sense-making in response to some stimuli. This is just the idea that the
sensory observations are first off, not the direct contact with the world. Like we're not seeing the
lightning strike event. We're seeing photons hit the retina and sound hit the eardrum. And so we're
receiving sensory input. That's that kind of Plato's cave angle. And then Kant and Helmholtz elaborated on that
to include this idea of unconscious inference that requires a priority structure, or like what we
would call like a Bayesian prior. Then we have this biological area. And these are just reflecting
natural systems that are exhibiting some kind of behavior. Like we can think about the 1999 paper of
Raoul and Ballard themselves about the functional interpretation of extra classical receptive field
effects. And we talked about that in the dot zero, like the classical effects are kind of the simple
normative ones. Like the joke is it's classical because of the papers and the order they were published, but that
doesn't like make it even true, let alone the best model. The classical is just like, it's like classic rock.
You might like other genres, but then there's the classics or whatever. So that's the biological systems that are
exhibiting certain kinds of outcomes. And then we have these two formal or quantitative areas.
And those are the Bayesian statistics and probability, as well as information theory.
And they're definitely linked as well, but we'll just leave them as kind of two
conjoined layers here. Okay. Now, where do we go from here?
Well, isn't that the question?
So maybe predictive coding and predictive processing and like really what's the difference between these two?
I think predictive coding came from neuroscience. So maybe that layers on top of the biological
part, the biological piece of the cake, and then predictive processing might go on to the quantitative
piece. Awesome. Yeah. And it really is what Maria highlighted and drew out in the dot zero,
which was using a quote from an Andy Clark book. And Clark wrote that predictive processing is not
simply the use of the data compression strategy known as predictive coding. So at least in this take,
predictive coding is like MP4. It's like an encoding strategy, which is also why we connected it to frame
differencing and video encoding. But predictive coding is going to be something that's data oriented,
and it's related to information theory, compression, information encapsulation. And then Clark is writing,
predictive processing is not simply that. And so Maria spoke to how another way to think about the
difference between predictive coding and predictive processing is to use coding for the formalisms and
implementations and processing for the philosophical understanding that prediction is the basis of
signal interpretation, as opposed to merely recognition or descriptive models. So if anyone has like a thought
on that, then, you know, put it in the live chat or come get involved. But let's work with that delineation
going forward. So predictive processing is going to be somehow related to the formal or sorry, predictive
coding is going to be more close to the formal, whether it's predictive coding in a biological context,
or whether it's going to be in a philosophical context or something, it's going to be more on the
formal side, whereas predictive processing is going to be where? A little bit closer to the philosophical?
Yeah, I think so. And then maybe like, does the Bayesian brain like make up the third part of our,
like predictive coding layers over the Bayesian statistics, and predictive processing layers over
the philosophical, then does the Bayesian brain somehow make the in-between sandwich that goes over the biological?
Okay. Okay. Okay. So let's see. We have predictive processing as being a philosophical approach
and consideration of these philosophical memes and themes in the biological case, which we're certainly
bound to. Then we can have predictive coding as kind of the formal way that these predictive anticipatory
systems are implementing predictive processing. And then what is the Bayesian brain? Seems pretty fair to
put it at like the intersection between Bayesian and brain. But what is the Bayesian brain to you?
So to me, the Bayesian brain is kind of, you know, I'm trying to look back through the paper to their
kind of make this kind of make this kind of make this kind of make this kind of make this kind of


introduction to Bayesian statistics, I was like, oh, this is great. And it wasn't even the Bayesian
brain. It was like the Jamesian interpretation of the Bayesian brain paper. But like that paper was
like probably my like turn on to Bayesian statistics and implementing this. And so in my
mind, the Bayesian brain is just this idea that the brain uses Bayesian reasoning or Bayesian
updating to process information and go forward. So, but that's probably a very simplified
interpretation. I think there's going to be one more realist interpretation, like the brain is doing
Bayesian stuff. And then there's the more instrumentalist interpretation. We can use
Bayesian statistics to model what it is that the brain is doing. So is Bayesian the territory or the
map of the brain? But we'll just leave it as an edge for now. So I'll read a question from Dean.
And then I think we're going to be exploring a lot where action and active inference comes into play.
So Blue Dean writes, what do you think of this? As coding, you are doing something in coding. As
processing, you determine by comparing processing and or not processing as you're doing. So process
entails processing types.
What I'm hearing there is encoding doesn't require two arguments. It just takes one, you take one file
and you zip it. You've encoded that in a way. So predictive coding can encode and or implement some
type of informational algorithm without a reference or a comparator. Whereas Dean's saying as processing,
you determine not with this single argument plug and chug, but you determine by comparing
as you're doing. And so predictive processing, it does have that sort of top down and bottom up as it's
often visually represented, but processing is entailing that full stack. And therefore the processing is
requiring something like a minimum of two to have consideration. If you're processing
nuts, then you're sorting them into two different kinds, or you're removing something from something
else about those. Like you're doing something that has compositionality or some type of multiplicity to
it. It's not just something you can take that one file and just zip it. So that's a great point, Dean. I think
I'll add two little arrows here. Yes. Okay. Yes, blue. Let me share the slides.
Thank you. I'm left in the dark here. I definitely agree with Dean's point about the coding versus processing. Like, I can
write a whole lot of things, right? Like I can take a whole lot of notes and that's coding. That's like
encoding the information from our conversation, this live stream. But like, until I do something with
those notes, like turn them into elements of a paper that I want to write or something like this, like,
I have not processed what I have encoded until I take them forward to a forward step. So I think like,
there is kind of this temporal implication with processing versus coding.
Yeah. Also like the timeliness of processing, like you want to process the food before it has
become, you know, bad or something. So, okay. We have predictive coding again. These are just tentative
slide play. If anyone thinks differently, they can join or write a comment, but predictive coding might entail
something of a unidirectionality, just like a .zip. And you say, well, somebody will unzip it later,
but we can encode it without that part of the loop being required. And then we have this two directional
relationship with predictive processing being like top down and bottom up.
Okay. What do you see now? Or I can bring up something.
Yeah. So I'm not really seeing anything. So why don't you bring up what is on your mind or what
you're thinking of?
Yeah. Where is action? And then I think that'll start to walk us towards where active inference is.
So because of the temporal nature of processing, I think action might start in the processing
elements, like even in something like mental action, like people do like thought correction
or thought remediation. So like, if you're, you know, you have this prediction and it like surfaces in
your mind, but then like you correct the prediction or, or like you, you know, you think you see a snake
on the floor and then you say, oh, that's a snake. But then like, you look, let me see that snake. Like,
and then you have to zoom in, look at it closer and it ends up being like a coiled up rope.
Right. And so it's not really a snake, but like you direct your attention because of some prediction
and then can continue to process that prediction. So, so possibly action starts in the processing,
um, in the processing area, or maybe it's there in the middle.
Well, I'm going to start it in the middle. We can see where it goes because I think it's going to have
an important edge to each of these three areas. So there's a few ways to represent it, of course.
So how does action relate to biological systems? Or first let's, let's, um, start with some
philosophical frameworks that highlight the importance of action. So this includes an activism,
embodied, the four E's, five E's, seven E's, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, everything involving like
this sort of embodied, enacted, and cultured, extended, et cetera, approach to cognition and
philosophy. And those can be qualitative. So I'm putting that edge here. These are different qualitative
and philosophical areas. Yes, they can be formalized. We'll get to that edge, but these are qualitative
memes that come from this philosophical area and they're going to draw us to action. Okay. Now,
how about biological systems and action? What do you think about when you think of biology and action?
I don't know. I think like those things are kind of inextricably linked in my mind. Um,
because like, you can't have life without having some action. I mean, cells replicate.
Yeah.
I think this is going to be just, uh, something that
doesn't demand to be that, but is totally true. Biological systems are active there. It's active
matter. And life is this multi-scale organization of activity. So there's many ways that biological
systems are doing action. And what are some areas that are formal, whether or not they have to do
with biology or any philosophy? Can you name a few areas of like formal theory and science that you
think relate to action?
So, I mean, I think, um, just that's maybe more related to processing. Um, but, but as I said
earlier, I think processing is related to action, but like Bayesian inference and, and variational
inference, I think, um, which also tie in a lot to active inference. Um, I think that they come in
there, uh, in the processing slash processing through action or action through processing.
Okay. Great. So, um, Bayesian planning as inference, as well as areas like cybernetics, control theory,
and, um, different formal ways of modeling active systems and modeling decision-making.
So, um, these could be related to a biological system or not, and they can be drawing on a philosophical
framework implicitly, explicitly, or not. All right. So now this is starting to get fun. You added another
term there, and I think this will merit, uh, a detour, but then I return to here, which is the
variational Bayesian approach. So what do you think variational is meaning or doing here?
So it's interesting. And part of what, uh, makes this complicated, um, paper and also like a complicated detour,
um, um, that like the authors cast predictive coding as variational inference. Like even though
we've kind of made this distinction between predictive coding and predictive processing,
um, where, where coding does just is like a one-way street and processing is like two-way street. Um,
the authors nevertheless use the term predictive coding as variational inference. Um, and, and this predictive coding
um, or this variational inference, um, or this variational inference, um, I think the, the key,
um, construct here, and that's probably, I don't know, it overlaps with, with Bayesian brain maybe
too, is the, um, idea of having a model of, of the data generating process. And so I think, um, variational
inference kind of throws the idea of, of, uh, of a model into the loop.
Okay. So let's zoom in on this blue corner
of formal and quantitative areas. And so these can be taken in an action independent way.
They can be explicitly about action, like planning as inference,
or they could just more implicitly rest on inference. Um, I'm sorry, more implicitly rest upon action.
For example, in the case of we're inferring the hidden state of the temperature of the room and we're
observing the thermometer. That doesn't have pi. It doesn't have a, it doesn't have action in that model.
It might just have those two parameters of like the room's temperature, hidden state, and the observations of the
the thermometer, but then we can kind of take a step back and see, all right, well, there's the person
who's engaging in this experimental action, the person's ocular motor zooming in on the
thermometer. Maybe we can just abstract away, but action is always baked into it because we're talking
about active systems, but let's just put some of that aside for a second and take a quick detour to
talk about variational inference, because it's a really important topic. Let's think about, and we've
also explored this in actinf livestream 26 and 37 and a lot of other times. So let's look at three different
ways of doing bays, bays ways, bays areas as they were. So, and maybe there are more, but the three that
we can list up here are exact bays, Monte Carlo, and variational bays. So pick one and then what is like
something important to know about that way of doing baysian statistics?
Well, so I'm by no means an expert in baysian statistics, actually like cracked out my baysian
data analysis book while I was reading this paper, because it was one of those papers, like I said,
I'm anal retentive and detailed, and I'm like, what does that mean? I have to look up every little
thing I don't understand. So like, okay, so let me start with exact bays. So exact bays,
when I think about exact bays, it's like the probability of a given b, like the probability
of rain given clouds or something like that. And so it's like an alternate alternative to frequentist
statistics where the probability of rain and the probability of clouds or like a coin flip is
easier to talk about, right? Like, so each flip of the coin is half. And so like, you know, the idea
that what are the chances that you're going to get heads, you know, five times in a row is half times,
half times, half times, half times, half. So in Bayesian statistics, there's, or the probability
that you're going to get rain here, this is it. In frequentist statistics, the probability that you're
going to get rain and the probability that you're going to get clouds is the probability of rain times
the probability of clouds. That's a great way to put it. And then in Bayesian statistics, there's,
it evaluates the probability of rain with clouds, like given what you already have observed
before, like if it's rained, it's usually cloudy this percent of the time. And it takes into
consideration the probability of rain with clouds, the probability of rain, probability of clouds,
all those things separately. So it gives you a prior estimation, I think. So I don't know,
that's probably super confusing. Great. No, you mentioned a lot of really important points,
which is it's an alternative to frequentist statistics analysis. So we're not getting a p-value
out of this and we're able to explicitly say our priors and not to go down this rabbit hole,
but a lot of frequentism implicitly has a uniform prior. And we'll just leave it at that for now.
So the exact Bayes is using the Bayes equation essentially as written. And just as you said it,
there's the probability of something given something else. And then you kind of find the probability of
that other thing, given the first thing multiplied by these other terms. And then you fill out all of
those variables and you literally do that division. And so we explored like this in the case of Axel
Constance paper with the bacteria. And so there was the exact Bayesian bacteria that was having its prior
and then taking in new information and updating how it thought about what was out there based upon the new
incoming information. And it was like in a formula and it was like dividing exactly the numbers that you
see here in this way. Okay. So that's exact base. Now, what are some issues with exact base?
It might be straightforward when you're talking about that coin flip, but if you're talking about a
high dimensional space or something that is just bigger than the RAM or whatever of your computer,
when it comes to the implementation, there's often challenges with exact base. And so there's several
techniques that have been developed to approximate what an exact Bayesian approach would be in a more
tractable way. So there's two alternatives to exact base implementation. And the spirit is going to be
exactly the same of taking in new information and updating our priors as specified, but it's going to be
done in a few different ways. So first, what about Monte Carlo? What is Monte Carlo?
So Monte Carlo, you probably know more about the history than I do, but Monte Carlo is like a sampling
technique. So, you know, instead of trying to calculate the probability of rain and clouds using exact
bays, you just sample like out of, you know, a thousand rainy days, how many of them were cloudy and
out of, you know, a thousand cloudy days, how many of them were rainy. And so instead of like getting an
exact measurement of your distribution, like what is, where's the overlap between clouds and rain,
you just randomly pick out from all of the possible days, you estimate your sample that way.
So it's based upon sampling. And so it's like, we might not know one of these terms, but we can
at least draw a sample. And so this does a few different things. It connects us first to empirical
and specific data as implemented, like in a row of a program, not just B sub I or some sort of analytical
representation, but like, this is where we're getting into this specific sample was pulled by
this algorithm at this time. And one method that's a common thing is the Markov chain Monte Carlo. And
this is using a local resampling approach, like assessing local maneuvers of a given chain that's
engaged in sampling. And you kind of drop these chains into different parts of the probability
distribution, and then have them evaluate different aspects of that distribution. So it's as easy or hard
as dropping those paratroopers into different parts of the physical landscape, and then having them
accept or reject different proposed moves. So that's sort of a two dimensional landscape with the height
being elevation. And maybe that's what you want to map because you might want to know, is there one
central peak? Are there two peaks that are very similar? And take that into the statistical case. And
this is especially helpful for when there's no, well, I don't want to say no idea, but there is not the
desire to explicitly formalize what shape the distribution looks like. So we might want to do
like Bayesian phylogenetics. And so we need to talk somehow about the likelihood of a given DNA sequence
being that way. But like, where do you go from there? And so that's where the Monte Carlo sampling
based approach really comes into play. And then because it's based upon sampling, the advantages are
you can run that sampling for three iterations or 3 million. So it's very flexible with the amount of
computing power that you bring to bear on this challenge. But also there are the risks of over
sampling, which is that you have used some unneeded electrical power and computational power, which is
really non-trivial, but also there's the risk of under sampling. And you might even be like in a regime
where you think that you've sampled because you're getting samples that are just confirming what you
already know. But you know, there's a whole other island that you didn't do the para drop to. So one can
be lulled into a false precision with bootstrapping and sampling based approaches because they can give
ultra high precisions, but that can be based upon actually more like a biased sampling approach or all
these other features. And just the one anecdote that I have on that is in the Bayesian phylogenetics
case. I remember this one professor in undergrad, Professor Moore, and he'd always say,
fuzzy caterpillar. You want it to look like a fuzzy caterpillar. And there's some technical details,
but it's like you want it to be exploring the full range of a parameter. Like if something could
be zero to one, you want to be exploring the full range, but returning to the best estimate.
And that shows that you're sampling like the diversity of what that parameter can be,
but also spending more or most of your time in the most likely and in the best regions.
And so if the value were at 0.5 and the range of what's possible was like zero to one,
that looks like a fuzzy caterpillar with more thickness in the middle and then a lot of fluctuation,
but it's not like it's spending a ton of time at one and then it drops suddenly to zero because
that would suggest that you're not converged yet. Whereas when you see that fuzzy caterpillar,
it's like you're sampling the extremes and getting novelty and testing different combinations,
but you're also returning to something that is working. So Monte Carlo sampling based approach
brings in all of these opportunities and challenges associated with sampling.
Well, so I was under the impression, like you talked about over sampling, but I think
over sampling, like as you, as sampling goes to infinity, like your, your accuracy increases,
like your, your closer able to get the true posterior. But I think it's, it's uneven sampling.
That's the, the danger in the Monte Carlo method. Like if you're sampling too far in one end or the other.
And perhaps like asymptotically, if you exhausted the state space, then you would know that you had the
right answer. But the whole reason why we're using any kind of heuristic approach rather than exact
bays is because like, we don't have the full state space. So yeah, there's relatively low cost to
oversampling, but we don't always know when that is. And then under sampling can be just totally
misleading if we take that as our only, um,
representation of that distribution. And so there's all kinds of cool techniques that involve
like multiple chains happening in parallel. And some of them are like higher temperature and
less temperature. So for one of those paratrooper teams, it's very cold. And so they're only making
the best, very local moves. It's like the elevation is sharpened for them. It's very hard to get out of a
local rut. And there might be another team that's very high temperature. And for them, the landscape
is flat, maybe even completely flat. And then they're like a hot molecule that's able to move
over something that might be a barrier for another team. So that team is going to like fill in the
details and locally explore quality solutions. Whereas there's another team that's like, or another
chain. And so that's the, um, multiple chain Monte Carlo approach. And there's a lot to that in
phylogenetics, which is where I've seen it the most, but also probably many other areas.
Okay, cool.
So I've, I've run it in phylogenetics too. And like, I mean, the programs can take forever
to run because, you know, I mean, you're too many parameters and, and whatever, they can really take a
long time. Um, the, the computational power is no joke. Well, like what goes into, um, the Monte Carlo
sampling. So we have exact phase, which is calculating the true posterior. And then we have the Monte Carlo,
which is estimating the true posterior through sampling. And then we come to the variational,
which is trying to minimize the divergence between the true posterior and your approximation of the
posterior. Great. Minimizing divergence between the true posterior, like what we would really
have wanted to actually know. What is the actual temperature in the room conditioned upon the noisy
thermometer estimates that we're getting? So are we going to sample our way out of that one? The
variational approach is going to be very different. And in 26, I think we had like the cat and then one
approach was like the Monte Carlo was like pointillism. It was like dots. So we're sampling
pixels from the cat. And then it becomes like a pointillist picture of a cat that if you do sample
densely enough, it looks like a cat or it's recognizable as a cat. And the variational approach
was like a clip art template. And so let's just say that you had a template of different curves or of like,
you knew that, that it wanted to be a cat. You knew you were looking at a cat.
So then you have like a cat template that can get stretched or zoomed in or out. And so that might
be very straightforward to optimize because you're just trying to minimize the divergence between these
very limited parametric changes that you can implement. And of course you run into a situation
which will explore various aspects of variational inference. What if you try to stretch that cat emoji
onto a different animal? Or what if it's a totally different kind of data set? So you will find some
divergence minimizing solution. That doesn't mean it's sufficient or even in the right ballpark. Just
like doing an L2 least squares minimizing linear regression will always find a best fitting linear regression.
But that best fitting linear regression can be like hilariously inaccurate. Like if the data are like a
parabola, like a U, the best fitting regression might be like a flat line through the middle. Or if 80% of the
points are here and 20% are over here, there might be a regression that's very misleading. That's like the
Simpsons' so-called paradox. So invariational, we're not going to use sampling. We're going to use the
minimization of a divergence, which is a KL divergence. But they mention in this paper it can also be a
different kind of divergence and the Rainey divergence has been explored in some recent work of Sajid et al.
So we're going to minimize the divergence between the true posterior
and a distribution queue that we control and is tractable to optimize.
So it's like instead of that sampling based approach, we are dropping the teams at different
parts of the landscape and then they were going to report back on information. Here in the variational
approach, it's like we have a template and then we're going to just do stretching and bending.
Again, this is kind of a torture metaphor, but we're going to stretch and bend and there's only a few
parameters on the stretching and bending. And we're going to find the best fit of those stretching and
bending parameters. Like if it were a linear regression, y equals mx plus b, the two dials that you get to
change are like the m, the slope of x and b, like how high or low the regression is. And then you're finding
m and b that are the best fitting about the data, y. And so you're kind of like minimizing the least squares
error term. Here, it's not a linear regression that we're fitting by minimizing the least squares.
It's a variational Bayesian approximation that we're fitting by minimizing the divergence between the
true posterior and the distribution queue that we control and is optimal or is able to be optimized.
What else would you add on that?
I think that's it. So the true posterior and the distribution that is tractable and we can optimize
over. Yeah, that's it. So let's close this little, okay. Computational intensity on variational is
much less, right? Because instead of calculating all of the parameters for every little dot,
every little point on the sample, we are calculating for like a big blob. It's like one big blob instead
of several little points. But we calculate for that big blob, this is the density of that function.
And these are the parameters of that. So now we're going to back out of this formal
cul-de-sac that we've been in and just remember to ourselves, even if it's your first time hearing
variational inference and or you're kind of like blue or I words like we've read it in how many papers,
but still every time we kind of start on square zero. So why do we use variational Bayesian inference?
So the first thing is it allows us to use Bayesian statistics and probability, which we might prefer
over, for example, frequentism. Okay. Variational Bayes then allows us to use a heuristic Bayesian
implementation. So if there's something that's too challenging or implausible for exact Bayes,
now we can approach it like Monte Carlo or variational. These are both heuristics.
Unlike Monte Carlo, it's not based upon sampling. Variational is based upon a family of equation
fitting. And so it can be implemented very efficiently, which isn't always the case for Monte Carlo.
It rests upon an appropriate factorization of the problem. And one other piece is this connects
to analytical equations and physics. So it's almost like Monte Carlo is like a computer scientist's
approach. It's like, how much RAM do we have? How many processors do we have? How big is this data set
going to be? And then there's no analytical equation or closed form for Monte Carlo. It's like engineering.
It's kind of like you have to have some art and skill and science coming together for the Monte Carlo to be
the best it can be. And then it's more about like an adequacy and an efficacy question because you're
not converging to the infinite asymptote. Again, otherwise you could have done something else.
And then the variational is like the physicist's approach and it draws on the variational calculus
of Feynman and others. And this is the part that's very amenable and connected to the equations of least
action and all these other things like factorizing equations.
So it's funny that you bring up the computer scientist approach in Monte Carlo. And like, so
I am a horrible computer person. I mean, I will brute force wrangle my data, like just give me more RAM,
just give me more processing power. Like I just want to make things work. I don't have any patience for
finesse. Right? So in my mind, I think about the Monte Carlo, like the brute force, just shove your data
through the algorithm, no matter how much RAM it takes. I think about Monte Carlo like that. And I
think about the variational bays, more like the people that can do like, you know, very simple things
in code to make it run much faster than have that like, very good skill with like, oh, well, we can just,
you know, run this little factorization or, you know, we can make the problem run so much better on
the computer. So I think about it about the variational like that. But you're right, it does have that
that connection to statistical physics and to Feynman. But I think about it as like a highly optimized
way to run Bayesian statistics. But why Daniel, would someone want to run Bayesian statistics in the first
place? So maybe you want to give us an example. Why would that happen?
Well, yeah, we will pull back. Just the last point there is the variational methods. We might even have
a heuristic for those or an algorithm or approximation of those. For example, message
passing and Forney factor graphs. Those draw an equivalence between Bayes graphs where nodes are
random variables and edges are statistical relationships. Bayes graphs can undergo variational
inference. And there's a tractable way to use toolkits like that developed by the bias lab
and use message passing and a Forney factor graph representation to have like a level of
implementability for even the variational. Whereas it's not possible to imagine like a heuristic for
Monte Carlo. It is the heuristic. Sampling is sampling. You can do better sampling, but that's the game that
you have chosen. Whereas in variational, even this question of minimizing divergence does require kind
of like a proximate or an operational approach because how can we minimize the divergence between the true
posterior and something we control when we don't know what the true posterior is. So there have to be a
little bit more added, but this is like a very awesome discussion because it's helping us pull out like,
this is the sort of exact approach. And then there's a more computer science like sampling approach and then a more
analytical and physics related approach. Okay. So why do we want to do Bayes? Let's pull back to our triangle here.
Why do we want to do Bayes and thinking about the concepts here? Why do we want to do Bayes?
I asked you, you're not allowed to turn the question around on me. That was me asking you. You're not allowed to just
talk and then ask me.
Well, there's a few ways to take it. I guess one would be what is the alternative policy selection? If we're doing
research or application, what is our alternative to picking some Bayesian approach? So if we take the Bayesian road,
we know that there's going to be some sort of
tri-virgents later, exact Bayes, Monte Carlo, variational Bayes, something else.
Or we could go down a different
statistical path. Like we could use frequentist statistics and maybe that's totally adequate and effective for the situation.
And both are just maps. So a well-fitting linear model of height and weight doesn't make height and weight a linear model.
A really good fitting action perception loop, whether it rests upon a kernel of frequentist statistics or Bayesian
statistics doesn't make those systems that way that you modeled it.
So I would say Bayesian statistics is useful when we want to do some kind of formal or quantitative
inference where we want to be specific and explicit about our prior beliefs and how we want incoming information to update those beliefs.
So I agree. And it's what I always try to tell people, you know, when I'm explaining like,
what is Bayesian statistics? Which a lot of people have never heard of. Like in college, at least when I graduated,
there's no Bayesian statistics course. Now many schools have them and, you know, I'm outdated already. But
it's really like when you're doing frequentist statistics, you go out to the desert and count mice
every year. Right. Every year you go and count how many mice you see in the desert or something like this.
And if you I mean, you expect to see some mice in the desert, otherwise you wouldn't be there counting
them. So you expect a non-zero answer. Right. So every year you go out, you find 10 mice, 20 mice,
50 mice, 30 mice, 20 mice, 10 mice. And every year you go count mice. So if you were to go like,
you have some expectation that you will find mice. You also have some expectation that there is going
to be less than a thousand mice because every year you sample this one place. Right. And so
what Bayesian statistics does is it takes actually that prior not like frequentist statistics. They
don't care if you ever found mice there before, like your probability of finding zero mice and 30 mice
and 50 mice and 100 mice and a thousand mice is all the same. It doesn't matter how many years you've
been there before. Like you are starting with nothing in frequentist statistics. You don't get to have
any guess that there's even going to be one mouse in the desert where with Bayesian statistics, like
obviously you think that there are going to be some mice and you think it's going to be some number
you can count reasonably. So with whatever area. And so what Bayesian statistics allows for is that
prior belief or that expectation that you have as experimenter.
Awesome. And that's kind of what we were getting at with that idea of frequentism, having this
implicit uniform distribution, you flip the coin 10 times, you get three heads. Your maximum likelihood
estimate is it comes up 30% of the time on heads 0.3. However, if you want to take like a bigger picture
view, you might have some sort of precision about where it's likely to be. Like, is it likely to be 0.5?
And you're going to be surprised if it were 0.3 because you just pulled it out of a cash register.
And then in that case, you still might say, I want to have a uniform prior. And if it is 0.3,
then it's 0.3. Or you might want to say, I'm very confident it's something else. But Bayesian
statistics opens up the space to be specific about how we want to use our priors, how confident we want to
be, how much precision we want to have in those priors, and then how we want to incorporate new
information. So any other thought on that? Or let's continue on that and connect it to some formalisms.
So I have one more thought on the coin flip with Bayesian idea. Like, if you know it's a fair coin,
then the probability is 50%. And like, if we're flipping coins and we're betting each time, like,
you know, dollar, dollar, dollar, dollar, if we flipped that coin, you flip the coin 10 times in a
row and it's heads every single time, like on the 11th time, like my bet is on tails because like,
it's not, it's a fair coin. Like, it's not going to come up every single time heads. And so
frequent statistics, like, does never allow for that previous information. And also like,
where is that information? Which is something that always baffles me. Like,
does the coin already know that it's been flipped 10 times and it's come up heads all those times and
that it then has to come up tails sooner or later? I mean, the probability is so low that you're going
to get like a thousand coin flips of a fair coin in a row that is heads. Like, I don't know if it's
ever happened to anyone ever. So like, as we increase in the number of flips, and if it's heads,
heads, heads, heads, heads, like, it becomes increasingly probable that the next flip is going
to be tails in my view, right, which is maybe totally wrong, but, but where is that information
stored? And the Bayesian kind of allows for that to be there.
And I wonder if this even connects to where is that information stored
in the quantum reference frame of the observer and nowhere else. But let's look at how that
gets implemented in these formalisms. So you just described that setting where somebody has
like a belief that the coin is fair. Maybe that's an empirically grounded belief. Like,
previously they flipped it a thousand times and they got 50-50. Or they have just an a priori
belief that is fair. If that belief were generated by a real other data set, we would call that
parametric empirical bays. Because it's the process where you set the priors as well as their confidence
based upon some collected data set. That's parametric empirical bays. Or one could just take that a
priori, cons synthetic a priori, and just say coins ought to be 50-50. And that's what I'm sticking with.
Let's just say that then we play this game, we flip it 10 times and likely or not, 10 heads happen.
That's the trace of behavior in the niche. It actually happened. Now that might be seen as a totally likely
outcome by somebody who believes that it always comes up heads, hence they're unsurprised. Or,
depending on what your priors were, that could be variably surprising. And then you talked about,
well, when and how should you update your beliefs on that coin? Like maybe something changed while you
weren't looking at it, and so you want like your best estimate to very heavily reflect the recency.
And maybe that should be like a moving average of the most recent three flips, or maybe the most recent
30. So let's look at two places in the paper where they do something like that. The first one has to do
with predictive coding and frame differencing algorithms in video compression. And so in this
area, we can think about the way that the video looks, people who are watching this video, the way
that the video looks is like the output. And then we want to encode like how surprised are we, what is
happening when the frames are changing. And so the simplest method is just count where it's different
and convey that information. But it might also be important to use, as they write,
each new frame using a number of past frames weighted by a coefficient, an approach known as linear
predictive coding. So that's one case where you're determining how many frames back, how many coin
flips back should we use for that now casting, and how should we weight them? So that's one area.
And then a second area that they bring up and connect is the Kalman filter. So here's the Kalman filter,
and this is their formalisms 33 and 34. And it has a lot to do with Bayesian statistics. So on this,
and Bayesian Kalman filter is very common. We can see it in two different ways. So on the left side of this
slide, the top image shows a prior prediction, that's the prediction. And then two is the measurement.
And then there's the fusion. So we have the prediction, the measurement here with like GPS,
and then there's the fusion. So that is very similar to having a prior and then some updated
sensory information and then the posterior. So it's just labeled slightly differently, but we can already
see how this is like totally related to Bayesian statistics. What this also brings into the picture
is like a pseudocode that unrolls through time. So Bayesian statistics approach doesn't have to be
about time. It can be about a static data set. And then you could be modeling like, okay, per extra
sample of the population of their height and weight, we're going to update our inference on that
relationship. But that's a timeless analysis. It doesn't incorporate some sort of unfolding through
time. That can be incorporated into the Kalman filter using this pseudocode down here on the left.
There's some prior knowledge of state, and this is like two dimensions. And then there's like a cloud
representing a distribution of precision or uncertainty. So a more precise estimate would be
like a tighter cloud there or a sharper peak or a sharper valley, depending on how you want to think
about it. And then less precision would be like a broader basin or like a more diffuse ink drop. And
then there's a prediction. Then a measurement occurs, which can be precise or can also have an associated
measurement error term, which could be fit with parametric empirical bays based upon testing, or it could
be determined on the fly with expectation maximization. And then that prior gets juxtaposed in this update
step and that outputs. So this takes sort of this timeless Bayesian update scheme and specifically
adapts it to the case of something happening through time. And that's shown on the right side here with
this image of like time is happening and we're getting these noisy x measurements and the true
temperatures, the purple, and let's just say it's unchanging in this case, but that could also be
changing. One can just imagine that, especially if it's very noisy, it's hard to get increasingly complex
dynamical patterns, but that's all part of the game. And then the prior starts high and then the prior
is weighted, it's kind of like a spline, it's weighted through all of these x's. And you could
imagine one extreme case is like move to the last one that you saw. And so that would be like basically
recapitulating the measurements distribution through time. The other extreme case would be
weight all the time points evenly so that like we're kind of converging to a moving average. So if we
have a hundred hours of video that is like at a two and then all of a sudden it switches to an eight
and then your moving average would very, very slowly start moving up from a two. And then one
could imagine that there's some intermediate solution that doesn't use like the whole data set because
that's too slow to adapt and maybe takes up too much memory, but isn't just like a one step instantly
switch to the nearest measurement. And that parameter of how fast should you update your
Kalman filter is a parameter in the model. And so that is exactly what is being statistically optimized is
how much through time should we update our ongoing estimate. And so in the static or the timeless
Bayesian case, that's where we talk about precision. How much should we update our inference as new
information is added to our data set, but that doesn't mean appended in a temporal way. The Kalman filter
is making it explicit that these data points are being added sequentially and that is providing us
with this pseudocode by which the latent state is updated, not just as a function of adding data,
but actually adding data in a sequential and unrolling way. What do you think, Blue?
Yeah, great. I think that that was a super good explanation and very clear. And yeah, my first
interaction with common filtering was in imaging and image processing. And so I think that's maybe where
people come across that a lot, especially like doing laser scanning microscopy or video, I guess the video update
also is like that. So yes. So let's just look at some of their writing, but these are like the smaller
the formalism, the less we've paid attention to it. And the more that we would love to know about what
it actually means, but let's kind of pick up above their 35. They write, Kalman filtering proceeds in two
steps. First, the state is projected forwards using the dynamics model or prior, and that's the P
of mu t plus one. That's the mean at the next time step conditioned upon the mean at this time step.
So that's like what is going to happen next conditioned upon how it is now. These estimates are corrected
or sort of compromised, coming to a compromise by new sensory data by inverting the likelihood mapping.
P of observations at the next time point conditioned upon our estimate of where the latent state will be.
So this is what temperature will the room be conditioned upon how it is now at the next time step? What will
it be conditioned upon what it is now? This likelihood mapping, which is like the A matrix in the POMDPs,
is what is the probability of the outcome in the next time step being a certain way conditioned upon
how we think the room's temperature is going to be? And so these are the equations and some of the
variables. And then they kind of conclude or in this little section, the derivation of the rules is
relatively involved and that's in Appendix A and some other places, but also the Kalman filtering can be
interpreted as finding the optimum of a maximum a posteriori estimation problem. So this is almost like
we have Kant with the exhortation of the A priori. What information are we bringing to the table?
Qualitatively, Kant or quantitatively, Bayes. That's the A priori. And then Bayes kind of bridges the A priori,
the prior, with the A posteriori. Not sure if that's the Latin for that one, but it's the posterior, what
happens after the sensory update. And then that space between like the before and the after is the
during. And that's the during of the now that we're doing action and inference within.
Let's look at how they introduce, oh, anything? Otherwise we'll look at how they introduce action
and then connect it back to active inference. So I think the common filtering and the updating. So I think we
we kind of skipped over updating when we were talking, when we were making our layer cake earlier and just
how, how messages in the nervous system biologically and in predictive coding are passed forward and
backwards. So it might be helpful to back up and talk about error propagation and
propagation of back propagation and propagation of signal through time. Just as like a very basic way, because I think the
common filter is kind of an advanced way to do that. Okay. Can we detour? Can we go back back?
We're back at the triangle. And so now we've added variational as like a little badge to the Bayesian.
And also we're going to add Kalman as a badge. Where have we visited on this journey? And one can imagine
that they could take a Monte Carlo or a variational or an exact approach to Kalman filtering and so on.
And then you mentioned a few more biologically inspired or compatible features like error propagation and
so on. So what is a area in the paper or an idea that's relevant here?
So I think that the signal propagation and, and bottom up prediction error, like how does error propagate
like through visual systems through like neural networks? I think that there's applications here.
And is it the error that's fed forward or is it the signal that's fed forward or where does the error go
in the system? So I think these are some, some confusing things that, that maybe they, they touched on
in the beginning of the paper. So let me see if I can find exactly where there's some debate.
Okay. While you're looking, so I've, I've pulled out this right edge of the triangle. So we're going to just
leave some of the baggage at home and take out to the table, just this link between Bayesian statistics and
probability and biological systems. And then you raise this really important question about like,
how do we think about error estimation? And also some related terms there would be like precision,
ambiguity, risk, compression, and that, so that those are error estimates. And then how are error estimates
propagated and communicated? How are they propagated and communicated in language? I'm not sure. If I had to guess
how are error estimates in how are error estimates communicated in systems. And so we might be interested
in mathematical systems. So then the way that you communicate the error is just, you multiply the two
variables. You have a precision matrix, and then you have like some sort of hidden state matrix. And then
you basically just fuzz this kind of pristine matrix by some error matrix. And so if your error on something
is like zero, this is not exactly how the multiplication would work because multiplying by zero, but
if the error were zero on something, one would want their estimate to be passed through without being blurred.
If the estimate of the uncertainty were super high
in the extreme approaching total noise and uncertainty and variance estimate, then no matter where that
pristine estimator were, you'd want it to be like totally fuzzed over. And then one could imagine that in
a per variable ongoing way, you'd want to be updating these variance estimators. And that is exactly what
happens in the Kalman filter, which is this unrolling and ongoing estimate of observations, latent states,
and the variance that links them. And that's done like through matrix multiplication. But how does it
happen in biological systems is a different question.
So I think some things come into play here, like redundancy and signal compression,
and then error propagation forward and backward. And so there is this in predictive coding slash predictive
processing, because I'm still like not 100% on the difference there. But I do think this is a predictive,
it seems like it's a predictive processing thing, but the authors do say predictive coding,
there is like a bottom up construction of a model. So the authors say that, but it's not only that,
it's the author say that perception is not the result of an unbiased feed forward or bottom up processing
of sensory data, but it's instead of process of using sensory data to update predictions generated
internally by the brain. So there's the idea of a model comes in here.
Yeah, generative model, where do you see generative model in these discussions?
I mean, it's kind of threaded throughout. So I think the idea of variational inference brings in a model,
because the model constructs the estimate of the posterior, like where we're consistently,
there's a consistent effort to update the estimate of the, or to, sorry, to minimize the divergence
between the actual posterior and the estimate of the posterior. So the estimate of the posterior is like,
you know, trying to make the model match reality. So trying to make the picture of the cat match,
stretch, bend, fold into, you know, the model of the cat.
Yes. Awesome. So generative model with no complications is being put into the Bayesian statistics area.
Because if you specify a model that's generating thermometer outputs, given the temperature,
it's quite literally the generative model. And we know that there's kind of two directions. There's
like the recognition model and the generative model. That's the tail of two densities,
because a distribution can also be understood as a density. And so in the realm of statistics,
generative model is quite literally the approach that is taking parameters of a model and using it to
generate, for example, observations in this case. No need to complicate that. But then there's a few ways
that we hear different people in different papers talking about the relationship between biological
systems and generative models, as well as recognition models. But we're focused on the generative model
here. And sometimes these are even coherently or incoherently used differently in the same paper or
the same sentence, which is our favorite. And we'll eagerly await the kind of automated detection systems
that will enable us to do high throughput analysis. But here's just a few of the kind of ways that people
can talk about that. We hear sometimes that the biological organism or cell is a generative model,
has a generative model, enacts a generative model, or the more instrumentalist, we can model
that system with a generative model. And so this bottom one is kind of like saying, I'm just planning
to use Bayesian statistics to model a biological system. And perhaps we could say that this is the
least bringing assumptions to the table of what that system is doing. Because by saying we can model it
using a generative model, we can use or fit, derive a generative model for this behavioral cognitive
system, we're just remaining purely with both feet in scientific instrumentalism and empiricism.
We're making only claims about the map and not about the territory per se, which might be throwing out
the whatever with the whatever. However, these ones are when people are making claims that are about
the territory. What is the brain? Is Bayesian brain what the brain is doing? Well, it's not passing
around screenshots of Bayes' equation like we are. So what is it that it is doing? Or again, is it on the
instrumental side is just something that we can use to model the brain? So yeah.
So going back to predictive coding and also linking to what is the brain doing? And really,
this is why I wanted to stop here. I found the spot in the paper. But when we were talking about
common filtering and image processing and then error propagation in a system, they talk early in the
paper about predictive coding as a means to remove redundancy and applied it to signal processing to
reduce transmission bandwidth for video. And this, they, the authors say here,
Barlow applied this principle to signaling in neural circuits, arguing that the brain faces considerable
evolutionary pressure for information theoretic efficiency, since neurons are energetically costly
and redundant firing would be potentially wasteful and damaging to an organism's evolutionary fitness.
Because of this, we should expect the brain to utilize a highly optimized code, which is minimally
redundant. And they say predictive coding minimizes this redundancy by only transmitting errors or
residuals of sensory sensory input that cannot be explained by top-down predictions. And so they
remove redundancy at every point of the layer. So it's like when you're watching a video and,
or even like the flip book, like, so we see like, you know, the flip book that likes of a little figure
kicking a ball. The point that changes is the point that's prioritized, the point that's different in
each frame, not the point that stays consistent, because that is where the action is here, where
the motion is happening. So that that's what's prioritized here. And that totally connects to
information theory. Informative updates are the ones that update your prior to move it to a different
posterior. That's the Bayesian information concept, as opposed to, for example, the Shannon entropy,
which is like based upon symbol entropy. So they're totally compatible. And if this seems like a
technical detail, it is, but also this is the Bayesian concept of surprise and information.
But that was a great section you pulled out. So here we're, we're really highlighting as following Barlow,
applying this principle of redundancy removal, but already we can caveat how much redundancy to remove,
because a more redundancy removed system is also potentially more fragile. Like if we only have
one copy of each saved file, now our threat of losing it is very high. So redundancy is always in a
trade-off with like resilience and other system features. So this is one principle, but it's not
the only principle at play. So redundancy doesn't mean we're going to pare it down to nothing. It just
means that for an organ like the brain, which is using like 20% or however much of an organism's energy
budget changes in its efficiency by several percents can be really important. So that principle of
redundancy removals being applied. And the argument is that the evolutionary pressure is for information
theoretic efficiency. So if you don't have anything to update, you don't want to spend the energy to do
something extraneous, nor do you want to spend any more energy than you might have to on updating. And
that's again, because of the wastefulness of potentially excess signaling. And then with evolution,
there's always a twist. Like what if it is wasteful? And that's just some second level reason why. So
it's not the whole story. This is just sort of short sentences. Because of this, we should expect the
brain to utilize a highly optimized neural signaling, neural firing code, which is minimally redundant.
And then they connect it back from what the brain ought to be doing normatively at a first pass
to the formalisms that were being described with predictive coding. So in the frame differencing case,
it was like, only tell me about the pixels that are changing. And then if nothing's changing,
just send me like a little beep. And I'll just know with just one piece of information, just to keep it
exactly the same, even if it's 4k video, and it's a gigabyte per second or whatever. But we don't have
to change anything for that video. And then as pixels are changing, update me on how to change them. And so
that would be like the maximum efficiency encoding. And so you would give a full resolution of the first
frame in the movie, that's the prior, that's D. And then all one has to do is think about how to encode
how the subsequent frames change. And sometimes they introduce things like a key frame. So every second
or every minute, it's it starts with a fresh prior. And so these are the kind of computational
things that one can do when they're not bound by like the constraints of biological systems. But this is
an awesome connection. Any other thoughts on that theme? Or like, where does error propagation come
into play? Or we'll turn back to the triangle?
So I don't know, the error propagation is interesting. It'd be great to have like the input of somebody
who is more like versed in machine learning. Because I think the idea of like back propagation,
like this is an error and like sending that back to the previous like layer in the neural network
is super interesting and part of what like enhances the efficiency of neural networks like,
hey, fix this. And so I think, and I can't really find in the paper where they say that, but,
but there's like a local correction for error within each layer of processing. So in the visual system and
um, yeah, in signal processing itself, it's like each layer prioritizes just fixing their own error.
And then that contributes to the overall efficiency and accuracy of the system at large.
Yes, back propagation is mentioned 45 times in the paper with a quick search. So it's definitely an
important concept and also something the authors have worked in a lot. So good error
propagation and back propagation. And also that reminds me of when Professor Levin was here in 40.2
with the back propaganda and the imperatives for like the different parts of the neural network and
the kind of information that they want or expect or prefer, and then how they want to escape being
trained and engage in learning, but not being trained, but still updating. So this learning and
being trained both involve like updating priors potentially appropriately, but in the case of
training, there's a feeling like another entity or agents is imposing their will versus learning can
also be associated with, um, behavioral and cognitive changes, but has a different sense potentially than
being trained. Anyways, let's go back to the triangle as we're sort of not quite landing the dot one plane,
you know, the check has not arrived at our restaurant, but, um, maybe we're, we're working our way up to our
first star. Um, where do we sit on where action is? And then we have a few terms that we want to put, which is
message passing and then active inference. Oh yeah. So what is another term that we can add in
or something that we're seeing differently in a new light or where do you see message passing or active
inference?
Whew. Um, so I think, yeah,
yeah. So we have action. Are we happy with where action is sitting?
It could be anywhere.
It is. I think it's good.
I've used every feature of Google slides sufficiently. Um, I, I like action as sort of a fulcrum
in the center of the merry-go-round is action and yes, more arrows could be drawn, but we'll keep it a
little sparse, but go ahead.
So I think, um, maybe message passing sits between predictive processing and action.
And then that's exactly where I was going to put active inference was right where you just typed in
inference. Um, because I think, uh, if we're, or, yeah, it's hard to say, um, where active inference
really goes, maybe like not right where inferences, but like somehow if action and the Bayesian brain and
biological systems could form a, uh, a triad, maybe actually active inference would sit in the middle of,
of those things. Um, so I added message passing to Bayesian statistics and probability because it's
something that we can do on a Bayesian graph. It's a implementational approach, but it's also
leaning a little bit towards the biological because when people talk about like, how does a given piece
of information or signaling or stimulus in the toe end up having an effect on the other side of the
body or on the brain? Like there's some kind of, now it's being used in a technical Bayesian sense
with message passing, whereas in a more just sort of like conversational way, um, with biological message
passing, but whether it's a synapse, an immune synapse or a neural glial synapse, or it's a mechanotransduction,
or it's a hormone, broadly, we can just consider these different biological mechanisms that convey
information or updates or anything to be like past messages. So message passing is going to be a formal
technique, but it does lean towards modeling the ways in which different biological nested entities
are exchanging information. Yeah. And so why I would put it with predictive processing is because
when I think about the things that we were talking about, like how are signals compressed,
how is redundancy eliminated, how is error propagated through a system or back propagated?
So w which is why, like, I liked it there in the processing because like, you can't
legitimately process that information without like knowing how the message is going to be passed. Like if
you're only going to get every fourth letter of the message I pass, well, I'm going to encode
my message in every fourth letter, not in every single letter. And that changes, right?
Okay. Thanks. Yes. So we have message passing now as part of the philosophical concept of systems that
engage in holistically considered predictive processing, because it connects what biological systems are doing
with some idea about like information sharing without any formalism, but then message passing
via the Forney factor graphs is going to be in the Bayesian side because that's like the implementation.
So maybe message passing here, yeah, it's like on the sort of predictive coding
implementational side. Whereas we don't, we're not saying biological systems are doing Forney factor
graphs and message passing in that technical sense, but for sure we can think about it in this qualitative
way. Okay. So we have action in the center and then kind of bifurcated it to include action and inference,
AKA active inference for a few reasons. First off, action is not just blind flailing action. When we talk
about planning as inference and inference on action and inference about future latent states and observations
that aren't explicitly about action, but we know in active inference that they actually do condition on action.
So inference and action, how we think and how we act, how the entity's cognitive model is and how the entity's behavior is through time,
those two are like an inseparable duel. And that's why active inference says it all in the title. It's about action and inference and all of the ways that they are related to each other. Again, whether it's like planning as inference about future action or inference on the consequences of action, or it's inference about something that isn't explicitly action itself.
Like what is the temperature, like what is the temperature, but it requires or is conditioned upon policy selection in this framework. Not the only way to look at it, but that's how they come together in active inference.
And like, let's peep over to 4.5 where they introduce action formally.
The basic approach to including action within the predictive coding framework is to simply minimize the variational free energy with respect to action.
Free energy is not explicitly a function of action up until equation 51.
It can be made so implicitly by noticing the dependence of sensory observations on action.
So if your future sensory observations don't depend on action or don't depend on that kind of action, this is like an extraneous calculation.
Like if you have a coin flip and you're rolling a dice and they don't influence each other, then they're conditionally independent.
And so there's no need to calculate the joint distribution if you're just interested in the coin flip because it's not having a causal relationship with the rolling the die.
However, if we're going to have agency or model systems that appear to have agency, then there's some kind of dependence on future sensory observations related to action.
In the visual case, the visual input is conditioned upon the ocular motor decisions, and those are actions of a musculoskeletal system.
And then the way that it gets tucked into the equations is the change in action with respect to time is going to be related to a gradient.
So like a partial differential equation, but then it's amenable to gradient descent.
It's going to be like a partial derivative of free energy and how it changes with respect to action.
So like am I minimizing free energy by steering the wheel more to the left or by steering the wheel more to the right?
That's like dF over dA, change in free energy over change in action.
And then free energy F here is a function not just of the joint distribution of O and mu,
not just a joint distribution of the observations on the thermometer and the mean estimate of temperature in the room,
that's kind of the pure inference take.
But again, we're suggesting that sensory observations have a dependence, could be partial, could be complete on action.
And so now observations themselves are a function of action.
And then that can be unpacked a little bit more in 51, and they discuss it further, of course, in the paper and elsewhere.
But that's like how this inferential framework gets built in predictive coding,
and then action becomes introduced as something that inference can be about.
And that's what they say allows for predictive coding agents to undertake adaptive actions
without any major change to their fundamental algorithms.
It's not like there was the temperature thermometer module,
and then now there's this totally ad hoc decision-making module that's bringing in all this thing about,
well, what is the reward of different temperatures?
What is the reward of different thermometer observations?
Rather, within this same parsimonious and first principles inference framework,
we can model active inference, which is inference including action.
Let's kind of continue on this action theme, but then we'll end in a few minutes.
So under such a scheme, the prediction error becomes the difference between the current observation
and the target or set point.
That raises the question of where these set points and targets come from,
and that's where they just sort of have that road leading off into the distance,
saying, well, in the evolutionary case, it's inherited.
In the computational case, it's just simply there.
It could be just a priori speculated, or it could have been a parametric empirical base.
So that's one really interesting point,
is like, when you do introduce action,
you have to discuss not just the target or the set point and how it's generated,
but also you have to make explicit in the forward model,
as they write, the dependence of the observations upon action.
And that has to be provided or learnt,
because just that temperature thermometer model
is not going to include a forward model
of what happens when you turn on the heater or when you put on a jacket.
So that's something that has to be learnt.
And then a second interesting thing that starts to come out of their framing here
is the costs of action.
And that closes the loop really well with the discussion that you raised of Barlow
and the information efficiency argument for why the brains
ought to be doing something,
something like predictive coding, efficient signal transfer,
and hence why it's either what they ought to or are doing,
or, and how we ought to or could model it.
So that's why the costs of this are important, costs of action are important.
And then just one last piece in 4.5
was active inference in the PID control,
which is related to the generalized coordinates of motion,
and we unpacked that a lot in livestream number 26
with the Bayesian mechanics paper of DaCosta et al.
And this connects control in active inference systems
to a very commonly used engineering framework
for controlling processes, which is PID control,
which is framing action through time
as being related to these three terms,
which are described above.
So that's how they brought action into this paper,
was by spending many of the early sections
providing like the single layer predictive coding model
and connecting that to variational Bayes.
That was in like sections two.
And then in section three, and also in section two,
they explored all these different interesting generalizations,
the spatial case, the hierarchical case,
and then they also connected it to biological systems
and reviewed some evidence for predictive coding of different kinds.
And then in section four,
when they connect to several other inference algorithms
like predictive coding and the back propagation of error,
linear predictive coding and the Kalman filter,
normalization and the normalizing flows,
which we didn't talk about.
Predictive coding as biased competition,
also something we didn't talk about.
And then after all of that action gets tucked into the picture
and it's just like very clean in a very elegant way
to think about it and helps us understand
like maybe even how active inference is similar
or different to some of these other frameworks.
So in the spirit of our layer cake,
I think today like we covered,
if this paper is a sandwich,
we covered both slices of bread,
like the very beginning and the very end,
but we left out like all of the things
that kind of come in between.
The meat and potatoes.
Potatoes.
Have you had potatoes on a sandwich ever?
They do it with some French fries sometimes,
but I know what you mean.
Go to Subway.
I'm going to go to Subway and be like,
yeah,
can I get some potatoes on my,
on my sub?
Can I have a predicting coding special?
And then they go,
then they go,
what do you expect is going to be on this sandwich?
It would be cool next week to really kind of dive,
dive in more to error back,
back propagation predictions are sent,
you know,
up and errors sent down or,
or is it the other way around?
And really kind of discuss these,
these computational graphs that they start to talk about.
So I think next week would be really cool to kind of dive into what's
inside of the,
of the sandwich.
Oh,
awesome.
Okay.
So we'll definitely go into some,
some,
so what's inside the sandwich,
um,
a back propagation of error,
a biological evidence and examples.
So I think there's a ton of,
uh,
exciting stuff that we'll be able to talk about next week.
Um,
like the,
the different paradigms,
like we could cover over figure three,
the paradigms of predictive coding and,
um,
the normalizing flow,
so we definitely,
um,
um,
we,
we covered the bread today.
Uh,
yes.
Um,
um,
well,
anyone who's listening,
we really appreciate it.
Look forward to your comments on the video or joining us next week,
if that's going to work.
And blue,
blue,
this was like super interesting and very helpful.
So I think it's a great dot one.
And it's funny.
Cause like dot one,
it's,
it's the meat and potatoes of the zero one,
two sandwich.
So it's like our middle of the bottom of the bathtub phase,
the dot one,
where we're opening up all these ideas and just trying to like give a second coat of paint on a few things,
go into a few technicalities,
re-represent some knowledge.
It's like that was in a very paradoxical or delightful way about not the potatoes itself,
but rather about the beginning and the end.
Well,
to be fair,
for those of you who haven't yet read the paper,
there's like 60 equations and like 55 pages plus an appendix.
So,
uh,
no surprise that we covered the bread.
Um,
but it would be cool to tear apart a little bit of what's inside of,
um,
the,
the paper,
because I think that these layers are cool and important and the paradigms of predictive coding were super interesting to me.
And I love like the intersection between the brain and machine learning.
And I learned a lot,
um,
reading this paper,
especially like I was taking neuroscience classes.
I'm going to,
you know,
say how old I am right now,
but I was taking like neuro in college at like,
at like in 2003,
probably,
maybe 2004,
um,
with no idea learning about,
you know,
the work of Rao and Ballard and Hubel and Weasel and,
and all of these,
um,
you know,
centers around like visual experiments,
uh,
with no idea,
like how new they were,
no idea,
like how,
um,
new of an idea it was like the processing through the visual cortex.
Um,
really like,
I didn't know how cutting edge the work I was learning about was.
So it's cool to kind of have that framed for me.
Um,
and put in perspective and yeah,
all the,
the building upon that that's been done.
It's nice.
Excellent.
Thank you very much,
blue and everybody else who's participating and see you next week.
Bye.
Bye.





























Thank you.

## X0Q6JLDYWJo

Hello everyone.
Welcome to ActInfLab livestream number 43.2.
It is May 11th, 2022.
Welcome to the ActInfLab.
We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied
active inference.
You can find us at the links on this slide.
This is a recorded and archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can
improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow good video etiquette for livestreams.
If you want to learn more about what's happening at ActInfLab, greetings.
Head over to activeinference.org and you can find out more about participating on livestreams
or other modes of participation.
And today we're in 43.2 where, as always, it's up to the last minute with what we actually
do.
And welcome also to Stephen.
We're going to continue this discussion in our third part of the conversations we've been
having on this paper, Predictive Coding, A Theoretical and Experimental Review.
And we'll begin with the introductions.
And then we can move around the paper.
We brought up some things that we'd like to cover last week for today.
But also we can take any questions or areas or sections that any of the stream want to talk
more about.
We can absolutely go there.
So we'll just start with introductions and say hi and feel free to add anything you'd like.
What brought you to the paper or what's just one thing that you took away from it?
And then I'm sure we'll have some fun today.
So I'm Daniel and I'm a researcher in California and I'll pass it to Dean.
How goes it, Dean?
Oh, sorry, I was muted in Jitsi.
So it was on the live stream.
But welcome to Dean and Stephen.
And I'll also share the slides with you here in the chat.
But we're live and in the game.
So feel free to say hello and anything just to get us going with this discussion.
I'm getting a bunch of feedback from somewhere, Daniel.
It's going good.
I'll open up another window so that you can see what slides I'm working on.
But yeah, how goes it or what was interesting to you about this paper?
Do you hear me, Dean?
That's me.
Okay.
All right.








okay all right all right okay i can do you know i can hear you now yeah i could hear you i couldn't
hear you before something was weird sound fine dean i can hear you daniel but there's a long delay
and uh there was a i can hear i could hear feedback like a second audio loop going off
while you were talking okay did you have the stream open or anything i just no i just have
the picture of the of the three of us okay i'll just reload just to be sure
so it goes with live streams all right okay so is that better
we'll
roll with it then so okay or we'll see what happens so yeah stephen how goes it and what did you like
about the paper as we start
well i'm just interested in the general scope um as per normal so i'm i'm sort of going to go with
the go with the the the overall vibe of um pushing the boundaries of active so um i'm fairly i'm
fairly relaxed with this one okay hey dean work better yeah my my bad all good all good thank you
for telling me not to have both jitsi and the youtube open at the same time so yes uh that uh
these little technical things that i should have been uh more on top of there's like some reflex where
if your own audio is played back to you at a certain delay it makes it like basically implausible to
speak it's pretty interesting yeah well apologies guys that's not the start i wanted all good so how
goes it or what like brought to you to this paper or what did you find interesting and what they wrote
well i'm i'm not really totally up on on what predictive coding is i think i know what predictive
processing is and when when you uh and maria were talking in the dot zero or you were blue or talking
in the dot one um just the sort of the translation of that into operations that you can you can um
identify with a certain amount of confidence is the part that i'm really interested in i'm not really
sure what the applications are beyond the psychology realm i'm sure there are quite a few and that's
kind of why i showed up today was to sort of piggyback on what what people who obviously know a lot more
about this than i do are saying about it and where it's going and what the potentials of it are
all right well let's start with a few reminders and recalls is there any area or figure or formalism
that either of you would like to suggest that we jump to to remind ourselves of anything critical
about the paper otherwise i can bring this to some is it okay to start with the back propagation of
error yeah all right so i'll bring in this was in um section four so i'll be bringing in some but let's um
we're gonna ramp into it just as a reminder about the roadmap so the first section of the paper is
an introduction the second section of the paper describes with quite a lot of detail the core kernel
of the predictive coding architecture this is a computational architecture and it involves information
transmission that is in this predictive coding way so check out the paper the dot zero the dot one
that's where we're going into a lot of detail on predictive coding as an information architecture
and then as maria was bringing out for us predictive processing might be used to refer
perhaps more holistically to systems engaging in predictive coding and there's a bi-directionality
there to predictive processing whereas predictive coding might be something that could be done in a
bit more of a uni-directional way that was section two on predictive coding introducing the kernel
and then going into a few specific generalizations of that kernel and modifications that help make it
more computationally powerful as well as linking it closer to certain biological architectures
of tissues like in the retina and in the cortex of the mammal brain in predictive coding in the brain
three there's some exploration on different paradigms of predictive coding and these are referring to kind of
like settings where the core and elaborations can be applied and that's in the supervised and unsupervised
cases as well as thinking about spatial and temporal predictive coding algorithms and connections with
modern machine learning like with deep predictive coding then after that sort of kernel and generalization of
the predictive coding kernel and exploring some of the paradigms for where that kernel and its elaborations have been applied in section four
there's the relationships between and among algorithms and so that's where we get into this section
on predictive coding and the back propagation of error so that's where we'll go and um i'll copy in some formalisms or find out um which ones would be the best to bring in
but um here we are on slide 56 which i'll share in the chat here what is interesting to you about back propagation of error then we'll start there
well what i'm curious about is is the that bottom line of that slide this recursion is identical to that of the propagu
to the propagation of error algorithm which are not which i'd never actually
encountered before this so i was wondering i i know a bit about recursion i think we all have a
sort of a basic understanding of what's involved in in recursive um loops but i was wondering
how sort of the predictive where's the where is this relationship between predictive coding and this
other algorithm which i've heard that i've heard that that i don't know if it's an expression or label
back propagation of error but i've never really looked at at it from a from a operational standpoint or
you know how it's how it's laid out mathematically and i'm not sure if either of you have that familiarity but
i was hoping maybe you did great so how does predictive coding relate to the back propagation of error
let's um look at these sections which we didn't annotate to heavily leading up to because you know
there's like many equations in the paper many areas um even before we introduced the formalism and to
give me 15 seconds to read it qualitatively what would back propagation of error mean to you or where
is an applied setting where you think this could matter well and again this is this is me talking
out loud hanging my butt out there because i don't really know what i'm talking about but am i am i correct
in assuming that it's um anytime you find yourself in feedback and feed forward loops i know that they're
a cyclical and i know that usually implies a directional but isn't anytime you're getting sort of a a
a looping condition where you get an opportunity to sort of reset isn't that what we're isn't that the
situation that we're examining okay we're in the arena of statistical bayesian graphs so we're talking
about models here we're not necessarily talking about what an actual system is doing the computer system
nor some sort of biological system we're talking about a modeling statistical architecture and it
would be a secondary conversation about what systems are actually doing with back propagation so this
isn't just like salt water flowing from the ocean into the river okay just to sort of forestall any
preliminary connections we might want to draw but we can see when we have a bit more sense of what
back propagation of errors on this graphical setting how it could apply so they're introducing
this concept of a computational graph fancy g not free energy related just g for graph and it consists
of two kinds of elements just like all graphs or networks do which is vertices and edges the vertices
are representing intermediate computation products for example the activations at each level this
multi-level predictive processing architecture so we have like nodes within the level and then there's
edges that represent influence um here as differentiable functions so this is related to some of the
graphical bayesian approaches we've looked at previously but also it shares a lot with some
neural network representations where the edges are not just like a correlation or mutual information but
the edges are more like a differentiable function okay we're going to restrict to looking at specific
kind of graphs here which are computation graphs they're saying are directed acyclic graphs so that means
that it's directed there's an arrow such that the differentiability of the function is going from one
way to the other like we can think of that as the forward direction and then the acyclicness is just
ensuring that there's like sort of one place where we could start and we could just forward propagate
everything out to the edges and that wouldn't trap us into an infinite recursion by going forward
and we've talked about some of the differences between like cyclic and acyclic graphs with
majid when we were talking about the the dcm the and all the ambiguities of that acronym um okay
steven anything and then we'll continue
just one quick question um ontologically how how useful or problematic is the word coding now we've
moved a bit further down with active inference um and in a way is back propagation of error needed to be
that needs to be distinguished out even in a descriptive term just so that the connotations of coding don't
sort of confuse all the discourse um what are the connotations of coding well that it's basically
kind of almost like a representational kind of um script almost that's been written somewhere um it's
kind of a how you know like the coding that you get in a computer program or something um and i kind of
think that that does sort of speak to the nature in a way because it's this is the the nature of how
for the future but um back propagation of error um kind of speaks in some ways to the nature of how the code
is processed um and i may be off off topic here but i just i just kind of wonder as we're going through
this and trying to uh link it all together um how much uh that ontological term um is is also possibly
something that could be thought of in another way to make it easier to to to to to understand what's going
on okay um we are dealing here with computational architectures so i don't think we need to run away
from these questions that were brought up more in a philosophical non-computational
version into the anti-computationalist perspective like we're not fighting for what is happening in
the brain here we're using predictive coding to talk about information coding and transmission
approaches so that's one thing and um yeah i mean we don't we can't just go around flipping different
words predictive coding is what for decades has been referenced by a certain architecture here
and then there's a lot of openness with how that architecture is applied but i i i'm not 100 sure like
this is about predictive coding architectures yeah no that's cool i'm i'm just putting that out there
just seeing how that floats a little bit i think that's a good good response like what else would what
else could be in this position of coding it's about how signals are encoded and what is being transferred
between different nodes is what is being transferred the raw value or in the predictive coding architecture
we have um two directions that signals are being passed in this compute graph not in the brain
and that would be coming from um one direction the expectation that's the predictive part and then the
error residual that's the deviation from the expectation and so that is what the predictive coding architecture
is it's just about having graphical systems that are passing expectations and differences or errors
rather than passing like just the plain values themselves yeah i suppose there's also that question of um
how much is in the dynamics of what's going on and the hyper parameters when looked at
and um how much difference that makes to to this story okay so you've got you've got the the the the
predictions uh the prediction error has been passed down um but coding tends to be like the numbers are there
but in some ways the numbers can kind of evolve once the the system the dynamics of the systems or the
dynamical sort of patterns of the system start to sort of fire up so to speak you know it takes a little bit
time for the active inference model to start really purring along sometimes so that kind of coding is in a
way sort of almost more alive than traditional coding which is kind of sort of baked in okay i got you we're not even in active inference yet so i i see some back later but we're discussing predictive coding back propagation of error
and then action does get brought into the picture in section 4 5 but up until section 4 or 5 there's no action
even in the model so we're just looking at the architecture that does computation
and then understanding how action could be brought in and that's kind of the fun surprise that we uncovered
in the dot zero and dot one and in the layout of the paper was when the architecture is sufficiently general
and powerful incorporating another variable that is about action like policy selection becomes fluent and
that's why these architectures are composable with different sensory modalities with different
scopes of action with different affordances all these things because there's a level of generalizability that we
can pull back to okay so let's return to predictive coding and back propagation of error we have this
graph the vertices are representing intermediate computational project products so like a number or like a variable
because it's kind of like where you're storing the intermediate computation product and then the edge of
differentiable functions um could be you know like y equals 2x is a differentiable function anything that
has smoothness in the graph is differentiable and as the orange part says we're restricting this to
directed acyclic graphs where we're not going to get into an infinite regress just by going forward
now what happens when we're trying to tune this architecture so that it has a minimized loss function
loss function whether we're dealing with least squares error like a regular linear regression
or whether we're dealing with some other loss function the loss function is like what is trying to be
minimized so when the ball is rolling downhill we're minimizing like the loss or the energy function
but the energy function approach and wording is coming more from like a physics
side whereas the loss function is just a purely statistical claim like what is the function that we're
minimizing okay given the output vertex v out so this is like the one that we actually want um to be reducing the loss around
okay the loss function is going to be l l is a function of v out back propagation can be performed upon a computation graph
so we're going to be minimizing loss at a certain vertex by back propagating upstream a lot of what led to it being the way it is
backpropagation and so that could be done on just the last tip of the sphere or it could be done
throughout the whole system backpropagation is an extremely straightforward algorithm
which simply uses the chain rule of multivariable calculus to recursively compute the derivatives of
children nodes from the derivatives of their parents okay so formalism 28.
this fancy d is partial differential so the change of the loss function
with respect to the change in an intermediate variable i is what we're looking at we're looking at how
we're going on that bowl are we dropping on the loss function are we is the model getting better or worse
with respect to changes of intermediate computational products vertices and that overall loss function
is the sum of v the subset of p which is the parents so we're looking at vi like the node that we're
focused on node of interest or something and we're going to sum over all of its parents and then for all of
its parents we're going to compute something that's basically like the change in loss function over the
change in that parent's value b sub j and how it changes with respect to change in the child so we're
taking something that's like this graphical network with nodes and edges and differentiability and then
figuring out which way is the overall downhill based upon all of the back propagation of the gradients
by starting with this output output gradient that's v out um and if all the gradients are known so
like we're dealing with a model that we specified then the derivatives of every vertex with respect to
the loss can be recursively computed so because all the edges are differentiable the big function is also
differentiable so like 2x is differentiable x squared is differentiable x cubed and x to the 11th power are all
differentiable functions so you could also differentiate their concatenation through addition
that'd be like the derivative of 2x plus the derivative of this and also the chain rule in calculus allows us to like
nest those so if we can differentiate 2x and if we can differentiate x squared we could differentiate
2x inside of parentheses squared that's basically the chain rule in calculus
um and then that is what allows this sort of big downhill computation based upon the specification of the graph
and then the back propagation of all the relevant nodes and finding out how those need to be tuned so that
the final output node that's being optimized can be going downhill defined as going down on the loss
function less loss is better here okay yes excellent thank you because this was one big opaque mark off
blank to me when i read it i just couldn't make any sense of it but is the ability to differentiate or what
they is what they're saying here is the ability to differentiate an ability to build relationship that
parent child thing is is it is it that is it the capacity to differentiate that allows for the relationship
to be identified or is it the other way around because when when they're talking here and saying
back propagation performed upon a computation graph that propagation is extremely straightforward
and uses the chain rule of multivariate stuff when it's talking about that it's it's it's pointing back
to something that you don't necessarily have to see but you know that there is some relationship just like
there is between 2x and x squared am i getting is that is your explanation helping me move close to a
better understanding of that because i understand derivatives but i'm not sure how the derivatives fit into
this explanation great yeah i think we're um we're solenoidly exploring now we haven't even brought in
predictive in this these equations here are for 28 and 29 are about back propagation on computation graphs
so right with these papers it's really important to know like what has not been brought onto this
diction and there isn't error this is just about the nodes and edges like the intermediate computation
values of the abstractest kind and their differentiable relationships so now they're going to
show how predictive coding relates to back propagation of error so they write predictive
coding can also be straightforwardly extended to arbitrary computation graphs to do this we simply
augment the standard computation graphs with additional error units for each vertex so let's
recall what some of these graphs that we previously looked at here in figure one of the paper we have
a graph where the nodes are intermediate computational products represent differentiable relationships
and importantly some of these intermediate products have the semantics or the interpretation of being
estimates about mean mu at that level or estimates about variance and error at that level epsilon
so this is kind of like a subtype of graph like the abstract is kind it's just intermediate computational
products and then predictive coding are specific kinds of computational graphs where some of the nodes
represent mean estimates and some of them are error estimates in contrast and hopefully not to confuse
here's from 26.2 where we talked about like integrator chains so notice that all of these nodes can be
interpreted as intermediate computational products but there's no error term here so this is an example
of a computational graph that doesn't have error terms this is not a predictive coding architecture
not that it's inconsistent with or somehow disjoint from but this is not having epsilons so it's not a predictive
coding architecture whereas this is sort of a canonical multi-level predictive coding architecture
great hey jacks good to see you in the chat okay now we're going to return back to the back prop
okay so we're adding in these additional error units epsilon sub i for each level of the graph
formally the augmented graph becomes now g tilde so previously fancy g was just edges and vertices
nodes and edges and now the vertices is is being unpacked so that v can remain for the mean estimators
which are ultimately the ones that like we would like to have the most accuracy on accounting also
for variance estimators and so epsilon this big e has been pulled out it's the set of all error neurons
we then adapt the core predictive coding dynamics equations from a hierarchy of layers to arbitrary graphs
the change in v the nodes with respect to time prediction is happening through a sequence of
observations in the predictive coding architecture that's that now casting column and filter frame
differencing a lot of these other sort of real-time algorithms for mean and variance estimation that we
talked about equals the change in f free energy with respect to change in the node so now the loss function
through time is going to be related to the f that had been previously um
previously defined in in earlier equations and then that is going to be defined as basically
the error this is in formalism 30 the epsilon sub i so the the error variance at that last level minus
a sum of c so c are the children and then there's just some more terms involving basically tuning the nodes
the nodes accounting for the fact that we want to like tune the variance estimators and the compute
computation nodes that represent the mean estimates and so um
then the dynamics of the parameters on the vertices v and the edge functions theta so they kind of slightly
evolve the edge notation towards um can then be derived as a gradient descent on f where f is the sum of
prediction errors of every node in the graph so previously um they had specified how the the composability of
the multi-level predictive coding architecture is such that the levels are can be factorized from each other
which allows us to sum their free energy contributions into like a free energy total and so that is how a
multi-level model can be fit because it's finding like the free energy minimum for that whole multi-level
system which might entail one of the levels not being at its like perfect perfect lowest free energy state
and in this section they've connected the way that back propagation in 28 and 29 without any action without
any prediction is able to make a big loss function that's composed because of the tractability of the
compute graph and all of these little loss functions can be summed into a big loss function that you use to like
train a neural network for example um and then moving that into the predictive coding in free energy
minimizing space by saying well this is a special kind of compute graph that has the mean estimators mu and
the variance estimators the error terms and then we're going to do something similar where we're going to
compute like what amounts to a loss function f the sum of prediction errors of every node in the graph
based upon internal prediction errors being minimized so in the non-predictive coding um frame we're minimizing a
big loss function that's composed of smaller loss functions in the predictive coding frame we're minimizing
our divergence from expectations composed of the divergences from many smaller expectations
okay yeah go for it
so extrapolating hopefully again from this the the predictive coding then like by working with the
errors which are kind of almost uh and i'm not making a little bit of a jump here but um are kind of
implicit to the to whatever the system of uh interpretation is on the data it is quite um it's kind of
uh that's why you're going into this biological world because it's it's so bottom up in a way um because
it can start just with um whatever the errors are in the nature of the um the system that's been set up
for doing the sensing even forgetting action just the nature of how the sensing set up will start to
generate the errors at some implicit level would that be a fair assumption
so anytime there's going to be a prediction of observations so yeah we don't need action here yet
there's two options either you have a hundred percent predictive power
and your error is zero or there was some error so you're always in one of those two cases and which
one are we usually in not having the total perfect 100 accuracy down to the you know 100th decimal point
if for no reason other then that's beyond the point of of diminishing returns or we're also trying to
balance accuracy with model complexity so because we have these metrics like the aic the bic all these
metrics that find us a model that's a balance between accuracy and complexity so it's not overfitting
the cost of not overfitting of cost of having a simpler model is literally increased error because
every new parameter that you add into a model you always explain more variance the first principle
component takes the most variance of the data the second principle component takes the next most
variance of the data every principle component on a data set is going to continue to eat more and more
variance out of the data leaving less and less in the error term but it's a situational thing whether
you need to explain 80 of the data or 90 of the data or 95 of the data but there's always going to be
some difference between the prediction and the observation again unless one is in this super edge case where
it's perfectly known so yeah go for it
yeah that's that's helpful and it's also implicit there that if even if you in whatever you set that
complexity and accuracy to at this very deflated level is is is really helpful so the nature of
the model will change the nature of the errors and basically the best it gets to
by the most it can reduce will vary a little bit as you change that model um and not making too much
of an extrapolation but that that is a nice way to be able to unify a lot more complex and rarefied ideas
and you know what is really happening um you can sort of drop back to that complexity accuracy um principle
but here's some more sections from 4.1 towards the end of 4.1 on page 30 in the paper so yeah hopefully
we've been representing this at least mostly accurately and then for those who want to go
deeper that's why there's a paper and that's why there's like a continued discussion and development
on these ideas because they they drop many little crumbs of well we've held this to be zero for
simplicity and but they're right we can think of this as a predictive coding network in which all the
error is initially focused at the output of the network where the loss is and then through dynamical
minimization of prediction errors at multiple levels layers this error is slowly spread out through the
network in parallel until the optimum distribution the error at each vertex is precisely the credit that
should be assigned to causing the error in the first place that's pretty interesting it's kind of like
let the chips fall where they may with respect to error and variance attribution dean
this is this is awesome so are they also are they also is the is the way the architecture is and the way the graph
the graph is set up as kind of a mirror of what the architecture is of this layering thing
are they also there to kind of contain little fires of of mistakes and errors is that why it's effective
because it sort of contains something you know suddenly causing a chain reaction and having and having
everything and when we read magid's paper about i think it was maybe it was axel's paper about you can
you could make predictions going right off of a cliff and and the result is you no longer exist is this kind
of an architecture that helps us avoid some of those really consequential prediction consequences
that's an interesting idea i think we should engage in some slide play and try to
try to get a little bit of clarity on that and like also hopefully we'll hit on um
a lot of the ideas that we've been bringing up in a more abstract way because i know it it's helpful
for like everyone to see multiple coats of paint on this and like it it's the the epitome of abstraction
or that is the austerity of those formalisms about compute graphs so let's think about a um we won't take
it to the um the cafe level um that was even though that was i remember that being quite fun um with
the we're gonna be we're gonna be between the cafe um and uh you know something else so we'll be
intermediate because we're gonna be talking about a specific graph but we're not gonna like necessarily
for the first pass on it go all the way in okay so the node that we care about being most accurate on
is seven so like this is gonna be like our our focal node this is like the one that we want we want to
have an image classifier algorithm this is the classifier node we want to have um prediction on what
the thermometer is going to say that's what this is we want to have prediction on the temperature in the
room that's what this is we want to have inference on action and think about the upstream parents
of action then that's what this node is so seven is going to be like the node that we're interesting
uh interested in minimizing our loss function on okay
this can be carried out on multiple variables but we're going to just look at minimizing on this
okay what is the back propagation chain here well let's think about what the forward and the reverse
arrows are so first just to clarify like this is a directed acyclic graph there's no loops in the graph
and the arrows are all directed um they reflect differentiable functions causal influences amongst these
uh variables these intermediate computational products so like variable one is then there's some function
differentiable function that translates it into two two influences four and three three influences five
and six six influences seven okay we've seen this in the bayesian context where the sparsity of the
connections allow for the factorization of this graph like it allows us to sort of
hold one part um unchanging and change other parts through factorization that's a lot of the variational
inference stuff that we've talked about okay so what are the parents of seven which nodes do you think
that we should consider if we're going to back propagate so the forward model the actual like
causal chain in the model not in the world is like one you can imagine some perturbation happens to one
every node is going to be influenced that's the forward perturbation in the forward generative model
what is going to be invoked if we start at seven and do a back propagation
which nodes are not important five and four right yeah five and four will not be invoked in this optimization
scheme so if we were so we'll make these ones gray that we're going to be back propagating on
one but um and i i also hope i'm representing this accurately but um you could imagine that like
changing the dials on five or the function between three and five will not reduce the loss on seven
so it still might be an important thing in the forward model but it's not in the back propagation from
seven it's in the forward propagation from one um okay so then um this is not a predictive coding
architecture because in the predictive coding architecture some of these um that's what we saw
in like for example in figure two is what we saw in figure one so there's the means and the
variance estimators so let's bring in figure one and try to adapt it to our graph so our graph is sort of
up to formalism 29. okay now we want to think about a graph that's not just nodes and edges of the abstract
type but it's going to be nodes and edges that include these error neurons as they're calling them
here okay so here's a reminder on what that architecture looked like
jacks wrote how is the back propagation of error related to um uh holland's john holland bucket
brigade the bucket brigade in signals and boundaries it sounds explain a little bit what is the bucket
brigade or will look but it sounds like a bunch of people helping and sharing buckets or something like
that um okay so let's just say that the one that we actually want to minimize is going to be like a mu
it's going to be a mean estimator now let's just modify this graph so that this one's going to be
error i'll i'll just use the um well type the variables so this is a mean estimator
and then we're going to alternate so that this one is an error and this one is a mean
this one's a mean again
gotcha this is not the exact same architecture that they laid out and this might not be um traditional or
um classical standards but like this is getting us towards this idea that within a cortical column
so to speak we have um the forward propagation of alternating layers of means and errors
we want this loss function to be minimized by diffusing
the uncertainty across these error nodes
that is like letting the chips lie in terms of the variance attribution
and as they write precisely the credit it should be assigned to cause the error in the first place
so if like node 2 in the forward causal model was causing 90 of the variance and so this was like
like one was you know is a very tight distribution and it gets blurred a ton on the way to three
and then from three it only gets blurred a little bit on the way to seven
so like two is going to be big this is like a big error estimator
and six is small
tiny variance estimator so it'd be like if we were in classical statistics and we were going to do
um you know we were doing brain imaging on a bunch of people from two different categories
like with and without this diagnosis you could imagine that in that two level model one world
there would be like massive variance amongst people and very little differences between those two higher
groups in another world it could be the opposite there could be big difference between the two groups
but very small differences but amongst the people within a group
and so this is the parameterization and finding the parameters that are going to minimize the loss function
means that we want the variance to be partitioned appropriately
across error terms just like we would like the average the mean estimators to be accurate
the equivalent in the error world is we want the errors to be appropriate
in how they're distributed so it's like it's like if you're doing a mean estimator
on something you don't just want like the highest mean possible you want like the most accurate mean
possible and the most accurate error possible doesn't mean the lowest error possible that would be the
fallacy of well we're estimating means well then let's just make it bigger so we're estimating errors
not because we want bigger errors or want smaller errors that's the thumb on the scale estimating
errors accurately entails appropriately distributing the error terms on this graphical architecture
and then they're adding in one extra point which is basically that the dynamics of predictive coding
are purely local requiring prediction errors from the cortex the current vertex and the child that is
on the computational front a win for tractability and for the actual algorithm because you don't need
to have the whole model loaded into ram for example because you might only you know which neighborhood
of variables you're going to engage when you're doing a certain parameter update and then on the
biological side it starts also leaning towards plausibility because like they even call it an error
neuron well neurons are signaling forward let's just call that the direction that the action potential travels
down the axon but there's also retrograde signaling at the synaptic junction so it's plausible at the multiple
neuron architecture level or even at the two neuron biological system level that there is like even if there's a
direction at which signaling is assumed or perceived to be normatively happening there's also a retrograde signaling
of multiple kinds of multiple kinds we won't go into that like complexity of retrograde synaptic regulation
but that at the circuit level and at even the synapse level the idea that signaling is happening both ways
is something that is seen as a strength of the predictive coding architecture again the locality allows it to be
more computationally implementable and this sort of bi-directionality and signaling is more reminiscent
of biological signaling processes synapses conversations brain regions so on
okay let's okay yeah any thoughts on this
i think that that's pretty good explanation go for it steven just just checking so if you added all the errors are
like are the errors kind of independent of each other or would they is there like a total error across the
the chain so to speak of like uh how much error there can be or is it like kind of contained within the street
like is six relatively contained and two relatively contained
the evidence
okay dean can i take a guess steven yeah sure i'm get i'm guessing so just keep the wild a money money part of
this front of mind um i think what the i think what the graph is telling us or at least when we
we formalize it in this way is that you could always find the cumulative error but the point of the system is
to try and keep the error where it actually exists within each layer so sort of sort of partnering the error
the error at each level with with whatever the prior or the hierarchical l plus one or l minus one layer is
but me again i'm just guessing but i'm kind of making sure that i understand completely what
what daniel laid out here and that would be my guess i mean you could you can add it all up
but i think the i think the point of it is is that before it it runs away from you this architecture is
set up so that there will be some cumulative effect but it probably wouldn't be it shouldn't be there's
the word i'm looking for it shouldn't be as abrupt as if you didn't have the layers and you didn't have
the ability to differentiate and you didn't have a kind of an understanding of what what is happening
i.e back propagationally now again i'm just throwing that out there but because i don't have a reputation
around this i could be completely wrong there's a lot to say and the authors like do provide many
citations but i i believe that's right like just as appropriate mean determination we're thinking in
a gaussian world like um there's a lot to say on gaussian processes but a gaussian is a mean and an
uncertainty so it's there's going to be somewhere where the hump of that distribution is and then
there's going to be some width to it now sometimes the process is actually gaussian other times we can
use nested gaussian processes so that it's like well there's some process that's moving it and then
there's wiggle around it so we're going to see that moving as one gaussian and then the other one is like
a ripple that's like a smaller gaussian on that
and then even in cases where there's a non-gaussian distribution that's where the laplace approximation
comes into play which is the second derivative we have the jacobian and then the hessian matrix
in 26 and then we talked about how when you take the second derivative you're basically making that
bull and then lying in it so you're going to the bottom of the bowl that you created and you know
that it's going to be the sort of hump structure that's amenable to going downhill because once you
go beyond quadratic beyond the hump anything that's like a multi-hump distribution or even just x cubed
you're going to have challenges getting globally optimal from local optimization processes because
you won't know if you're in a local energy well or not and so many of these computational tools and
approaches that we're discussing like across these live streams and papers can be understood as taking
something that isn't like a bowl and making it so that it can go downhill and finding well what is the
appropriate level of how many layers have to be added to this onion or how many oven gloves do i have to put
on how many approximations should we carry out in our approximation science so that there can be something
like a parabola where we know that we're on parabola territory and that's what allows us to then minimize
a loss function because if one believed that they were on a rugged landscape then minimizing something
locally would be you'd have no way to know if that was on the right track or not um yeah steven
and could i say then would i be okay to say that it's almost like each of these areas say number six
number two in here and you could have those would be like little mini bowls or mini um at different and the
further up the chain the bigger the potential um impact of the positioning in that bowl or whatever the
the landscape is out towards whatever's been you know the mean that's been understood
okay let's look at figure one so this is a cortically inspired so inspired by the cortex and blue wrote
dean i understand the architecture the same way error correction is retained locally so let's look at this
semi cortically inspired predictive coding hierarchical system just like in the example with the two clinical
populations doing brain imaging there's one world where the patients within the group vary a lot and the groups
don't differ there's another world where the groups differ a ton and then the people within each group do not
have any variance amongst them so depending on how it's parameterized one could have a model where the
um highest level has a major influence or not
and that's the whole question it's like in a linear model is it more important like the um
mx part the slope or the b how much it's shifted well if the regime of attention is on linear modeling as
an architecture it doesn't make sense because they're both just parameters in a model now for any given
data set it's an empirical question to what extent changes in the slope or the intercept
are associated with changes in the loss function and that's linear regression here's an architecture
that gives us an approach to finding loss functions but how do we know how many layers
how do we know how many of these side connections to make
but there's a few ways to go about that one could just a priori model the structure of the model of the
graph around something else like previous work or some inspiration from a biological system
they might also be interested in this structure being a parameter of a model like and that's the whole
structure learning and meta bayesian approaches and all of that but that's pulling back another level and
so that's the the challenge of structure learning because we can get that loss function within a given
static graph but that doesn't mean that we have the best possible graph architecture
it's like if you have a hundred pieces of um data biometric data on people and you're making a
multiple linear regression to find out their risk for some condition do you just use a hundred
that might be overfitting it might be too costly computationally so how many of those variables do
you use there's a process for determining that what's at the trade-off between accuracy and complexity
where it's fitting the outcome well the loss function on the condition that you're trying to actually
predict but it's not past the point of diminishing return or using variables that are uninformative
or for example if there's two variables that are perfectly correlated with each other
um that's called multilinearity and like you wouldn't want to use those variables
so that's the challenge in the linear regression world and this is like taking it into another space
but it has more analogies than not which is why spm statistical parametric mapping that textbook is
for those who want to engage vital prerequisite because it addresses a lot of these questions on model
fitting including on dynamical systems and it puts it with six feet on the ground in classical parametric
and non-parametric statistics dean this just raises the question in my mind i haven't answered it
as to whether or not a mean is constructed or if a mean is actually sculpted or some combination of the two i
mean i'm not being a min 2 guy i'm going to assume that it's probably both like you can have the figure
but it's your understanding of of what the difference is between an edge and a and a
and a directional link which you have to kind of carve out from the overall image but that's again that's one
of these things now where if you get into this predictive coding piece i think the product looks
like a construct but an actual but in actuality there's there's got to be a huge element of this
of being able to isolate the mistakes so that they don't overwhelm and if you're isolating something if
you're removing some factor you're actually sculpting as well so maybe that's a bit of a philosophical
overlay on the sort of mathematical operational side but you know me i'm always trying to turn
it into what's the what the practical function of this yeah it's like statistics as world building
because if you just want the mean then just take the grand average if you want the mean and the variance
there's a method do you want a variance on the variance how confident are you that it's 10 plus or minus
one is it 10 plus or minus one plus or minus 0.5 or is it 10 plus or minus one plus or minus 0.01 so a
tight estimator on the error as a parameter and so we're like playing with which parameters
are seen as like the things in and of themselves the means and which ones with respect to means have
this interpretation as being error neurons or being variance descriptors now one properly fit model
which you could take into the you know 50 stacked levels 10 plus or minus one and then on that one
variance estimator we have plus or minus 0.1 and then how how sure are we about the plus or minus 0.1
0.01 okay now how sure are we about that 0.01 0.001 that would be like a well fit model where as we kept on
adding uncertainty parameters we would be making appropriate estimators now what would be like a
malfit model and i hope this is accurate 10 plus or minus 1 and you go how sure are you on that 1
plus or minus 50. it's like the variance just exploded it's like well but you're saying that the variance
could be like 0 or the variance could be 50 how much confidence should we then have in the mean estimator
and so that's what this appropriate distribution of uncertainty is now let's think about node 7
an uninformative node 7. we're predicting temperature but it's just it's unchanging
we don't have a lot of information there to fit a world model because it could just be a single
level estimate it's 10 and it's not changing but as we deal with progressively more and more
nuanced and informative things that we want to minimize loss functions on like natural language
images from natural scenes action including the unknown consequences of real-time unfolding action
those because the uncertainty becomes higher and the information content of what you're trying to
minimize your loss function on is higher it um
um not authorizes or licenses but kind of moves us into potentially having higher levels of model
complexity as simple as possible and not simpler with that principle being carried through again if
you're just trying to predict a constant number you don't need a six level predictive coding architecture
whereas if there was something that did actually have that many levels of depth
that's the kind of architecture that would do well to predict it and we talked about this with the
par and pazulo on the architectures for homeostasis and allostasis and it was like yeah to just
recognize if you're out of bounds and then come back in that's a given model but then there's a
different graph that's going to do something like intermodal or anticipatory or have memory so all of those
cognitive or computational features license or engender more complex causal models but these are being
sculpted ab initio from nothing by the statistician
and then we're in sort of brackish or gray waters when we um juxtapose the architecture of the graph
with the architecture of some natural system
okay yes steven yeah and you've got this and you've got this excitery and
inhibitory dynamic going on um and even though the arrow is going from the arrow down to the
u that there is a the the u is exciting the layer above isn't it it's exciting it's almost like
it's like one bottom up is kind of exciting higher up areas and then things that are further up also
sort of saying hey calm down calm down i can reduce some of this you're getting a bit out of hand here
you know they've only scored two goals let's relax you know that that again i also hope this is not
uh inaccurate it's almost like um there's a suppression of error like a dampening being carried forward
with the ultimate dampening being you predict it perfectly you have totally quelled all error
yet in real settings because of just simply model simplification or uncertainty in the world
error is coming in from the observables which is often what we're trying to reduce our loss function on
and that's this whole difference between reinforcement learning finding oneself in reinforcing or rewarding states
and active inference with reducing surprise about outcomes we're dampening error and carrying that forward
in the forward generative model and then also able to run it back in a tractable way because it's like
you're you're you're dampening the vibration but then the vibration is still entering in and you'd want
that vibration to be appropriately distributed according to where it should be okay dina then steven
yeah it seems to me that the way what this is what this is saying to me is that because of the way things are
organized um two two things can live simultaneously at once one is sort of that local uh mean correction and
the other is the more generalized global or the other direction in the bi direct bi-directionality parallel
of of mean correction one is kind of reinforced through external evidence while the other one
one is reinforced through localized almost almost it is distributed but it's almost like the ability
to localize and isolate if necessary so i know we've talked a lot about top down and bottom up but this
brings a lot more color in my mind to some of those conversations we've had before in terms of you know
the arrows going in opposite directions and it's not so much that they're going in opposite directions but
that you can be going two different directions quite literally what literally at once because of the way
things are set up so yeah i think this this has been really really helpful for me in terms of not only
understanding what back propaganda propagation is but actually in sort of giving me a little bit more
foundational ideas around again how do we turn this to these sort of statistical ways of representing it
into so i'm confused should i should i go into the cafe or not i mean we do not not all of us have to
go to that level of detail to really understand what the final thing was that pushed us over the door
threshold or not but it appears that it's this has been around for a while and being able to take that
if you really are kind of stuck because you really don't know what the the parents are of your current
action because we haven't got as you say we haven't got to action yet but that's the whole point there
is an architecture there that's going to allow us to have choice
thanks um this minimum of two um comes up so much so it's awesome to hear about that and then to connect
like expectation maximization and the tale of two densities epistemic and pragmatic it's like wherever
we look there's partitions into two into multiplicity and unity through plurality and then other times
even within the one road there's the movement in both directions forward and backwards in time
or the forward propagation of a generative model which could from just one if all you knew was one
you could simulate sevens if all you knew was seven and the structure of the network of course
you could back propagate the best possible mean and error estimates using back propagation of error okay
stephen this is helpful for thinking about how we perceive things as well for i was dean was saying
about making choices it can be when we get zero error or whatever seen as negligible error you want to
just allow that to carry on and stay with your imagination so i go to the bar and i a lot of things
are the same right maybe there's a happy hour sign and if that's unusual maybe i'm happy about that i note it
um but if a lot of things are exactly or very similar to how i expected then in a way my perception is probably
mostly my predictions just not being contradicted it's all oh they actually i just don't see it i just
i think i've seen it but i just don't need to see it and where there's something which is like ambiguous
like ambiguous like you were saying you need that number seven if we're going to use this diagram
starts to have to be looked at you know you start peering at things straining their eyes trying to
sort of see well what's that is it is it a dog is it a man running into the woods is it a dog is it man
running into the woods um you you you know you start to notice things so i think this is also quite
useful for that perspective of you know when when you just you don't actually need to see a lot of
stuff it's quite an efficient model right if it's if if the if the area goes below a certain level
you just move on and carry on of course that's where the challenge with autism is they think because
too many things have been looked at that are possibly negligibly relevant at the time
okay thank you so just one last one last thing down before because i know you want to
i clean this up i think then one of the analogies that i draw is with the emphasis on the word minimum
to min to doesn't mean it's always a you know a hard bifurcation and or a binary it means that
the minimum amount of things like even when you take your shoelace and wind it through all the eyes of
your shoe you've got two ends that you eventually will loop back together and and entangle in some
way to hold your shoe on so even though it's one lace i think what a lot i think what active inference
reinforces because it's active and inference is that ability to be able to
see two things both seemingly contradictory and both actually true now it can be multiple things you can have
multiple as as you can have multiple surprises some of which are make you quite happy and others where
you walked in and said well why hasn't it been happy hour at this hour when i've been at this bar on multiple other days like
you could be disappointed in that as well as being pleasantly surprised so i think
what this again i just reinforce this the the minimum
of two allows for the integration the minimum of two recognizes the differentiation and when we're
talking about statistical issues and when we're talking about errors and when we're talking about
energy um i think i think the way that they that these folks have been able to discover what so what
architecture would allow for that is what's really interesting to me now because i i wasn't even
thinking in these sort of so what's what is the what does the scaffold look like but it looks like
there's been a lot of work done in this area so so let's take it to action as we head into our last
little bit on this and of course if anyone is more author or not familiar with the formalisms just
contribute to act and flab help us annotate the papers and read these deeply because there's so much
to learn and somebody getting involved like a few days or weeks before these streams is a leverage point
if you want to help other people understand this area so i've changed the colors just all to gray
because they're all just random variables now we had the seven so we were back propagating error on
temperature prediction but also maybe this system is predicting um pressure and so then three might be
like estimating you know is the water boiling again just we're getting one one step closer to the cafe
so if if we were only trying to predict temperature we would back propagate along the seven six three two
one route if we were only predicting pressure we could back propagate along eight five three two one
the fact that there's a parent that is upstream it's like the last common ancestor of pressure and temperature
like we might be able to reduce um these errors a lot on the temperatures by having this higher order
variable is the water boiling and so when can mention like if the answer is yes then it's like it's expecting that this is like
higher on both and if it's low it's lower on both so the generative model can go from the water's boiling
what pressure and temperatures do i expect and you can add a third node it allows you to condition on a
cognitive structure go from observations of just temperature around the horn to pressure or from
pressure and temperature up to the water boiling but the influence of these observations
is like limited through this choke point it's actually a markov blanket with respect to what's on the either side of it
let's bring action into the picture action can also be understood as parametric
what angle should my elbow be at what angle should the eyes be oriented
those types of things again not whether that's what the actual neural signaling in the brain is doing
but this is how we model action it's like the the car how many miles per hour should i be going
those kinds of questions is parametric modeling of action and that's what was so fun and exciting
was the first 50 equations in this paper have scaffolded this tremendous general node computation
architecture. Multi-level, means and variances, forward and backward, up, down, left, right,
all of these interesting ways and connections, but not yet action. Not because we hadn't brought
action in as a dancing partner, but actually this was above any interpretation of the nodes as
inference or action. And then it's as easy to condition on action as it is to condition on any
other inference, because action is just a parameter for parametric active entities that are engaging in
action as inference, planning as inference, and so on. And so then one can think about what is the
compute graph, whether it's composed of just nodes and edges, or whether we think of some of those
nodes as being like variance estimators. And then, you know, this, maybe, again, the connections,
I'm not going to rewire this whole graph, but just like, is, is this a water boiling situation?
Okay. So we have a thermometer. It says that it's a hundred C it's boiling temp. We didn't,
the pressure sensor is broken, but we back propagate it. We're in a water boat. We're high confidence
on the water boiling. Then this is like another variable that's going to require like a different
sort of question that it's answering. But one can imagine that if this is a water boiling situation
and the water is not boiling, there might be an error. And so how can we reduce loss function
on the total compute graph, including observation and action? How can we reduce uncertainty about a
cognitive model, including observation and action? There's two ways to do it. And it's how they
introduce it in the very beginning of the, of the paper, which is that the minimization
of the loss function of the free energy, expected free energy, variational free energy can be achieved
in multiple ways through immediate inference about the hidden states, the world, explaining perception,
updating a global world model to make better predictions, slower parametric inference updates
that have the interpretation of learning. And when action is a variable that we have agency over,
it introduces some complexities like the need to have preference and the need to specify a time
horizon and to have uncertainty about the consequences of action, right? Wouldn't it be easy
if we were just watching the movie and our actions didn't have any influence upon the story that we saw?
It'd be a different inference. And finally, through action, to sample sensory data from the world that
conforms to the predictions, potentially providing this integrated account of adaptive behavior and control.
So it took us 50 equations at the general before we could jump into action.
But it's a deflationary approach to action. Because action is a parameter in a broader cognitive and
computational framework. Okay, Stephen?
Thanks, Daniel. Yeah, that's really helpful. Actually, going back to that, the example with water as well,
you can even bring in the higher level of affect, in the sense that one thing that's really hard with water,
compared to a lot of other things when you heat up oil and stuff is, you can have the water boil, and you've probably had it. And you can have a thermometer, theoretically, say 100, but the steam can go above 100. But it's very hard to really, it can trick you, right?
It's like, it's hard to, it's actually quite hard to get, I find it hard to get my head around steam being hotter than water, because it's kind of, just kind of how I know, you just think of it as being 100 degrees water, right?
And it's almost like, if you were to get into that situation, or after I burnt myself one time, or there's almost, maybe I just start to have a feeling of fear, if I have a sense that I'm somewhere where, what might be coming out is high temperature steam, right?
And that will override the fact that, perceptually, I haven't got a lot of ways to easily, sort of, gauge that visually, unlike, say, a ring getting red, and, you know, other things.
Okay.
Okay.
Here's what that makes me think of.
Sometimes, we have indirect cues.
That reduce our uncertainty about something that's not directly observed.
Like, the mood ring.
If everybody was wearing a mood ring, and that was an accurate predictor, you know, that would be this other alternate world.
And so, there are certain kinds of variables that are more like the magical mood ring, or like the temperature of metal within a range.
Because, I mean, it's only going to start to get glowing when it's super, super hot.
So, it doesn't help you differentiate whether it's free, like at 0C, or 50C, or 200C, probably even.
But there's some range for certain things in the world where we can use indirect sensory cues.
Affect is not quite here in this model, in this graph.
But we've talked a lot about how uncertainty can be understood as like anxiety and or negative valence.
In the world of reward maximization, less reward is bad.
In the reward, in the world of precision optimization, excess variance is bad.
Not any variance.
It's not a simple, you know, destroy the variance estimators.
It's about the appropriate applications of variance.
But excess variance, more variability than expected.
You told me it was 10 plus or minus 1.
But I just pulled 3, 50, negative 80.
That's confusing.
It's more confusing than I thought.
So, then some of these mean and error estimators in a computational model might have...
This could be a mean estimator on valence, or one could choose to write a paper where an error estimator is framed as being an anxiety parameter.
And that's always that jump between what any parameter is in a graphical model and anything about the world or attaching it to some word.
Because, oh, it's anxiety.
Well, then that makes me think of this other situation.
So, you can send someone really too easily down a road of associations when the deflationary perspective is just stating what it is.
Okay.
Okay.
Fun.
Didn't expect that we would go this way with the back prop, but Blue mentioned it last time, and it is important to bring up.
And also, it connects to modern methods for training neural network architectures.
And that's what a lot of the author's research has focused on.
So, let's just continue to explore action a little bit.
They reiterate that when we're thinking about active inference, about inference involving action.
So, cybernetics, control theory, any area where some parameters represent observations or latent states,
and other parameters represent active things.
The first way that you can minimize prediction error is to update predictions to match sensory data corresponding to perception.
And the second is to take action.
And earlier, from the introduction of the paper, they kind of did a little minimum of two even on this,
which is to split out perception as rapid inference and learning as a slower updating.
But we've talked about the continuity between perception and learning.
Like, if you're seeing the ball move across the screen, is that perceiving the movement of the ball?
Or is it learning a parameter representing the location of the ball?
So, whether we call something more perceptual or more learning-oriented,
and even abstract learning can be seen as a perception in interior spaces,
which has been the focus of a lot of work by Fields and Levin with competency in navigating these abstract spaces.
But perception sometimes brings us a little bit, not too close,
but a little bit just linguistically to, like, our experience of perception,
when the phenomenology and the qualia is not what is in play here.
It's about parameter updating in the model.
Yeah, Dean?
Do you think, Daniel, it's about sample size, but sample size is related to maybe the time commitment?
Like, if I'm inferring something, that's a very, very short volume of sample versus prediction,
which is slightly or relatively larger volume of time commitment to move to that volume,
and then modeling, for example, which takes the perception and tries to build something material from that?
Is that, do you think that that counts here?
Because at least that's what I was, that's what I was telling participants we had to take under consideration,
was sort of the time factor of the sample sampling process.
Sure.
I think if we allow inference to be just broad and including everything, then that's what it is.
But just in its connotation, inference using a model often has the, it's sort of like the machine is ready,
the model is ready, and we're going to do inference.
The new patient comes in with a biometric data, we're going to do inference using this model,
and we're going to predict their risk of the diagnosis.
Okay.
That's the fast perceptual timeframe.
Learning is, unless it's one-shot learning, is taking in multiple patients and updating the parameters of those models.
Now, those two stages can be alternated like in expectation maximization or in the tale of two densities,
but that doesn't get away from the fact that there's sort of this like one data point mode,
like plug and chug inference perception mode, variational free energy.
And then there's a little bit more of like the updating the model parameters.
It's like, are you tuning the engine or are you using the engine loosely in the non-action space?
In this first way to minimize prediction error.
Given the ongoing stream of patients coming to your office, there's two ways to reduce your surprise.
Those are the perceptual and learning continuum, which does come down to the specifics about like the sample size,
like you're in the architecture of learning and perception.
You could also reduce surprise by choosing what to sample and or modifying the world.
So that's how they bring action in.
And it's very interesting to think how many pages of prose have gone into wondering where action fits in.
And there's still many more pages to go in terms of where does Formalism 51 take us?
Have we cached the check of pragmatism, inactivism, extended cognition, and so on?
Like what is 51 with respect to all the qualitative insights of action with all of its depth?
What is 51?
A short answer might be that it's like the y equals mx plus b with respect to all the ways that linear models are used in the world.
This is just like a sort of skeleton archetype that is just the trace or a hint
for someone who then wants to analyze specific actions over specific timeframes for specific cognitive computational models.
But that's where 51 takes us.
Stephen?
Yeah.
One other piece that could be kind of interesting to throw in there,
as well as matching my sensory data with my predictions,
I could reimagine my reality to explain my beliefs,
which in a way would mean I create my own sensory data by proxy, if that makes sense,
which is a kind of an interesting slight add-on to that.
But it's the same idea because you're not strictly taking actions.
You're taking actions to match sensory data, but not necessarily the real world sensory data.
It could be the kind of, you know, the imagined world data.
I am seeing an angel coming over the top of that hill now, you know?
Yeah, one could engage in mental reverie,
and it would either be reducing their surprise in the long run,
or that system would fail to persist in an entropic world.
And people have made all kinds of arguments, like in evolutionary psychology,
about the basis of why we perceive or believe different things along similar arguments.
So, definitely makes sense.
Let's just look a little bit in 452, which we didn't previously get to.
But, of course, anyone with any other questions in the live chat, welcome to do so.
So, here, in 26, livestream 26, we talked about PID control,
we talked about integrator chains, and about generalized coordinates of motion.
So, just a reminder on what 26 looked like.
We had, from left to right, is time.
These are different time points.
And then, at each time point, there's this vector, it's like a stack,
reflecting the observables.
And then, also, things that are latent states,
they're not observables of the world, real or imagined.
They're the derivatives of how the observables are changing.
And those can be the position, it's like the zeroth derivative,
but then also velocity, jerk, so on.
Acceleration, so on.
So, we looked at that in 26,
but it wasn't connected formally to predictive processing, predictive coding.
PID control is restated in 53,
using the formalisms, using the notation that is going to prepare for the merge with predictive coding.
Like, A for action, epsilon for errors.
And so, the error term is included in all of the three levels.
To obtain equivalence to predictive coding,
we utilize a linear identity generative model with three levels of dynamical orders.
So, the joint distribution of all the O's, all the observables, and all the X's through time
is going to be this factorized expression.
So, the distribution of the observation conditioned on the latent state,
and then that is conditionally independent of,
so it allows it to be factorized and calculated out separately.
Here's like the first derivatives, second derivatives,
with O double prime and X double prime.
Here is X conditioned upon its own derivative,
the derivative of X conditioned on its derivative,
and the sort of root node is the double derivative of X.
Because this one like stands alone, that's like where our model kind of taps out.
That's equivalent to node one here.
Like, there's no variance term leading to one.
There could be, but then that would be a different model.
So, these equations in 54 restate this dynamical model
and introduce omega, which I believe would be an error term, this W,
and also the mu's, which is the desired set point for X at that order.
So, at the first, second, or third derivative,
what is desired there,
then that allows,
so this is like a graph where instead of these being different things,
like what if, what if,
kind of mixing architectures a little bit,
because the generalized coordinates doesn't have errors interleaving.
It just has the state, the first derivative, the second derivative, and so on,
rather than interleaving error terms.
But we can imagine another similar graph,
where as you backpropagate,
it's like higher and higher derivatives.
That's the integrator chain.
But, I guess, in 55, 56, and 57, and 58,
they do something similar.
To what we had done with the generic computation graph,
or to the predictive coding architecture,
with the interleaving of the means and the errors,
this is just that,
on the graph architecture,
where the nodes have this interpretation of being derivatives
derivatives of one another.
What is there to say?
That's an interesting introduction.
Just bringing back flashbacks to trying to,
trying to get my head around 500 level economics courses,
and when you'd have somebody walk in and start pounding stuff up on a whiteboard,
on, you know, second, third, and fourth derivatives,
and just feeling like you'd been tossed into a blender,
and you had no way of avoiding the blades.
So, I'm glad that there's people that can do this stuff,
but I would have to dedicate way more time to trying to parse what the heck they're talking about,
because it's a wall to me.
It's really hard.
Yeah, I feel you.
Maybe for the last few minutes, we can kind of pull back to,
okay, as we swoop out of this bathtub,
out of the dot two,
into the great beyond,
like,
what have we taken with us?
Why was this lengthy journey through predictive coding,
and the 60 formalisms,
and what Maria brought with the thousands of years of philosophy,
and history on perception?
So, where are we,
and how are we different now,
and going forward,
than we were before we started 43?
I'll say what it's done for me.
First of all,
bringing up the historical piece of it was really,
really helpful,
because this didn't just sort of come up yesterday,
or in the last couple of years.
It's been around for a while.
I think,
for me,
predictive,
I wouldn't have seen predictive coding
as a sort of formalized way
of retracing a navigational route,
but that's what it screamed to me,
and after the point one,
I listened to you,
hearing you and Blue talk about it,
when the idea,
when the question around backpropagation came up,
that's when I sort of did a deeper dive on that,
and again,
it wasn't,
I wasn't picking up on how to do that path retracement.
The formalisms weren't really addressing
what I thought was being said.
I think what today helped me with is
sort of examining,
if you don't have traces laid down
that are material that you can see,
if you weren't actively part of the building of the path,
that there's still some graphical,
statistical ways
of organizing information
to give you a better sense of,
okay,
so you didn't lay the breadcrumbs down,
but we can still give you a better sense
of where you came from
as a result of being able to use
this kind of formalism.
I mean,
honestly,
Daniel,
53,
53?
Come on.
I mean,
if you're one of the people
that was able to write those 53 out
and actually present it
in paper form,
I mean,
props to you.
You get,
you get many thank yous,
but
holy mackerel.
Other than the fact that,
that there is some evidence now
that you can retrace,
even though you don't have necessarily
those markers,
or
you didn't self-correct,
you didn't,
you weren't aware of how you self-corrected,
whereas
the predictive coding
at least gives you an opportunity
to maybe trace that,
retrace that back,
even though you didn't spend
a lot of time trying to
organize the evidence.
The other thing that it does
is I think it reinforces the idea
that the way
that these live streams are structured,
which is just introduce the paper,
just give the paper its,
its opening,
like open up the box
in the point two,
you can actually go
into one particular area
of the unknown,
which for me
was the back propagation,
which you and Stephen
helped me with.
In the point two,
we are still doing the part
where
the point two
could always,
even if you didn't have a record
of the point one
and the dot zero,
this paper told me
that you would still have
some way of knowing
where that
elusive dot zero
exists relative
to this live stream today.
And again,
I could be overfitting,
but I don't think I am.
Otherwise,
why would you
spring out 53 operations?
A lot of interesting stuff there.
So,
so,
um,
because this is level,
this is the exact,
I mean,
what we're doing in the live stream
and the levels
that they're talking about,
they,
they affect each other
in exactly the same way.
It's diagrammed out here
as a stack.
And we tend to think of ours
because it's over multiple,
multiple days
as sort of a horizontal,
horizontal continuation,
but they're essentially
one and the same.
Oh,
that's,
that's very interesting.
Um,
so it's almost like,
well,
there's,
the dot zero
and the one of the two,
they can go both ways.
So in,
in the temporal sense,
the dot zero
is a precursor
temporally
to the dot one,
the dot two.
So for the,
for the,
um,
for the,
uh,
YouTube channel subscriber,
this is their observation.
Oh,
43.0.
Oh,
43.1 has been live streamed.
43.2
has been live streamed.
But,
um,
what is like
the derivative
that sort of sets
the initial conditions
for dot two?
It's the dot one.
Yeah.
And then what,
of course,
sets the,
for the dot one,
dot zero.
And so there's almost
this sense in which
as we,
um,

that high school teacher,
that book that you read
all the way back,
even beyond one's own
corporal birth
as like
parameters that
dampen
or specify,
if one doesn't want to think
about dampening,
the position,
acceleration,
and velocity,
and,
and so on.
Um,
they're like higher
and higher chains.
And that means
that they have like,
they're further and further away
from where the rubber
hits the road
for the YouTube subscriber
on the outside.
But they're absolutely
like part of the process
by which something
comes to be.
And then the dot two,
you said,
can exist without the dot one.
And then,
and then the first time
it made me think of like
the negative numbers,
like even before
the zero,
what is,
what is there before zero?
What happens before zero?
Is there a negative number?
There's no number
that's positive
that's smaller,
but what is,
is it,
is it a letter?
Is it a shape?
Like,
is it its own big bang?
It's like,
and there's a sense
that it is,
and there's a sense
that it isn't.
Um,
that's kind of.
Part of it's the pre-reading.
The other thing
that I think
maybe doesn't
sort of register
explicitly
is that
the error propagation
in the way
that we do
the live streams
remains.
There are some corrections
and there are some,
there is a sort of
a gradual movement
towards a bit
of minimization.
But every time
we,
we come together
and try to figure out,
we don't come
from a position
of,
we figured it out.
We come from
a position of,
well,
what will we,
what will we do
with this today?
So,
we retain
that error propagation.
And I think
that that's a,
I mean,
it's,
that's not convention.
Convention is,
why would we spend
time on something
where we leave
a bunch of error
baked in?
But I think,
when,
when,
again,
if we're,
if we're going
to differentiate,
if we're going
to truly integrate,
if we're going
to be able
to say that
you can have
a point two
existing
without a point
one or a point zero,
of course you can.
But how superficial
is that relative
to the method
because of the
architecture,
because of the way
it's structured,
how much deeper
you can actually go
and how many times
you can bump
into a dead end,
immediately find out
how quickly
you're going,
or,
you know,
going off the rails,
so to speak,
because I can't remember
which one of the live
streams was that
you had the train
moving down the track.
But you can find out
whether or not
something is a dead end
quickly and recorrect.
That's what that
retracing part today,
I think,
is one of the,
well,
it's the takeaway
from this set
of live streams
that,
and I wouldn't have
anticipated,
based on the title
of the paper,
that that retracement
piece was going
to be the thing
that was going
to sort of percolate
and make the most
sense in terms
of why the structure
is,
yes,
there's an optimizing
piece to it,
but there's also
a piece that,
that allows for mistakes
without,
without,
you know,
I mean,
sometimes it's
very consequential,
but lots of times
it's,
the consequences
is what's minimized,
not the error.
And I think
that's what the
architecture affords.
You want to talk
about affordances.
So when you said
the consequences
minimized
and not the error,
that makes me think
about,
like,
high reliability
organizations.
Of course,
one way to minimize
the consequences
of error
would be to
never have errors.
Zero tolerance
for anything.
But that is
challenged
in a world,
again,
that's always
throwing us
challenges.
So,
in,
in,
in that setting,
it's almost like
the observation
here,
the one that we
actually want to
reduce our loss
function on
is not the
so-called proxy
of error occurring,
but we could reduce
our loss function
on function,
on the thing
working,
and just say
we are minimizing
the consequences
of all this
upstream stuff,
stuff that might
have the interpretation
of error,
and things that
might not.
They're just nodes
in this graph.
And then,
what is going
to dampen
surprise
about the
consequences?
And so,
like,
if you say,
you know,
anything that you
say to me right
now,
I'm going to
accept it
and believe it.
And then,
it's like,
in a,
in a trust space
that opens up
there to be,
like,
a communication
that goes deep
if it's being
honestly said.
And that's because,
like,
what's being minimized,
like,
don't tell me
something surprising.
it's like,
my consequence,
you can have
precision on
my consequence,
that's one direction
of the conversation,
and that is what
allows that
second direction
to really
come into play
with the
transmission
of
variability.
Rather than,
well,
how am I going
to reduce my
uncertainty about
action relative
to what the
person is going
to tell me?
I won't talk
to them.
Or I'll tell
them what to
tell me.
Or,
um,
I'll leave them
in the dark
about how I'm
going to act.
And then they'll
have uncertainty
about how I'll
act if they say
something even
trivial.
And so I think
this, like,
really,
it,
it spans many
levels and ways
here because
there's nested
levels and deep
chains.
but I,
I agree.
I think on
the more
topical,
um,
if such a
thing could
exist,
some of the
takeaways that
I had.
Also,
um,
really,
um,
appreciated
Maria providing
a lot of the
philosophical
context and
then that one
part where
we're like,
wasn't this a
meme like
thousands of
years ago and
in many
cultures in
the world?
What is it
that still
makes the
predictive mind
and surfing
uncertainty and
being you,
what makes
these novel
and surprising
and even
somehow
countercultural?
What,
what is happening
there?
What chain is
leading to that
where the idea
that we're
generators with
agency rather
than passive
receivers,
why is that
such a hill
to climb and
die on?
that's one
piece I
absolutely
take away.
Then it
was awesome
with blue,
um,
to work on
this in the
dot one
where we
had like on
the bottom
left,
the qualitative
philosophical
insights and,
and connecting
to technical
and formal
insights on
the bottom
right and
biological
systems.
And it's
sort of like,
where are we
engaging deeply
with one
of these
vertices?
Where are we
engaging deeply
with an edge?
Where are we
trying to grab
two vertices
and the edge
or go
around the
horn?
Or where are
we trying to
really go for
the triple play?
Um,
every baseball
home base
inference and
action,
um,
in the bottom
of the ninth
of the dot
two,
it's,
it's a
full count
and it's
a power
play.
That,
and then also
I think the
last piece
that,
the kind of
takeaway is
just when
the computational
and cognitive
framework are
defined generally
enough,
like at the
level of a
graphical
network,
which opens
up message
passing,
variational
inference,
back propagation
of error,
predictive
processing
architectures,
hybrids of
all of these
approaches,
then action
is deflated
or it's
inflated,
maybe,
or whatever
it is that
we even
say,
it becomes
composable
and tractable
to discuss
open-ended
combinations
of perception,
cognition,
and action
and impact,
which is the
home base
in the niche.
And so,
if even
that model
has to be
structurally
revised,
like we
end up
having another
way of
framing
entity
and the
niche
interaction,
it may
fit within
this framework
or it may
necessitate
revision of
the framework,
but within
the entity
niche
interaction
space
and the
nested
systems
and the
counterfactual
cognitive
systems,
there's
almost like
less and
less to
action
than it
seems.
It doesn't
remove the
challenge of
action.
It reduces
something else
that I'm not
quite sure
about what it
is.
Like,
it doesn't
make it
easy,
but
something is
being removed
as we're
learning and
working through
this,
moving forward
to think
differently.
It doesn't
make the
climb,
well,
it makes the
climb
different,
to think
differently,
but it
doesn't
move,
doesn't
mean that
fewer
foot pounds
of force
have to
be applied.
But there
is something
different about
the navigation
around action
and inference
via active
inference
that I
think will
continue to
develop for a
long time.
okay,
Dean and
also Stephen,
thanks a lot.
Wasn't sure
there for a
second at the
beginning.
I got to
thank you
again,
Daniel,
because
obviously you
did understand
have a
reasonable
understanding
far more
than mine
in terms of
what that
backpropagation
implication was
in terms of
marrying it to
the predictive
coding.
So I didn't
mean to put
you into the
tutor's seat
today,
but I
appreciate
the fact
that you
were able
to sort
of pull
it apart
and then
put it
back together
in a way
that made
a lot more
sense than
just reading
it off the
page.
So thank
you,
sir.
Thank you,
Dean.
See you
later.
All right.
Take care.
Bye.
Bye.


























Thank you.