## bNB-7nQDdwM

SPEAKER_03:
hello and welcome everyone to actin flab this is actin flab live stream number palindromic 22.0 it's may 13th 2021 and this should be a really fun discussion just to introduce ourselves at the beginning i'm daniel i'm a postdoctoral researcher in california and i am joined by dean go ahead oh


SPEAKER_02:
I'm Dean.

I'm from Calgary.

I'm retired.

And I'm kind of new to this active difference thing, but I'm trying to keep up.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm Blue Knight.

I'm an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

So thanks to both of you so much for helping a lot on the slides and giving insights.

And we're all going to be sort of working through this together because there's a lot of big ideas that are going to come up in this discussion.

And then we're going to have the next two weeks with Alex Kiefer, the author, and other participants on the .1 and .2 streams.

So we're just going to be surfacing probably more questions than answers today.

Welcome to ActifLab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find more information at these links.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good livestream etiquette.

We're preparing and setting the context for the discussions on May 18th and May 25th, 2021, where we'll be discussing the paper, Psychophysical Identity and Free Energy, which is a paper in 2020 by Alex Kiefer.

And just like the other .zeros, this is a context and a background and just an initial stab.

It's not a review paper.

It's not authoritative.

This is us unpacking and exploring as we read the paper.

in preparation for the group discussions and similar to some of the other dot zeros we're going to start out with in the author's own words what are the aims and claims as well as abstract and roadmap and then we're going to ask some big questions we're going to talk about why it matters which is hopefully a discussion that includes everyone

And then we're going to meander through some quotes from the paper, some formalisms, some related reading, just a few ideas that we actually brought in during our learning process to help connect the dots.

Because the paper is really like the tip of an iceberg, and there's a long history of information and thermodynamics, and that's even before you get to everything with the free energy principle.

So we hope that this will be a educational experience, whether you're familiar with active inference and just learning about thermo or vice versa, or not familiar with either.

Any overarching thoughts that either of you would like to bring up before we jump in?


SPEAKER_01:
Nope.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

So I'll read the first aim of the paper and then either of you would be welcome to give a thought.

The target thesis of the paper is the claim that biological systems whose internal states come to encode statistical models as a result of spontaneous self-organization in response to environmental pressures, learn and make use of these models by minimizing their physical free energies.

The identity thesis, which is that yellow highlighted section, does not specify precisely which approach to variational inference is thereby implemented or the minimum value the variational free energy must take.

It may be, for example, that biological systems run an algorithm closer to contrastive divergence than simulated annealing.

So, a lot of terms, maybe first time hearing it or not, but what's something that draws either of you or made you curious to read about the paper?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, for me, it was a contrastive piece.

It was the idea that in order for this, any kind of a modeling effort to work, you can't start out by knowing.

You have to kind of have a bit of a fuzzy idea before there's anything that's edgy.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

And the second, Blue?

Yeah, so the second piece of the aims and claims here, and very timely, what is exciting about an identity thesis in 2020, and we also hope in 2021 and probably beyond, is not so much its opposition to Cartesian dualism,

because many people are that way today.

But what does make it exciting?

Well, one, the fact the connection between mind and body is drawn at the level of physics undercutting even neuroscience as a reduction base.

So strength for some, weakness for others probably.

Two, that the reasons for which and the precise way in which identity is realized can be discerned at least in broad strokes on the basis of current science.

And three, that the theory is accordingly expressed in quantitative terms.

So this is not your run-of-the-mill anti-Cartesian dualism.

This is that 2020 flavor, and it has more science now.


SPEAKER_00:
So this for me was really awesome.

I mean, I am always looking for the expansion of the mind-brain duality to incorporate the body, because I think that it's been overlooked for quite a long time.

And it's nice to see that incorporation in this thesis.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

We'll definitely be able to return to that.

All right.

So let's turn to the abstract.

It's three sentences long.

Would either of you like to read it?

I can.


SPEAKER_02:
An approach to implementing variational Bayesian inference in biological systems is considered under which the thermodynamic free energy of a system directly encodes its variational free energy.

In the case of the brain, this assumption, I like that, places constraints on the neuronal encoding of generative

and recognition densities, in particular requiring a stochastic population code.

And some people may know what that means, but I'm sure we'll parse that in a minute.

And the resulting relationship between thermodynamic and variation of free energies is prefigured in mind-brain identity, theses, in philosophy, and in the Gestalt hypothesis,


SPEAKER_03:
psychophysical isomorphism and i didn't know anything about gestalt before i read this paper yep this paper it's like relating the relations because the little kernel down there at the root is mind brain identity theses and we'll return to this but that's the relationship between mind and brain between the physical and the mental

and then how is that as a kernel the mind-brain identity thesis related to on one hand qualitative areas like the gestalt theorizing which we'll talk about and then on the other hand more quantitative areas like the formalisms related to information dynamics and thermodynamics

let's go to the roadmap.

So the roadmap, it's nice because first off, there's only a few stops on the roadmap, but there's a lot of freeway between each stop.

On the right are the sections that were in the paper, and on the left is how Alex wrote out in a narrative way, the roadmap.

So we kind of have the turn by turn on the right side, and then we have a little bit of the expert giving you a guidebook on the left.

And it starts with an introduction and goes straight to formal equivalences between what?

Well, between free energy and a lot of other things.

A transparent code, a little bit of an oxymoron there.

I thought codes were supposed to be oblique.

But what is a transparent code?

And eventually, how does it lead to this free energy identity thesis being proposed in 3.2 and then discussed more in Section 4?

Then there's a conclusion.

So it's a pretty dense paper.

And what did anyone think about just the roadmap or just getting from A to Z?


SPEAKER_02:
Can I speak to that for a sec?

Please.

Yeah, so...

The first reading of this, when I saw transparent code, I wondered about that as well, a lot, because I didn't even see it as oxymoronic.

I just wanted to know how that was going to get unpacked.

And the other thing I've found really interesting on first reading, and both of those sections three and four changed by the time I'd read through the paper a third time.

But then the whole idea of isomorphism to identity

I came around to the idea that I think he was talking a little bit about the ability to be an identifier as one of those measures of sort of quantitative measure of what an identity could look like.

He doesn't really get into, he still throws possible in there quite often in the paper, which I think is really a good thing to do because he doesn't try to

Doesn't try to bring it down to absolutes, which I think is smart, given, as you said, the density of the stuff he's trying to look at.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Blue, anything?

Otherwise, we'll go to the big questions.


SPEAKER_00:
Other than it was a really pretty rocky road to get from A to Z. And it, you know, I just kind of had no idea really where this was going.

So it was nice to see it evolve as it unfolded.


SPEAKER_03:
I just always keep in mind the paper's finite.

I will get to the end if I just crunch line by line and somebody who knows way more than me on this topic thought way more than me on the paper.

So let's just trust the author, not in every single claim, but at least in the structure and go from there.

Well, why does it matter?

Why are we spending our regime of attention reading this paper clearly multiple times each and digesting it and turning it around and having discussions on a chat forum?

What is bringing us to the table from very different backgrounds and hopefully you as well to think about and be curious about this paper?

um the three things we wrote down here and then either of you feel free to unpack one or any why does it matter well continuing existence depends on efficient energy use it's important to understand what life is as well as how we model it and it's interesting to think about information identity and physics what brought any of you to the table


SPEAKER_00:
Well, so just to comment on the distinction between life and how we model it.

I mean, I think this is very relevant to the discussions that we've been having on realism and instrumentalism and really a fundamental way to clarify that distinction, I think, which was nice.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

And the big questions of the paper, which are sort of a little bit drawing from quotes from Alex, other times us linking the questions together.

One is how might models of psychology action and perception such as Gestalt, but basically just psychological theories that might have no math involved at the first pass.

How could those math free ideas be connected to formal equations

potentially those related to certain kinds of statistical inference.

So how are we going to connect psychology to equations?

Big question.

Two, after realizing some of these resonances between certain types of statistical inference and information and thermodynamics, as well as potentially mind and the brain,

is there any way to bring that all together?

You know, we have apples and oranges, but maybe we can make a still life that has apples and oranges and they're each in their own place and it kind of makes sense.

And then the third point here is the biggest question perhaps, which is where does identity come from or what is identity?

How would we measure that or characterize it or determine it?

And I think one hint perhaps from Dean was to start with identity formation, what it is not.

So then there was a quote there about comparing with neuronal networks and computers.

Any other thoughts here before we jump into keywords?


SPEAKER_00:
So this quote, the difference between living systems and computers, I think it would have been nice to see that up front.

I kind of had no idea where the paper was going and that it was going to come to this really solid kernel of meaning.

Right.

And so it would have been nice to have some hint of that, like foreshadowing, maybe like an introduction or the abstract.

But I was like, had no idea where this was going and actually pleasantly surprised, like wrapping a gift wrapped in, you know, 10 different boxes at the end.


SPEAKER_03:
It went better than expected, you know, in active inference.

What could we want other than that?

But it does say that it provides a criterion for distinguishing minds from relatively crude simulations.

Like, Blue's alive and was just speaking, but if it was just the voice being played from a speaker, is that going to be counted as alive because it's making noise as well?

Well, if not, we want something richer than just making noise.

What is that going to be?

How are we gonna get there?

We're gonna start with some of the keywords.

And just like there was only three sentences in the abstract and in the final paragraph, there was only three given keywords.

And so rather than do a keyword driven intro and then walk through the paper, we're gonna kind of do a little bit of both.

We're gonna give some background information and some frame setting on the paper.

And then we're going to walk through the paper and where we need to introduce a formalism

will just kind of unpack it there and share resources.

Okay.

So earlier we were talking about how it's kind of relating different relationships.

And this slide, a little bit abstractly, a little bit provocatively, a little bit ambiguously, is relating those relationships.

So at the top... Yeah, Dee, what... Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
Because of the twist.

And I think when I saw it, I mean, I didn't anticipate ants, which is cool too.

But the fact that there's...

there's a twist in it i actually think is is what we're talking about it's i i think i think that will i think that will again surface as we go deeper into today's conversation but actually i was like whoa

Very cool.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

So what we were trying to get at here is to link the topics and then see how those topic linkages are linked.

So the mind and the brain are these two nodes on top.

And the question is, how are the mind and the brain related?

And you can check out the mind-brain identity thesis to learn more about what a few previous perspectives have been.

But one can imagine there's all kinds of takes.

They're the same thing.

They're totally different.

They're a little bit related.

So that's how the mind and the brain are linked.

And then on the bottom, we have these two nodes.

One of them is actual thermophysics.

So candles actually burning, balls actually rolling to the bottom of a hill.

And then on the right side, we have human models resembling patterns that we see in thermophysics.

And the question of the linkage here is, how are, just like how are the mind and the brain related, how are actual thermodynamics, so instead of skin in the game, ATP in the game, actual thermo, related to maybe some equations in other domains that make us think about information dynamics?

So those are the level one linkages, first between mind and brain, and second between actual thermo and models that are akin to thermo.

then this next slide is a little bit of a multi-play but it's saying maybe by juxtaposing these relationships also with a nod to gestalt and illusions with the arrow illusion maybe by us as the observer juxtaposing these relationships we gain new insight and maybe fep which is sort of the little ants crawling all around the sides

Maybe the FEP is that permeable membrane or it's the framework that's strong enough for us to build within and subspecify, but it's also permeable in that it allows us to be open to new ideas coming in.

And the psychophysical identity thesis is kind of smack dab in the middle.

It's relating these relationships.

So if there were four things that get brought together, I think it would be these four, mind and brain, and then actual thermo and models of thermo.

And the way to link them is to first make the pairs and connect the pairs and then see how those linkages are contrasting or similar.


SPEAKER_02:
Danny, would you say that part of this too, though, is the fact that they are parallel and apart?

I mean, we build a relationship.

We've already sort of confirmed that.

But is it a connection?

And I'm not saying that in a questioning way.

I think it's a legitimate question.

I'm not sure that the way that we quantify that confirms it or not.

But maybe I'm

grasping at something that isn't there.

I agree that this relationship exists, but I'm not sure if it's a connection, but that's just me wondering.


SPEAKER_00:
Perhaps it's reflective of the instrumentalism versus realism debate, right?

Like, so thermophysics is a model and the human system is like an alive system with some kind of concrete existential purpose, right?

So we assume.


SPEAKER_03:
yeah it's almost like real on the left side and then more like an instrument on the right side because the brain does have thermodynamic constraints it generates heat it takes in glucose it's doing metabolism if you cool it down it stops so that's like a candle and then

what is the mind?

Especially if the mind is kind of higher order and reflexively making a model of itself in an interesting way.

But if the brain, like a physical energy consuming object, is like a candle, that's this left side, people might draw a link between those two, draw an edge between the brain and actual thermo.

And we're going to get to that in just a few slides.

And then the question is, well, what's the relationship then between these thermo-inspired models on the bottom right and the mind?

is it that the brain is actually minimizing free energy or is it that we can model it as minimizing free energy what is happening here let's go to the psychophysical isomorphism i'll play this video and um blue what made you interested in this video


SPEAKER_00:
So I saw the term psychophysical isomorphism in the abstract, and I was like, what is that?

It's the Gestalt hypothesis of psychophysical isomorphism, and I was like, those are really big words.

I just don't have the background.

So I wanted to look up the concept, and it comes from the expression that

The properties of the mind and the consciousness are a direct consequence of the electrochemical interactions within the physical brain.

And so this is the phi phenomenon.

The video, did it work?

It's not playing on my end.

So this phi phenomenon is an example of where the patterning of a stimulus and the activity in the brain is similar.

And that's why it makes this like illusion of motion.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

It's almost like we're connecting the dots, but here it's shown with negative space.

That's an entry point into thinking about Gestalt more broadly, or is there anything else you want to add on this slide?

That's it.

what is gestalt well people live their life teaching it so we're not going to cover it in one slide but we can cover some of the ways in which it was used in the paper as well as just a few little tidbits which kind of on our active inference foragers path were cool so first just as a design principle on the slide you visually and this is a culturally uh

scaffolded process separate, for example, if you're not colorblind, the red shape out from the black text.

And so it's almost like there's this organization that arises when we're viewing material.

And that turns out to be patterns that we can study, like reification on the left side here.

we do see quote a triangle like a white triangle in a even though it's the negative space of these other pac-man type shapes and so gestalt is this big area of theory so check out the word itself terms like figure and ground and all these related fields and what are we getting at that's bigger than all of these examples what does reification of shapes

and multi-stability like illusions have to do with this notion of invariance.

Like the idea that by looking at different angles of a shape, we can recognize that an object is invariant, even though computers often have trouble with that.

So it's almost like if you're working towards grasping it or you're seeing that there's something bigger behind these examples, that's kind of gestalt.

It's hinting at the whole.

And so it's very related to holism and relational thinking.

but we can dig one more level into Gestalt and just look at how Alex used it.

And in the paper, it says, this work, the paper that we're reading and other work by Carl Fristen and collaborators confirms a systematic link between variational free energy

even if it's your first time hearing it it's all good variational free energy and thermodynamic potential energy interestingly this view is presaged not only by the identity theorists in philosophy but also quite precisely by the gestalt psychologists who suppose that the perceptual phenomena as subjectively experienced had structures isomorphic same shape to their underlying physiological correlates

and does that mean when you're looking at a triangle that there's another triangle that's the same exact thing in your head well not the same exact thing but maybe something that's structurally isomorphic or the same shape and so to unpack that and to also evaluate the author's claim is it really true that this area of science that we think is super awesome and advanced in 2021 is it really true that it was pre-saged so we can go to these citations like this 1935 citation

and just copying out the contents and doing a little color coding, look at the titles of the sections.

Chapter two has to do with behavior and sets up the problem, but chapter three through seven, it's about the environmental field, the field of affordances.

This is what we've been talking about with a lot of our different discussions.

And then action, memory, learning, and at the end, a little bit of a closing note on even society and personality and probably what it means to be a person and an individual.

So we are seeing a lot of these terms, which should really,

bring us to slow down and think about how we can tie different knowledge traditions and perspectives together in the way that alex has done and hopefully in a way that we can also do when we come together to discuss any thoughts on gestalt okay now we're gonna switch gears from the ecological field and psychology to thinking a little bit more quantitatively about statistical inference and metabolism

Alex wrote that the argument at hand is meant to support a slightly less abstract isomorphism or identity directly between variational and thermodynamic free energy descriptions.

This argument is consistent with a detailed treatment of metabolic efficiency of variational inference given in 45, which is a Sengupta et al.

paper with Carl Fristen in 2013.

So for those who are interested in active inference, check out where active inference was in 2013 and think about how what has happened since then changes our understanding.

But just to pull one figure from this paper, which is thinking about energy use in nervous systems, it's showing how the sensory environment, whatever's out there,

is going to get encoded, this is where that transparent code is going to come into play, into a format that allows control.

Gain control of the sensory input as well as action control.

And it has to be done in a way that's thermodynamically viable.

So you'll often hear things like the brain processes this much information or it uses that much energy as if it were just like some sort of desktop computer.

But it's pretty clear from just a first pass understanding that it's not just doing what my video card is doing.

Vision isn't just the RAM going back to the video card and back and forth with a processor.

So how is it that brains and cells and all kinds of biological systems are able to act effectively when it's pretty clear that they're not doing it like our heat producing computers are doing it?

So this is sort of where we're looking at.

How do biological organisms do good inference on the very complicated sensory environment and represent all of these wild stimuli in a way that allows for effective control of the inputs and do that without overheating or requiring just a ton of energy?

Let's go to free energy.

Want to start here, Blue, or I can start?

Yep.


SPEAKER_00:
Free energy in the context of variational Bayesian inference is a functional of a probability distribution or density Q used to approximate the, in practice, typically intractable joint posterior distribution P of H V of data V together with the unobserved causes of those data H under a statistical model whose parameters may also be unknown.


SPEAKER_03:
Sorry, go ahead.

Just that Q is the one that we can control, and Q is our guy.

Then the one that we can't get at is the actual distribution, P, of two different things.

the data which is what we definitely have so that's good but then the unobserved causes of the data h and sometimes h is hypotheses like i hypothesize that it's raining and so what are the data that you get well maybe it's visual or maybe it's tactile data but you're going to be able to control your estimate of whether it's raining q

And then what you're trying to get at is that total distribution P, part of which you can get at with H and V. So we're going to be trying to talk about a way to bring what we can control, our internal generative model, and align that distribution through optimization to really complicated distributions in the world that might have many more degrees of freedom or a lot more variability than we could possibly handle.

And another nice quote on the bottom in yellow is, free energy captures the discrepancy between the organism's generative model of the world and the current environmental conditions.

So that's kind of cool, and we've seen that come into play in the context of the predictive processing or the hierarchical predictive processing framework, which is shown here from Ramsted et al, answering Schrodinger's question.

It's a figure that's showing how there's sort of a bottom-up, which is sometimes associated with sensory input, and a top-down, sometimes associated with priors about the world.

These two interacting streams

And they're in a multi-level way.

So each level is only getting past up or down one level.

And what's going up are these sensory inputs and unaccounted for errors.

And what's coming down is expectations.

So if the bottom up is exactly what you expect, it's almost like the system is resting.

So in other words, if the model is perfect, given the visual data coming up,

everything is very chill and things are not chill to the extent that the bottom-up information is surprising so what is getting passed up and under the free energy principle maybe it's free energy but what is free energy

Another way to look at this question about the relationship between the observations in the world, which are called data in many cases, and the generative model of the world is with the paper that we discussed in ACT-INF number six, Tale of Two Densities.

Variables and parameters, they're used often loosely because when you're dealing with programs, everything's a variable, everything's a parameter.

So it can be a little bit confusing to which kind is which, but the data parameters are the observables.

And the recognition model in Bayesian statistics

is the model that recognizes the data and forms hyper parameters about the data for example um the hyper parameter might be like the location of an object and the data might be the actual retinal cells giving raw input and so the recognition model is going from that retinal input to a hyper parameter of where is the object located and then that can be used

in an invertible way with a generative model that goes from, okay, given where it is in the estimated location, what kind of data would be generated from that?

So this is a Bayesian model fitting approach that's related to expectation maximization, where you take what you have as far as data and you update what you think about the generative process of the data, and then you crank it the other way and you ask, given what we know about the world, what kind of data might it generate?

And Tale of Two Densities contrasted that sort of Bayesian approach with a lot of the theory of the inactive researchers who are interested in this relationship between agents in the world and seeing that incoming data as analogous to perception and then the outgoing generative model as generative model of action.

So that's what we discussed in Tale of Two Densities.

Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I wasn't there for that, but I'm just going to ask the two of you.

I really like the diagram, but one of the things I was curious about is I've had lots of conversations with people who have taken an activist stance or an activist perspective on things.

I'm wondering from your guys' perspective, is this ability to ask and then what happens, how is it fundamentally different on either side of that diagram?

Fundamentally different.


SPEAKER_03:
So you're asking the ability to ask and then what happens?

So the ability to ask a counterfactual.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

How is it different between the statistical basis and the here I am in reality basis?

Cause I've asked this question and every time I ask it of people on either side of that, of that diagram, they kind of go on.

I, I'm not really sure.


SPEAKER_03:
Do you have any thoughts blue?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I, you know, I think that this paper kind of really tries to get at it, actually, like getting at the what's different, you know, in maybe not this inactivist sense.

But yeah, I really don't have the background.

But I think, you know, a lot of times there are

layers that seem like they should overlap, but maybe don't have a direct correlate, right?

And I think that that's what's happening here.

And I think that that's what Alex tries to address in his paper in like a thermodynamic, free energy, statistical thermodynamic kind of way, right?


SPEAKER_03:
Fair.

I'll give another thought.

So, and then what happens in the context of Bayesian statistics, it's like a question about counterfactuals.

So if you're asking, and then what happened differently with the data?

Well, from the point of view of the hyperparameters, either the data would be better fitting or not.

If you ask, and then what happens to the hyperparameter?

Well, it might generate a different kind of data.

What would happen if the sun were in a different location?

Well, the shadow would be different.

So as opposed to that sort of cut and dry sense of counterfactual, either on the data or the generative side, in the inactive frame, perhaps, and then what, is more of an invitation to play.

So just at a very first pass, the inactivist perspective

gives more of a affordance for negotiating that counterfactual as um play rather than just coercing it into a statistical crank it's like well what happens if we jam this gear it's like well then the wheel is going to stop turning next question but in activism is a little bit more playful with that blue


SPEAKER_00:
So I didn't see this in terms of counterfactual.

I was looking at it in terms of a predictive standpoint, right?

And then what happens is in my mind, a prediction.

And so making a statistical prediction versus making like a prediction on the side of the organism or from like an inactive standpoint to me, like, I don't know.

I mean, I still think like it just, you predict and then either you're right or you're wrong.

And then you update your model accordingly.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Dean.

So because I've sort of come at this from the wayfaring and the wayfinding perspective,

of how do I orient myself to this stuff.

I've wondered, I don't even have the confidence to sort of put this out there and stand by it, but I've wondered if part of it is the statistical gives us a bit of an allocentric, a bit of a detached, kind of back to what both of you have said, and Daniel, you know, there is a personal piece, an egocentric part on the inaction side that doesn't necessarily exist on the allocentric side.

But that doesn't make one or the other more or less real.

But I think it's whether you can look down on something and see it in that kind of a relationship, because we're talking about relationship or relationships, or whether you're seeing it from the egocentric, oh, that snowball is now going to hit me, duck, right?

So I don't know if that's the explanation that Kiefer was going for here, but...

I think it's part of the conversation if we're going to quantify this.


SPEAKER_00:
So perhaps the difference here really is, and then what happens in my model, and then what happens to me, right?


SPEAKER_03:
Very nice.

Very nice.

It has to do with agency.

And there's an eye in that inactive side.

There's what happens to me and what happens to my model, or how would I see it differently versus given this chessboard, how would it just play out, which is a little bit more like the impersonal Bayesian model.

So pretty cool.

And the reason why we showed this slide was first off to highlight that even when we're talking about the hard, the soft is there and maybe even vice versa.

And also because this approximating distribution that the free energy is being discussed in the context of is the recognition model.

So that's why we're showing this mapping.

Okay.

What is variational inference?

well it's something that i'm sure we all had to do a little bit of a dig to find out about and early in my digging last week i came across a really helpful pdf and i started with this quote from what alex wrote and then just started searching and the quote that alex wrote was that variational methods formalize statistical inference and learning in terms of the maximization of a lower bound on model evidence

called the negative variational free energy.

He describes them as state of the art approaches and also notes that the variational methods have a long history in unsupervised learning.

So cool, it sounds state of the art, but there's a long history and maybe it's a tractable way to get at some hard problems.

Well, what is it?

And this PDF started pretty early on, said, if you haven't seen Jensen's inequality, spend 15 minutes to learn about it.

But again, this person has thought about how to teach variational inference.

Maybe it's worthwhile thinking about Jensen's inequality.

And one way of phrasing Jensen's inequality is a generalization of the statement that the secant line of a convex function, so kind of like a cord on a circle, like a cut through a circle,

lies above the graph of the function so it sounds like it might be a little bit obvious graphically and indeed there is a proof without words so that's just flipping to this next slide so yes it's kind of like if there's a bowl any slice that you take through the bowl it's gonna be able to have something roll underneath the slice that's really important

And pulling a few quotes back from the variational inference by Blay PDF, what is written is that we can't minimize the KL divergence exactly.

Maybe we'll talk more about KL later, but we can't minimize the divergence between KL

the data we're getting in in the generative model.

We want to minimize our divergence.

So just we'll think about it at that level for now.

It's hard to minimize that directly, but we can minimize a function that is equal to it up to a constant.

This is the evidence lower bound or the elbow.

So it's almost like, I can't tell you where the bottom of that bowl is, but if I can take a cut through the bowl,

then I know that it has to be lower than that.

But if I cut as low as I can to the bottom of the bowl, maybe I'm gonna be just infinitesimally cutting above the bottom.

So if I have a really easy way to figure out how that cut gets minimized, then maybe we'll do all right.

Maybe we don't need to find out the true single bottom because we'll just make cuts that are lower and lower and we'll go from there.

And it turns out that Jensen's inequality really comes into play.

And also part of the trick is that there's a choice of the investigator for which functions to use.

And it turns out that some functions, it's easy to calculate them one way, but really hard to go the other way.

And there's times where you want that, like when you're doing cryptography, but there's other times where you want functions that are very, very easy to go back and forth, like as easy to go from the input to the output

it maps uniquely and quickly back and so it turns out this loop thinking kind of primes the pump but it turns out if you choose mathematical functions where it's really easy to go from input to output and back and you combine it with this idea that you can take a slice through a curve

and find a tractable way to estimate basically the lower bound on the evidence, it's gonna be possible to set up some optimization problems so that we can solve them straightforwardly.

And so in other words, highlighted here, minimizing the KL divergence

is the same as maximizing the ELBO.

So maximizing the evidence lower bound means like we're pushing up the bottom bar.

So we're getting more and more evidence, we're getting better optimization as we minimize the divergence between the data that we're getting and our generative model, but we picked a generative model that we can play really flexibly with.

Any thoughts or we'll continue on?


SPEAKER_00:
Just that it goes back to solving the problem once you know the answer.

The process of solving the problem once you know the answer becomes very constrained and simple.

Nice.


SPEAKER_02:
And I just described this as then if then, which is exactly the same thing.

Then you have something that you already are aware of, the if, the unknown space below that line, and then you resurface to a new place.

And below that line on that next slide is what I would describe as learning's unholy triad, the triangle under there, but I'll let you talk about that.


SPEAKER_03:
No, it's really interesting because outside of the chord, outside of that line, you have no guarantees.

And in fact, often you increase the precision of your guarantee within the frame at the cost of losing the generality beyond.

It doesn't make any generalizations.

So the metaphor that, I don't know, somebody with more math, please correct or help us make this richer, but it's kind of like variational inference is doing inference on rails.

So the train operator can have a really complicated generative model of the world.

Like what time should I be home for dinner?

And what's my favorite color?

It could be wild sensory input.

So you can have a really rich system, but the operator can tell from the local speed of the train

that the train is going in the right direction and maybe even how fast it's going in the right direction given the structure of the problem go to the desired location now there's other times where you don't want to go as fast as possible but just taking it at a first pass going from a to b we want to structure the problem so that we're on rails we know that all we have to do no matter how much data we have in our generative model we want to have like a forward and break

Variational inference helps us structure the problem so it's more like being a train on a track with a destination in mind, which is this minimization of the divergence, which we will get to, as opposed to this hill characterizing and just mapping all the hills.

That's like a map maker, but the train conductor is not map making.

They have exactly their tools at hand, and then they're just going as fast as they can in the right direction.

And this was just a technical slide from the paper.

Any remarks on this, Blue?

Otherwise, I think we could, yeah, okay.

So this is for those who wanna see the technical details, read the paper, but this is equation 2.1, and it relates some of these terms that we're talking at, but we're just exploring today.

This was another useful blog post and it plays into the fact that the KL divergence is asymmetric.

So the divergence between Q and P is not necessarily the same as P to Q. And so it's almost like there's two different ways that we might optimize.

It's kind of like finding a local maxima versus a more global maxima.

but q is a constrained type of distribution so for example here we might be picking q to be a gaussian so we know that q is going to be a bell curve and we're only going to be trying to maximize one thing about q which is its mean and its variance as well in the easy case what um the author of this blog post writes as easy is just like find me the highest point in p

and then place q right on top of the highest point in p so that gets you to a local max it finds a local the global maxima and it just lays down your uh average there

But it turns out that there's a hard direction as well, which is actually given the total distribution of P, I want the best overall fitting Q. And the author writes, well, why is this hard to compute?

Well, for most interesting models, we can't compute a complex model

example the real world or really complicated graphs or very complicated bayesian posteriors because remember a lot of this variational inference rested on the fact that we were choosing distributions that were easily reversible however when we're optimizing functions where there isn't a really easy reversible way it's harder to do inference and um

They also write down here on the bottom, the optimization problem is convex, so curved, hashtag Jensen's inequality, when Q is an exponential family, i.e.

for any P, looking at this bottom graph, the optimization problem is easy.

So in other words, if we pick Q to be the right kind of distribution, then it'll be smooth sailing no matter what P looks like.

But if we want Q to be the same type of distribution as P, and we don't know what kind of distribution P is, we're kind of setting up the problem to fail.

However, if we say, hey, whatever kind of problem P is, whatever is generating P, we're going to make Q part of the exponential family, then it becomes easy.

And so you can think of maximum likelihood estimation as a method which minimizes the KL divergence based upon sampling P. But in this case, P is the true data distribution rather than a model of the generating function, Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it was interesting because when I first looked at that, I wondered, is this a good way of quantifying the difference between the guy in the train who's looking at the world through deontological eyes and another train conductor who's looking at it through utilitarian eyes?

Because that actually exists in those graphs.

It's kind of interesting.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm thinking of who those different kinds of people would be or what they might be.


SPEAKER_02:
Which one is, if I'm going to run over somebody on the tracks, do I run over five people who I don't know or do I run over one person who I do versus I can't do anything that I wouldn't have something be done the equivalent to me.

But anyway, I just think it was interesting that the philosophical qualification ended up being

visible in the representation of those graphs there.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

And here is how Alex framed it.

which is that f the free energy is useful as an optimization target so just a little reminder why are we going into all these details about statistics and about the kl divergence and the variational inference well because we're talking about variational free energy and doing optimization on variational free energy so that's why we had to pull back to asking what variational

means and then when we think about where the energy comes in it will return so alex writes again that f is useful as an optimization target for several reasons that have been widely discussed and maybe those reasons are obvious to some or some people think that it's uh not enough of a good reason for f to be used but there are reasons to choose f as a function that you want to minimize

2.2 gets at that and it even uses the Q and the P. So if we look at 2.2 relative to 2.1, in 2.1, see how P is on top and then Q is on bottom.

And then here, Q is on top and P is on bottom and there's this plus F.

you want to unpack the equations please do so and help teach to us but just note that things are flipping and it's being mirrored by what we saw here where on the top one the easy one cues on top right and then on the hard one cues on the bottom so also using that phv notation and then we

um what does that mean so let's just say that free energy is the thing that we're going to be optimizing on and variational free energy has a certain structure that's related to variational inference that means that maybe if we're trying to minimize variational free energy that's going to be like the right optimization path

Okay, so we're going to be doing variational free energy minimization to do model fitting.

Where does real energy come into play?

Where does thermodynamics come into play?

And it's right here.

As is often remarked in discussions of variational inference, so e.g.

in the statistics literature,

f free energy has almost precisely the form of a negative helmholtz free energy from statistical mechanics in fact that's why we call it free energy because it has a really similar form and that free energy term or the energy term let's just call it f of t um it's uh has two parts to it

The first term on the right is the expectation.

So that's E is for expectation here of the energy stored in the system at a given temperature due to internal states.

So really complicated molecules with a lot of order like DNA, they have a lot of internal energy locked up in their structure.

And then the right term Ts is the temperature times the entropy.

So that's what the term looks like for energy

and that's how you can look at whether an equation is going to be like endothermic or exothermic.

Like if it creates a lot of disorder in the environment, it can locally order some stuff, but you know, you can't make or lose energy.

And so to get to this more chemical phrasing of F from variational inference, Alex writes, we rewrite equation 2.1 using an energy term.

And so we get this equation 2.3

which is analogous to this more statistical physics equation where we have basically VFE consists of the energy of the internal configuration minus the temperature times the entropy.

part of the question is gonna be, okay, cool, it looks similar.

Might those things be isomorphic?

Might they be the same?

That's the thesis.

That's the question.

Is it actually that way?

Or is it just that we can think of it similarly?

And so this is where we got to 26, bringing back the train, two, two.

Could we take well-structured optimization problems,

and connect them by resonance in the structure of the equations to the ways that downhill trains navigate or burning candles.

Or if you put a ball into a bowl, it goes to the bottom every time, and it only goes to the bottom.

So could optimization, variational optimization, not just be well-structured, not just have the gas and the brake so that we know that we're going in the right direction,

But could we be thermodynamically pulled

in the right direction that would be like the candle where the candle always burns if you think where its higher state is with a candle and then the lower energy state is it's burnt and dissipated it always happens given the activation energy and if there were an isomorphism between the structuring of the statistical problem and the actual thermodynamics in the world that would be pretty interesting

So analogies are always partial.

I know Dean's probably going to have a ton to say about analogies here, but this is what is written by Alex.

If the connection between statistical mechanics and statistical modeling by the brain were merely one of analogy, it would be surprising to find that all the terms in the Helmholtz free energy play useful and interlocking representational roles.

This coincidence between physical and representational descriptions is to be expected, however, if free energy simply measures how much useful representational work can be done by the internal elements of a system where work has physical meaning.

In the remainder of section two, I consider how the physical interpretation of each term in the Helmholtz free energy can be related to a corresponding facet of the optimization process.

it's like we have a dna molecule and there's the energy that's stored in the configuration of the bonds that's the internal energy and then there's the temperature dependent term which has to do with the dna snaking around and moving around in the environment

So now when we compare that to statistical models, it's almost like the internal energy is the complexity, not of the DNA molecule, but the complexity of the model.

And then that wiggle room is related to potentially the accuracy or the variability of the model.

But we'll see.

Anything to add here on the candle?


SPEAKER_02:
Just that the focus is on the function, I think.

The representation as function.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep, that's really interesting.

So I hope Alex can clarify on a lot of these math points and also on the representational work side.

So here's another piece that came up during preparing for this.

gibbs free energy is g and the difference between the reactants and the products of a chemical reaction is often referred to as delta g and when the delta g is significantly low like it's a downhill

Then if you can get over the activation energy with just thermal energy or with an enzyme lowering the barrier or whatever, it will flow downhill.

So if the delta G is negative, the reaction proceeds as surely as water flows downhill or in hill, should I say, because up and down are not real.

And so here's three different cases that are being shown.

So here is the downhill case where the reactants have a higher G than the products.

the reaction proceeds, but not all the way.

Sometimes it's functionally, it proceeds to completion, but actually all reactions have this K value where it's somewhere in between because at some point you'll have like 99% of the product and then the backwards reaction is 50-50.

So just like if you have a test that's 99% accurate, but the disease is really rare,

you might do the Bayesian statistics and find that actually contingent on a positive test

it's actually not likely that the person has it because there's so many people who don't have it who get false positives.

That's the Bayesian case.

So in the chemical case, it's kind of like, even if the reaction is favored 20 to one, well, once it's 95% done, then for every one of those that goes forward, 20 come back.

So it re-equilibrates at 95 to five if the overall difference is 20 to one.

And then on the right side, on the top, if the products have a higher Delta G, they have more internal energy, then you need to add energy to make it happen.

And then on the bottom left is the special case where the reactants and the products have the same Gibbs energy.

So for example, like two isomers of a molecule.

And in that case, it's like a coin flip.

It's as energetic for the reactants and the products.

And so it ends up just jostling back and forth and getting completely mixed.

So those are the little bit of the thermal intuitions that people might have heard related to kinetics and thermodynamics of chemical reactions.

But let's talk about inference and models.

What does it look like to have a model that's going downhill on an energy landscape or two models that are as likely as each other?

So it's kind of like a coin flip between them.

So that's just kind of, again, getting at this potential, certainly helpful, but potentially even physically real isomorphism between model inference and thermodynamics.

Cool.

Lou, what could you tell us on this slide?


SPEAKER_00:
So I think this is stuff that Alex put in here talking about the role of internal energy.

And so these two equations, the Helmholtz free energy you talked about already first.

So where U is the internal energy, the top equation is A equals U delta S. And so U is the internal energy combining the kinetic and potential energy total in the system.

And then...

The T is the temperature and then the S is entropy.

And he writes, an intuitive explanation of the minus TS term is that insofar as the properties of the particles in the system are uncertain, the kinetic energy constitutes irregular motion.

So the impact on the free energy of entropy, a measure of the irregularity, is scaled by temperature, roughly average molecular kinetic energy.

I thought that was a neat explanation.

And then the Boltzmann distribution is this bottom probability and it's the probability of a state at a given temperature in relation to the energy in a system.

And he says here, low energies are associated with good or desired configurations of the system, which are often interpretable as assigning high probability to what they represent.

And the analogy to physics is closer that the energy can be directly related to the probability of the internal state of the network occurring.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

so how exactly are these different flavors of thermodynamics and math related alex teach us and and help us understand where other researchers can contribute how about on 30 blue what was interesting to you about this


SPEAKER_00:
I threw these in because these are both different kind of neural network setups.

And so I'll start with the bottom one.

The Boltzmann machine isn't really practical or used a lot to solve problems because it really takes a lot of energy.

As you can see, the connections in the network, there's a lot.

It's like a fully connected network.

But they use this restricted Boltzmann machine to kind of solve problems instead.

It's a neural network architecture.

And it's simpler than the Helmholtz machine, which is above it.

It's just divided into the visible units in green, which is like you can see the data going in, and then the hidden layers, which are the blue nodes in the network.

And it's, anyway, it just uses Gibbs sampling to recognize and generate inputs.

not like what goes on in the Helmholtz.

In the Helmholtz model, which is the top one, there's this recognition layer and a generative layer.

And so the hidden layers are behind it.

So when you see the visible layer,

This is the input in the recognition model.

And then in the generative model, this is the output.

And so I think that it's really kind of cool that there's this recognition layer and the generative layer because it just relates so closely to active inference and how that's...

all done and uh there can be multiple layers so you can have like a deeper um you know structure than this and also these helmholtz machines are i think alex talks about in the paper he doesn't show it um or maybe say it explicit explicitly but the helmholtz machines literally are doing sleep wake sleep wake and so how you train train the model is that like the the generative tr or the

Generative traces the recognition by definition, and so it's constantly chasing each other, versus a Boltzmann machine that's just all kind of happening at once.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, that's really interesting.

Also, these names like Boltzmann and Gibbs,

it's almost like there's equations that are named after them in thermodynamics, like Gibbs free energy, but also this is an inference machine.

The Boltzmann machine is an inference machine.

And I just looked it up.

Some may find this interesting, some may not, but this is the Wikipedia page for Gibbs sampling.

What is Gibbs sampling?

Gibbs sampling is a Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm for obtaining a sequence of observations which are approximated from a specific multivariate probability distribution when direct sampling is difficult.

So that comes into play in Blue and I's area of genomics or in phylogenomics where we don't have the generative model, but we have a ton of data.

And part of the way that we fit Bayesian models in phylogenomics is by using these sampling approaches.

And so it's kind of like sampling, but that stochastic way that we're sampling, where like you kind of go in the direction of informative samples, but also you want to sample broadly from a distribution that you don't know the real underlying truth, but you just have a ton of data.

That is just very interesting to see how it comes back here.

So thermo and info have been presaged for a long time.

That's what Alex does an awesome job of bringing back some of the literature from.

Okay, what is temperature?

So there's temperature in the physical world, which is related to the speed of molecules

and just before we quote alex on the left just a reminder that even at a given temperature that the speed distribution of different molecules is really different because they have different masses so what's conserved at a given temperature like zero degrees celsius or something is actually an energy value per molecule and lighter molecules are moving faster than larger molecules

And what Alex writes is that the meaning of temperature within statistical modeling, so that's what it means in physics, statistical physics, but in statistical modeling is illustrated in the example of simulated annealing, where increasing the temperature increases the variance of the distribution over configurations of the system.

And lowering it collapses the distribution to a small range of states near the ground state.

So like when you have DNA, the lowest energy state is when the two strands are annealed all the way together and just resting.

And then when you crank up the temperature in that reaction, there's more and more wiggling of the double helix.

And then for any given stretch of DNA, there's a temperature where there's so much wiggling that they separate.

And so then you cool it down and they reanneal.

So that's kind of how PCR works.

But it also has a statistical interpretation.

As you turn it up, everything is wiggling around more.

And then as you cool it down, things converge to small ranges of states near their ground state.

and controlling the variance of a distribution is useful in many applications.

I'm sure we can all think of many times where there's a need for looseness or tightness or flexibility to tune a given model from loose to tight.

But what does that make you think about?


SPEAKER_00:
So I just want to talk about temperature.

There's temperature in this thermodynamic sense that controls so much about the energy of the particles and all these things.

And I just read a really interesting model.

And so I would have added the reference.

I just looked it up really quick.

So it's a paper called Dynamics of Collective Action to Conserve a Large Common Pole Resource.

It's a paper that just came out in

scientific reports by Anderson et al.

But in this paper, they use this, it's this five metric and they use it to like talk about the temperature, but it's not really like a temperature, but it's just like the influence of all of the external surroundings on the behavior of the agents.

So I think about in the terms of active inference, like what, like the political arena, the news, you know, like all of these things have influence on our perception and our action.

And so can we have a temperature in terms of having this in an active inference sense?

And they did kind of a really nice job baking that into that agent-based model.

It was nice.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Also thinking about action, it reminds me of a golf swing or chopping a knife.

The low temperature action is the variance in the action is very low.

And so you might see that reflected by a groove that's very entrenched.

but then the high variance, the higher temperature action is kind of all over the place.

And so we can imagine that, especially when we're learning, we don't know where the right place to put the average is.

So you don't wanna have a tight distribution too early.

You wanna start with a very high temperature and a broad distribution,

and then you want to hone in maybe like there's a few ways that you might a few successful endpoints you might get to but ironically if you start there too tightly then you'll fail so that's kind of interesting to think about how about organisms that have to minimize their free energy to stay alive

Well, Alex writes that free energy minimizing has been used to explain how organisms manage to keep themselves away from thermodynamic equilibrium, the ultimate equilibrium of dissipation with respect to the external environment.

In other words, you have to maintain that non-equilibrium steady state because if you descend into total equilibrium, it's equivalent to death.

And so using a candle analogy, you know, the flame is out, out, out flame.

there's a point where the system is no longer lit.

The flame is out.

And then it's not just that, it's like a zero to one with life and death, even though we're not going to the human case or anything like that, just taking it thermodynamically with a candle.

And then it's just like volume.

You can just get more and more and more dissipation of energy from a candle to a flame to just a complete inferno, more and more dissipation of energy.

And then there's some value where you're not dissipating energy as a system, you're dead.

Well, let's map that on two organisms.

So there's some point where the organism dies.

Not saying there's a moment where it happens or a clean break, but there is a difference between something that is no longer actively maintaining a non-equilibrium steady state versus something that isn't.

And here is like a dog that's sick, but it's alive.

And this is like a more vital and healthy organism.

dog and so the question would be do species really minimize their free energy or do they just oh oh wait that's a little bit more of a generalization as long as the organism is maintaining it's not equilibrium steady state it's fair to say that it is acting as if it's minimizing its free energy

then the question is maybe for other levels of organization like a species do higher levels of organization actually minimize free energy in their own right or are they just more like a collection of agents that are seeking to stay alive and then the group stays alive as long as you have individuals that are staying alive thermodynamically um so

I think that's partly where the mapping is going with this whole energy and information and life and death.

But again, Alex, that'd be awesome spot.

You know, what is life?

What is death?

These would be great things for you to address any thoughts or we'll continue.

All right.

So in the free energy principle and metaphysics section, um,

We pulled out a few quotes related to where all of these predictive coding and free energy principle ideas come together.

It's a little bit rehashing, so we're not going to read anything, but people should check out the paper.

And sometimes with these dense papers, we end up just getting a lot on the slides just to get it out there and unpack it.

And there's many ways we could have probably reordered stuff or thought differently about it.

What about this slide, Blue?

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Just that it's just, yeah, we're not going to read it.

We're not going to read it.

The paper was really good.


SPEAKER_03:
Good.

Good there.

Let's consider the thought experiment that was done in the paper, which is this sleeping and waking agent.

And so we're going to have these, an agent that has two different phases.

There's a wake phase of the algorithm where the activity is driven bottom up by the recognition weights.

So like when you're awake, it's driven by the visual input coming in.

And then there's a sleep phase where you can imagine the opposite is true, like the model updating is being driven by the generative model in the absence of being driven by stimuli.

And then you take those two phases of the model and combine them into this R equation.

So it's like you have night and day, light and wake, and then the agent is gonna be modeling that.

And I think Dean, you had a nice take or interpretation on what this sleep wake meant.

What did this example show or where did you see it in the context of the paper?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, sort of going back to this being an example of this stochastic channel.

So I wondered whether or not recognition is a recognition, which is then consolidated is a two way establishment of what sort of we've taken to be

what we now know versus what we don't.

So is there two parts to this, being it's a two-way establishment, is there a buildup in terms of the generative model as probabilities are confirmed and is there a build-in?

Is there a way to be able to, in that, I guess it would be in the sleep phase or the non-wake phase, is there a way for us to be able to sort of purge the error units and then sort of discard them?

But again,

I'm saying this not knowing my negative F from my D sub KL in terms of what this actually means, right?

But I do like the idea that you can try to take a shot at it, a guess at it.

And if you're completely off, well, fine.

But it's not so unreachable that you can't take a good guess at it.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks for really...

doing awesome on the .0 and bringing your perspective because I totally agree with that.

I'm not even sure what the agent is modeling here.

It's like R of what?

Let's find out what this agent is doing and what it means.

But it is playing a role in the paper, which is using the model as just a minimal experiment

to illustrate the identity thesis which is the claim that the variational free energy so doing the variational statistical inference that model fitting is going to be equal to the thermodynamic free energy of the system so definitely alex help us um

understand what the model is showing here and also what maybe empirical system could we actually look at like can we collect data from a wake person or a sleeping person or another system to see if this is the case in equation 3.2 there's more unpacking of the f in terms of a kl divergence and then another term if you want to learn more of the mathematical details

unpack that and work through it in the discussion there is some uh connection to the work of lewis and others how is the bayesian brain and the position of lewis uh relating to folk psychology how do these terms come together section four later in section four

there's some formal logic, Ramsey sentences, predicate logics.

Also, it'd be very interesting to learn about what is being done here, because we were talking a lot about the mind and the brain, that sounded like statistical, I mean, and philosophical, and then there's things burning and thermodynamics, and then here's a logical sentence that is actually, yeah, Blue, what did you see here?


SPEAKER_00:
So I put a lot of these little comments into the slides because I was like, what is a Ramsey sentence?

And what are these like weird symbols?

Like I can do regular math, but like when you start to get into these like, I don't know, tricky symbols, it baffles me always.

So a Ramsey sentence is a formal logic reconstruction of a theoretical proposition that attempts to draw a line between science and metaphysics, which I didn't know that, I've never heard of these before.

And so I just couldn't really figure out, like, and so this backwards E, I was trying to read this, like, you know, equal this equation here down at the bottom.

And so this backwards E is called the existential quantifier.

So, like, there exists a. X. There exists an X. And then this upside down A is a universal quantifier for all.

So there exists an X for all Y. And then the T, I guess, is the predicate.

I don't know what that means.

So that Y, and then this is a material biconditional.

So I was really grateful for the triple equal unpacking because I had no idea what that meant.

And then the identity relationship.

So I couldn't even get all the way through reading this.

So if someone would read it to me, that'd be great.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep.

Perhaps there exists X for all Y.

And then the claim is of that or that relationship is that the predicate, which it's the part of a sentence or a clause with a verb stating something about the object, like went home in John went home.

And then just to see the three and the two, like the three is saying the material by condition, that's the psychophysical part.

it's like saying there's you know something t of y and x those are the parts that are actually materially bi-conditional and then there's an equal sign and those are the identity or let's hear it from alex red in different languages

Another topic that came up in this paper, as well as was in 16, is what's the difference between a real mind-brain system versus a simulated mind-brain system?

Like, is every chess-playing algorithm alive just because it can play chess just because people play chess?

Or does there have to be some other aspect to the information dynamics?

And it's something that...

Both this paper and, again, 16 with Wanda Weiss went in two.

Any thoughts on Real Simulated?


SPEAKER_00:
I really thought this was, like, the crux of the paper.

So that's my only thought, this identity thesis and the criterion for distinguishing a neural network versus an actual neural network in my brain, right?

Or a person with a neural network or an organism somehow.

Plankton or whatever, it doesn't have to be a brain because Alex did make that distinction in the paper.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

So just a few more last notes for those who stick around to the end to listen to the good stuff.

First, how does the cell do more with less?

It's kind of like asking, how does the brain do more with less from a model fitting perspective?

If you were to train the computer on tracing a baseball, it might use like 100 hamburgers worth of energy.

but then you can trace the baseball for a fraction of that one centi hamburger.

So that's the brain doing more with less for model fitting.

How does the cell do more with less in the biochemistry realm?

And this helps us get an intuition for how the brain might do more with less in the information realm.

and it relates to the hydrolysis or the cutting with water of atp which is a molecule with a high internal energy so you can use some of that internal energy to do other work and also release heat in other words split atp into adp and a free phosphate and extra energy free energy energy you can use and this is what was one of the most fascinating

probably facts that I learned in my biochem education, exactly how much free energy is released with a hydrolysis of ATP, and how is that free energy used to do cellular work?

The calculated delta G for the hydrolysis of one mole of ATP is negative 7.3 kcal per mole.

So if you just burn the candle, you get negative 7.3 units of energy.

That's under standard conditions.

In fact, the delta G for the hydrolysis in a living cell is almost double that, negative 14 kcal a mole.

How?

Is it vitalism?

Is it magic?

Well, can't rule that out, but there's a lot of tricks that can be played with localizing reactions.

So you can have a little tiny bubble where the pH is ridiculously acidic, like one proton vibrating around, but it's so small that the proton's local acidity is unreal.

And so there's all kinds of tricks that can be played with how things are combined and separated and connected to each other and related that help you get more energy out of just the hydrolysis of an ATP.

So just think, if you can get 2x on burning the candle in a cell, probably you can do a lot more than 2x on the information in the environment.

Is that physical?

Is it just statistical?

That's the question.

But it certainly is happening physically with a cell.

So it seems like it probably could be happening in the brain as well.

Biochemistry, Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
No, the cell has the demon.

So when we were putting these slides together, it's like, where's Maxwell's demon in here?

The cell has the demon, I guess.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_03:
Then where does active inference come into play?

Hashtag actinflab.

And so we searched for the term and it's used twice.

Both times it's used a little bit indirectly referring to the literature on active inference and the literature on the FEP.

And also it's related to topics we've talked about like top-down priors, the umwelt of the organism.

So it'd be super interesting to hear from Alex, where does active inference come into play in your agent as you had the thought experiment or just where does active inference come into play?

And then a key test and prediction, although

in another sort of classic three-sentence paragraph, Alex does take it both ways, which is basically to ask whether the identity thesis can be tested.

And he suggests that you could look for a stochastic code.

So in encoding, just like we saw earlier on with that Sengupa 2013 paper, the encoding that's going to be like the sort of trade-off between

only giving a little information but making it the right info so that the model can be updated appropriately, is to see if that is empirically plausible.

And this is an interesting philosophical point, which is that the conjunction of the identity thesis with FEP, free energy principle, is a falsifiable hypothesis, even if the FEP is not.

so in actin 14 15 20 we talked a lot about this what is falsification and relationship with the fep and so it's almost like fep is a carrier like it is deployed in really clearly falsifiable ways

yet it is more of that carrier wave that isn't directly falsifiable or i'm not sure where what he was getting at here but i thought that was really fascinating to think about not just oh well it's a corollary that's falsifiable it's like we're taking the fep and another field and now that is going to be something that we can both formalize and falsify

But here we just had falsification, here we just had formalization, and we had to amalgamate them in order to make something that would take the best of both worlds.

So let's hear from that.

And then this is where I said he has it both ways, which is not that something is true and false, but actually that the evidence is gonna run backwards to us.

He's saying strong empirical evidence for the right type of encoding together with a formulation of cognitive dynamics in terms of that variational Bayesian inference supports the case.

So maybe there'd be so much evidence for some kind of encoding

kind of encoding how much evidence how would we know but we'll find out maybe it would be overwhelming positive evidence for the identity thesis and then as always then what what then then if then all these cool learning terms that dean has been helping us understand what would happen then what would happen if the identity thesis

is true or not and then what would we be then so pretty fun thank you both for participating any last thoughts we'll have just a closing section if anyone wants to ask a question to live chat they can otherwise we'll just close it out can i ask one quick question oh yes yeah so


SPEAKER_02:
I'm glad Blue brought up the thing that she thought was really important about the paper.

So I want to kind of swing all the way back to the beginning, because I think identity as proximal formalisms is really important.

And I want to just read part of what he wrote right directly under this section.

for a transparent code, because he never really does get into this too much, but I think it kind of matters.

He wrote stochastic encoding and variational inference.

In order for the thesis of this paper to make sense, it must be kept in view that the generative and recognition densities

variational inference or densities over and then he puts in brackets possible external causes of the sensory input that is to say in the parlance of most philosophers and nearly all cognitive scientists they are representations and it is their representational function that defines them as statistical models fixing the encoding of the recognition generative densities allows us to directly relate the representational work in quotes

done as the divergence between the densities is decreased, decreased mind you to physical work.

That to me would be amazing for him to be able to give that to me in real terms, real examples of people doing that on a sort of ad hoc basis, because that would be lovely to turn the what is, because I understand, appreciate the down the train track thing, but the what if.

to be able to sort of translate that, what he wrote there in terms of a transparent code around what if would make my day and not just my model.


SPEAKER_03:
It would make my model of my day.

Make my model of my day.

But...

That sounds super interesting.

And that part, first about representations, we didn't even tackle the representation question because also in several other streams, we've asked about what is a representation, internal representation, where are these representations?

What if they're distributed in the environment or among agents?

Is that still a representation?

But also that adjacent possible.

That's kind of like, whoa, if our perception is actually just the tip of the iceberg,

of a really deeper generative model.

And there's cases where it seems intuitive.

Like, oh, well, I guess daytime is contingent on having a model of night.

Or thinking A is contingent on knowing that it could be A or not A. But even that whole framework for thinking is still just part of a bigger process.

And that's what I think a lot of philosophy tries to grasp at from a lot of sides.

We're working with a kind of forceps, but there's like a bigger picture.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, it sounds like we're also working with something called the transparent code, which blows me up because, oh, okay, well, if that's all it was, can you just tell me, show me what that is?

And I know it's going to be hard because it's transparent, but hey, let's go.

Luke?


SPEAKER_00:
I'm good.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, guys.

Well, thanks to those who watched this live or in replay.

We hope that you'll join us for the discussion when it happens or after.

Thank you.

Great times.

Talk to you later, Dean.

## v60cQUiu1NE

SPEAKER_04:
okay hello and welcome everyone to act in flap this is the act in flab live stream and i'm pretty sure we're live yes we are it's number 22.1 on may 18th 2021 and this is going to be really great discussion so i'm looking forward to it and thanks again everyone for joining live

Welcome to ACT-INF Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links that are here on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And we'll be following good live stream etiquette.

Welcome, Scott.

And raising our hands to ask questions and hear from everybody because this is really going to be a special discussion.

We're here in paper number 22 and on May 18th today.

And next week on the 25th, we're going to be having two discussions on the paper, Psychophysical Identity and Free Energy by Alex Kiefer.

So thanks a lot, Alex, for joining us live and engaging with the .Zero video because we gained a lot as a lab working through that.

And so we're ready to take it to the next level through conversation with you.


SPEAKER_06:
Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
And today we're going to be learning and discussing.

The papers link is here and the video is just us unpacking and exploring, raising questions.

And we're going to be also taking notes so that in the dot two, we can be following up.

We're gonna start with some introductions just to introduce ourselves and also maybe to raise any thoughts or questions that we had at the outset about the paper.

So everyone can feel free to write down points or write down questions so they don't forget them.

And we're pretty much just going to jump around to any topic or question that drives us along and we'll flow with it as people join and leave.

And there will be a follow-up discussion 22 next week.

That brings us to the introductions and the warmups.

So I'll start and we'll pass it around and then end up with Alex, who will provide, I think, a short introduction to the paper, and then we'll continue the discussion from there.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a postdoc in California, and something I'm excited about today was something we were just speaking about right before, was learning about a transparent code and understanding what that might mean.

I'll pass it to Scott.


SPEAKER_02:
Hello, I'm Scott David.

I'm at the University of Washington Applied Physics Lab, where I run a program called the Information Risk and Synthetic Intelligence Research Initiative.

And I'm delighted to be here today, and I'll pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

I'm doing a practice-based PhD at Canterbury Christ Church.

And I'm really excited about the psychophysical areas being brought in with this process with energy.

So I'm intrigued because that connects to some of the research I do with communities in their landscape and how to understand that.

So thank you.

And I'm going to pass it over to Alex.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

Hi, everyone.

I'm Alex Svyatkin.

I'm a researcher in Systems Management School in Moscow, Russia, and also co-organizer of Actinus Lab, and I pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, I'm Dean.

I'm up here in Calgary, Canada.

I'm retired, and I just try to keep up with everybody here.

I'll pass it to


SPEAKER_04:
our special guest today alex is dave um no david has left sorry okay continue okay


SPEAKER_06:
Hey, thanks.

I'm Alex Kiefer.

I'm a researcher in philosophy and cognitive science, and I do some modeling as well.

I have an affiliation with Monash University.

Currently, also, a lot of my time is devoted to working for Nested Minds Solutions, which is an enterprise started by Maxwell Ramstad and some other people.

Just recently, we've already got a lot of work under our belt.

So I'm really happy to be here.

Thanks for having me.

This is, I think, going to be a really fun discussion.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Maybe just while the other participants are preparing a thought or a question to lead off, Alex, just how did you come to writing this single author paper?

What in your path led you to write it this way?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, sure.

So...

So this is an idea that I think first sort of came up for me in 2015 or so.

So I've been fascinated by this formal analogy between optimization and processes in thermodynamics and physics for a long time since, well, not that long, maybe 2012, 2013, when I started getting into the neural net literature on Holmes machines and things like that.

So I think this analogy between physics and optimization has been tempting for a lot of people to want to collapse these.

And this is something that people like my friend Mel Andrews constantly warn against, is just taking the physical informational description of a system to be the same as its physical description.

But I thought that there was a compelling argument to be made here.

So I wanted to actually articulate, not necessarily endorse, and I think

the way I catch things in the paper is a bit cautious on this, but I wanted to articulate what is the most sort of, the simplest, most kind of perhaps radical perspective one could take on this, the relationship between the cognitive dynamics and the physical dynamics that you might be able to defend, right, from a sort of free energy principle-ish perspective.

So I wanted to just lay that one way of understanding this relationship out that was as clear as possible.

I think in the process, I ended up writing a paper that many people find to be quite complicated.

So this was supposed to be an exposition of a simple idea.

So maybe we can see if we can get back to that.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

So anyone can raise their hand and we'll just start.

But I really liked how you said articulate, but not endorse.

You've put out an artifact for us to interact with and to explore.

And you have framed the psychophysical identity thesis as a hypothesis.

So it's something that evidence can now be used to support or to disprove.

And that's sort of a nice example.

piece of work that now obviously we have started a discussion around.

So we'll go to Stephen and then Scott and then anyone else with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, one thing I like about what you're doing here is you're sort of bringing it into the domains where the action is happening.

It's a bit like most of the physics around thermodynamics is really often used in chemistry.

And a lot, like Niels Bohr was actually a chemist, wasn't a physicist per se.

He used physics.

So there's an interesting thing about how

these areas get transposed over, you know, and maybe layered again to biochemistry, which maybe is trying to look at the mechanisms that sit on that and X, Y, Z. So I think that's quite relevant to some of the questions we've been wrestling with, with what happens when things start to transition to the ontology, like, and how can you keep a handle on that when you've got people from different backgrounds?

So I think that's quite interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Thank you, Steven, Scott, and then anyone else with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I'd like to just ask about your having written the paper and now contemplated it, discussed it with folks.

What's your impression of the role of the observer of difference, of gaps, of differences in

identifying sources of free energy um exploitable sources let me let me back up one i did a paper in a presentation in um uh mit in 2013 called entropy accounting and i asserted that carnot's equation the hot and cold differentials that are reflected there are the same as arbitrage equations in markets

And I asserted that heat engines were produced by the human mind observing an attribute because it didn't matter that we thought we had a flow of caloric and it was flowing downhill.

Actually, the notion of flow was what we asserted in order to convert random heat, random motion of particles, which we really only use for warmth.

Being able to put that into a cylinder, a combustion chamber, and then perform work took thousands of years.

I wonder if you could comment on it feels like we're using information like the cavemen as per warmth and not yet putting it in a combustion chamber.

And the combustion, is it the fact that the processes where differentials are captured, exploited, utilized?

I'm not sure what word to use here.

Is that like a reaction chamber?

Are we reacting observations and data into inference in these reaction chambers of mind, similar to the differentials that we exploit in a heat engine for work?

Are we able to?

to capture, what are the devices of capture?

Sorry for the long question, but your hand on your chin makes me think that maybe it's an intriguing question.


SPEAKER_06:
It's definitely intriguing.

I probably can't do justice to it, but I'll try.

So just on the last point, I guess I think that the, well, actually, so first to take your question about information, whether we're using it, sort of like whether we're really exploiting it

up to its maximum possibilities right as information or just or just treating it as sort of you know uh something like warmth a source of warmth i mean i i take it that insofar as we're using information so i i right so it gets to the heart of my perspective into this perspective of this paper i guess so i said i floated this thesis as a possibility but i i do

kind of have some sort of deep-seated conviction that information can always be looked at sort of in terms of what it represents and physically, right?

So any process of information

information is literally a process of physical change as well as a process of some system coming to know something.

So to take the etymology and just go back to Shannon's original framing, information is just the amount by which someone or something has been informed, in my view.

So I think insofar as we're treating something as information, we are using it as information.

um right it's not now i don't know what the now maybe i'd love to hear more from you on this i don't know what the analogy would be to using information just as heat is it like we're aware of something but we're not really doing anything with it like in terms of inference or uh so so i guess my my view is that we are insofar as we're thinking and exploiting information sources for inference we're using it to its um

maybe not maximally efficiently always, but we're using it in a way that's intelligent.

But just one more point on this.

The analogy to combustion engine, the idea of, I guess my thesis here is that any time we're performing an inference, any systems performing an inference, the physical aspect of that

is something like, right, it is an actual physical reaction.

So there is always something that has precisely that nature behind any use of information.

But I think everything I just said sounds to me completely trivial as I'm saying it.


SPEAKER_02:
That's its power.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, Scott, what did you mean?

We can unpack that because it's known that heat is not just simply wasted, but where there's a heat differential, there can be work.

And potentially when there's an information differential, there can be an analogy to physical work, but in the informational regime.

So what motivates that line of thinking for you?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and again, I'll send around the slides from 2013, but the idea was that it is not by analogy, it really is a capturing by the mind of an attribute of a system, right?

You look at a block of iron, it has spin, it has temperature, it has color, there's all sorts of dimensions that it has that are unexploited.

And then we can look at them and exploit them for different, you know, magnetism with spin and then temperature or electronic electrons flow through iron.

Same block iron is just sitting there.

But you measure different attributes.

And as you measure different attributes, you measure them into existence.

And that existence then can be exploited.

And so we did that with heat.

Right.

They thought that heat was caloric.

They actually thought it was a fluid.

Right?

But then the guy who was the cannon borer, I forget which one, the guy who bored the brass cannons, he said, wait a second, it can't be a fluid because it's unlimited.

It's a quality of the material.

So I think what we're talking about in information, it's a quality not of the brain, it's a quality of the mind.

And the differential between the brain and the mind

There's a mind out there to be learned.

Let's call it an environment if it's animals, but if it's humans, it also involves language.

And when you're born, you don't know it.

And then you go learn it.

So your brain has to get tuned into the mind.

So to me, the mind is our combustion chamber.

And you've got to learn the combustion.

Now, if you learn different things, if I'm a hunter-gatherer, I'm going to learn different things in my environment to combust.

I'm going to have different cues, and I'm going to say, wow, this is relevant for me because I've got to do this and this.

So we train, I think, we train our combustion chamber.

It's symbolic, right?

And so we're training this thing in which to contain the differential accomplishment of the active inference, the Bayesian accomplishment,

And then we train.

So it was an article in just the last thing.

I'll shut up for a minute.

It was an article in Nature magazine a couple of years ago.

They said less than 12 month old human infants learn in a Bayesian way.

If you point to it, if you tell a baby a horse has four legs, the baby will point to a table, a coffee table and say horsey.

Then you say no.


SPEAKER_04:
scott just disappeared it was too much of a truth drop with the table and the legs so steven to you and we'll return to scott when we can they freeze sorry okay scott's back anyway continue with okay continue from the table


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, anyway, it's Bayesian, the Bayesian accumulation.

You point to a table, then you say, no, it has to have hair.

They'll point to a dog and say horsey.

Then you say, no, it has to have a mane.

They'll point to a horse and say horsey.

So it's a Bayesian, the article was about Bayesian assembly of human knowledge.

And so what if the baby is not really assembling knowledge, but just tuning their brain into the mind and the mind's a combustion chamber.

And the mind we teach, we have to learn the mind because that's the useful combustion.

We've already designed this brain

community mind to navigate space and we teach it to our offspring in order to make them more fit.

Anyway else.

Cool.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you.

Any thoughts on that, Alex?


SPEAKER_06:
Well, it's interesting.

I don't know if I completely understand the way Scott's using the term mind here, but I think I kind of can see how something that deserves to be called the mind would emerge through this sort of learning process, right?

So I guess there's a trivial sense, I think, in which anything that has energetic properties has a mental side.

That's kind of what I'm saying in the paper.

But it's trivial.

And if you want something that really functions cognitively,

then you need to have internalized a lot of these regularities through the sorts of learning and inference schemes that we're all familiar with here.

So if that's what you mean by learning the mind, I think, Scott, you analogized it to the environment at some point, or maybe it's more than an analogy.

It's like the data, the source of the data, sensory data that you're interpreting.

So yeah, I think it's a cool idea.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Stephen, welcome Blue.

Stephen with a question and then anyone else with a question or Blue, you can say hello.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, one question I'd be interested in is, do you see maybe more than one type of information processing that maybe happened at different levels?

So maybe you've got because we've had people talking, say, at the quantum level, which could be happening, particularly, say, the photons coming in with the iris and things going up.

And then you've got other levels where you've got these steady states going at different levels.

rates and then you've got some of the things you're talking about where maybe it goes into this sense of a a more averaged closed mind idea which would have to be somehow created maybe because the dynamical nature of the data and the noise is not necessarily exactly how it is when it first arrives at the organism but maybe you're you're bringing back some of that more averaged out heat


SPEAKER_06:
ideas um around how energy can be averaged over time in in some sort of heat form is that would that be accurate um i'm not sure about the heat piece i'm just genuinely not sure we can talk more about it but like as far as multiple types of information processing i mean i think that's

Definitely what's happening in the brain, of course, there's all this literature on multi-scale active inference and stuff, which my paper isn't directly about active inference.

So we tend to signal out certain processes in the brain as like processing information.

But really, that's going on on fine grade levels and on larger scales, as you say.

I think we tend to just pick out one piece to analyze at a time.

I guess the part of the question I don't know how to answer is, what are the types of information processing in question?

So I guess I'm skeptical of that type distinction, not against it.

I'm just not sure what kind of types we have in mind.

Definitely, I think there's a role for averaging.

Even if we just stick to neurons and don't worry about underlying chemistry or physics.

It can't just be that one neuron firing represents your grandmother, because then if that neuron's shot, then you can't represent your grandmother.

So I think there has to be a...

if we want to associate content with brain states, for example, those states are going to have to be couched at the level of averages in some sense, or some kind of statistical property.

And I think that comes out clearly also in the work that Carl Friston and Vanya and others have done on the whole Markovian monism idea.

So they talk about the fact that it's

You know, it's not individual brain states that encode information on their view, it's the mean of the distribution, conditional distribution.

Anyway, going a bit into the weeds on this, but I do think that that's important.

Heat, I don't know, let's talk more about it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

Keith, we had the what is temperature slide, which I'll just switch to.

Yeah, wait, Stephen, do you have any other thoughts?


SPEAKER_00:
No, go to that slide.

And maybe just following from that is maybe something about the mind and the level of the psychophysical.

Maybe actually the mind is kind of a psychophysical level.

We think of it as a brain level, but maybe what you're pointing to is something a bit more of a dynamic, which is kind of interesting.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

I mean, I generally... Sorry, I generally have trouble seeing distinctions between levels.

So maybe that's what... You all could help point out why these things are not the same.

It would help me.


SPEAKER_04:
Go ahead.

Hence the psychophysical identity thesis paper that you wrote.

Right.

Because that's the entire topic of this discussion is what are those relationships and are they like each other or are they...

Are they isomorphic?

Are they one and the same?

So here on this temperature slide,

you wrote about how increases and decreases in temperature change the variance of distributions so maybe just what is temperature or in this psychophysical identity mapping what does temperature reflect because changing the temperature on the brain you're not just talking about going into a warmer room you're talking about something related to inference so what is happening there well


SPEAKER_06:
Right.

I mean, I guess I am saying like, look, if you change the temperature in the room and that ends up changing the temperature of the brain, then it's kind of an implication of the thesis that you are changing the temperature of your statistical model as well to some degree.

Right.

Probably usually to an imperceptible or insignificant degree when something like walking into a different room because the brain has its own internal homeostasis and it's not like we're going to drastically directly affect the brain's internal temperature.

by changing the room temperature one degree.

But I really am speculating, or I'm considering the consequences of, I mean, the overall theme here, and temperature is a special case, but the overall theme is that anything that you want, so any of the terms in the Helmholtz free energy from thermophysics, from thermodynamics,

should directly this is a transparent encoding idea should directly sort of be reflected in the cognitive dynamics and so that cognitively speaking what temperature means

like it says here, is just temperature parameters in models, neural network models, and other sorts of models.

I think I've heard this referred to in the active inference literature as the shaky hand parameter.

So it's like you're reaching for something.

If you increase the temperature parameter, there's less certainty in exactly where the motor system will end up.

So that's what it means cognitively speaking.

Or if you don't want to call low-level motor control cognitive, then

In terms of these models of organisms, what it means is literally just the variability of the distribution, the variance.

I guess what I'm saying is, yes, I think if this thesis is true, then what encodes that is the actual temperature of the system that implements the model.


SPEAKER_04:
Very interesting.

Thank you.

We'll go to Blue, and then Scott.


SPEAKER_03:
Good morning, I'm Blue Knight.

I'm a research consultant based out of New Mexico.

And I really enjoyed this paper.

I really enjoyed the possibility of having a way to separate the mind from simulations of the mind.

I think that that's a really relevant and pertinent idea to put forward.

But so in relevance to temperature, and this is gonna like totally throw what I just said out the window.

You know, I dabble a little bit in retail investing, right?

And so like the day before or like maybe in the morning, you might like what's called take the temperature of the market, right?

So you see kind of as things going up or things going down, like you just kind of put your feelers out there and take the temperature of what the market's going to do.

So I just wonder in terms of cognition, in terms of active inference, if there's a way to like take the temperature in maybe like more of a...

of a metaphorical sense, right?

Does that make sense?


SPEAKER_06:
I'm not sure.


SPEAKER_03:
So I can elaborate a little bit more.

In the political system, we get a temperature.

Is this a liberal environment, or is it a more conservative environment?

And that might influence our actions.

The active inference loop might be influenced by the perception of temperature in the environment.


SPEAKER_06:
Right.

So, yeah, I mean, first of all, hi.

Thanks for joining.

You and Dean and Daniel, I really enjoyed your discussion in point zero.

And it made me excited to talk about it today because it's cool just how many different questions or, you know, anyway, whatever.

It's cool.

So, I mean, sure, you could use temperature in a metaphorical way as well.

Like, I think, like,

I guess in this paper, I tend to like

I tend to assume that when people, that metaphors are not metaphors, but identities, right?

As the ground level assumption, and then see where that you're forced to distinguish between them.

So like, if we're talking about, again, if we're talking about a model of motor control where you're literally reaching for something, then I think in that case, it's plausible that there's some relationship between the actual temperature of the pieces of the system that are driving the motion and the temperature parameter in the model.

But like, if you're talking about something like

taking the temperature of the market or the political, there still might be partial mappings there, right?

But if you're defining some arbitrary dimension, so if the temperature politically means one side of the scale is conservative and the other side is liberal, then I wouldn't expect that there'd be some physical component to that.


SPEAKER_04:
But the same way that your paper was, as you said, just putting it out there, not endorsing the psychophysical identity, it's almost like an econophysical identity thesis would be asking whether the thermo-like dynamics of markets actually have some sort of mapping that's more than a metaphor, but it's something that can be stated and

blanketed or boxed off, and then can be understood as being adequate in certain situations, but maybe inadequate in other situations.

But when we talk about the market heating up, people know what that means in a way where, you know, the market feeling happy doesn't really capture it heating up or cooling down.

So Scott, and then anyone else with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_02:
Oops, I'm not sure if I should try to share my screen.

I may just screw up, so let's not do that.

So I just pulled up my slides from 2013.

And so I said, under the first law of thermodynamics, temperature has two roles.

First, from the perspective of a party outside the system, temperature tells whether two or more systems are in thermal equilibrium.

Same temperature equals equilibrium, OK?

From the perspective of a molecule in this system, temperature tells about the distribution of various molecules in the system over the possible energy states, right?

The higher temperature equals a broader distribution of molecules in different states and a higher Boltzmann distribution.

So what I'm asserting in this context, in the context of those earlier slides, was analogously here, are we looking within this system of the

cognitive system and the dynamics of components within it or

vis-a-vis an outside voice for that system?

I think that's a relevant question here because when we're talking about the first law in here, we don't, we have, this is, Maxwell's demon is actually a person now.

Sorry, that obscure reference.

But Maxwell's demon was a convention to fuss with the second law of thermodynamics, a gating function.

And now we actually have the notion of what does a molecule in the system think, in a sense, is what I'm inviting here.

And so I think the assertion certainly I make in that context is we can capture

either one of those dynamics and it's info dynamics you're not thermodynamics is what i call it but essentially first law tells you about interoperability is what my assertion is because you can have equilibrium in a symbolic way i assert is the equivalence of interoperability symbolic and so that's when you can have a meeting of the minds and you can have shared consciousness society shared language all that kind of stuff is my notion of where the first law takes you thanks


SPEAKER_06:
That's very intriguing.

I need to read your work on this, please.

I mean, not to give a too hand-wavy an answer, but I think since we're dealing with multiple scales here, we could talk about neurons performing active inference, people doing it.

I think both of those uses of temperature are relevant.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, we'll get to Steven, but maybe just a general question.

Where does active inference come into play and how does it come into play?


SPEAKER_06:
Oh, yeah.

So, right.

you guys raised in the point zero that I didn't really talk about active inference that much.

In fact, I only referenced the literature on active inference.

So this is, yeah, it's interesting.

So this paper isn't really about active inference.

It's not really directly about the FVP either.

So thank you for having me despite that.

But it's, I mean, obviously it's in the very core, it's concerned with the same core issues, right?

But...

I don't want to take us on this if it's a tangent, but the reason that I don't write about active infants that much is that I think from a high enough or meaning abstract enough point of view, you don't need, I don't know that there's really a difference.

To me, active infants kind of relates to this stuff the way that Dawkins' extended phenotype proposal relates to more traditional ways of thinking about evolution and genetics in that

It's a new paradigm.

But I don't think that there's a system that you can describe using active inference that you couldn't also describe using, say, traditional representationalist terminology.

So that's obviously controversial, and we could talk about it.

Insofar as you're concerned with analyzing or designing a system, even if you want to write an active inference agent as a model, you only have control over its internal states.

You can't directly control.

Yes, it optimizes

its situation by acting and intervening on the environment but you can't directly control how the intervention on the environment plays out you can only control the expectations for sensory data given that you've acted in such a way and so um that's why i tend to just default to you know it's what jerry fodder called methodological solipsism right which is a very different perspective from what people i think

i love to talk about this maybe maybe they're more similar than i think too but um anyway so so uh like active inference is great i think in fact it leads to new ideas for technology and new models just because it's a different way of thinking about things but when you're doing like philosophical analysis like this um i don't find that it's for me often necessary to think in those terms but i would love for someone to point out something that i'm missing by not doing that


SPEAKER_04:
Well, what we love here in the Active Lab is hearing everyone's perspective on active inference and also adjacencies and synonyms and other languages and other ways of expressing it.

So thanks for sharing it the way you did.

Stephen, if you wanted to.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Yeah.

So building on that, you mentioned the Helmholtz free energy rather than the Gibbs free energy.

So you sort of, the broader sort of,

energy that's available.

I suppose a question I've got here is, actually, go back to that diagram just one sec with the distributions.

There you've got both the difference in the size of the distribution for the different size molecules.

But you've got the average speed is higher for hydrogen.

but yeah, hydrogen or oxygen it's, it's faster.

It's the speed is faster for something that's lighter.

And that may have an impact.

at the local level when the actual atoms are hitting each other at the same temperature.

But when you take the average, it's all around the same energy, if that makes sense.

So I just wondered if there's any particular sort of relationship to the way that the speeds are happening and the way that might change something at a certain scale and just Helmholtz and Gibbs free energy.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

So to be honest, I mean, the reason I write about Helmholtz free energy is just because it's the thing that Jeff Hinton and others used when setting up things like the Helmholtz machine.

The Gibbs free energy, I'm just less familiar with.

It adds complications that I thought weren't relevant.

But if they are relevant, then let's talk about it.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, could we maybe hear a little bit from you?

Just what is free energy in the senses that you used it, or how would you describe it to somebody who might be not very familiar with thermodynamics?


SPEAKER_06:
Right.

Someone such as me, for example.

So what I would say is, well, I mean, I'm a philosopher, but so free energy in the physical and thermodynamic sense, as I understand it, again, welcome, I welcome any

hangs in the other direction.

But as I understand it, it's just the energy that's available for doing work

in the system.

So it's the internal energy, all the energy that the system harbors just in virtue of its configuration, its existence at that moment, minus all of the energy that's not usable because it's tied up with this disorder with entropy.

So I'm sure that someone else here could maybe articulate that more gracefully than I just did, but that's the one term.

And the other term in the equation here is the variational free energy, which is just the difference between the

basically the generative model or the joint distribution that defines the system's generative model of some kind of statistical model, right, more generally.

And the approximation to it

that you've arrived at at a particular time step, right?

So if you're doing variational inference, you're trying to fit this Q distribution, which, I mean, you know, people, this has been talked about ad nauseum, so it's hard for me to get the energy to really launch into it, because I feel like we all are familiar with this concept, but it's just the difference between the approximating distribution, the recognition distribution or density, and the generative density.

So I guess the thing to underline there is that it's only defined in terms of these P's and Q's, Q recognition, P generative.

They're defined in terms of the generative model, which is a model.

It's a mapping between hypotheses or hidden states and outcomes.

So there's obviously no a priori connection between that and thermodynamics.

So it's just important to keep in view that one of these is, in terms of how it's defined, is thoroughly cognitive, has to do with belief updating, and the other has to do with the physical states of the system.


SPEAKER_04:
And that mapping between the cognitive and the inferential and the physical is, again, the entire discussion and the entire point of putting out an artifact that is

critiquable or is extendable in the ways that you made it so scott then steven and then also anyone else who's watching live can just put a live chat in and we'll ask the question so scott and then steven


SPEAKER_02:
So this is really, what a great conversation.

Thank you.

You've got a great paper.

So a couple of things.

First of all, you know, I wonder, we always talk about it being by analogy and it's not really thermodynamics, but von Neumann said to Shannon, use the second law of thermodynamics for your quantitative theory of information because, and his quote, right?

His quote was, because the math is identical, which tells you something.

It at least tells you something about math and humans.

But it may not tell you anything about the environment, but it tells you something about math and humans.

But he also said, and if you use the word entropy in any argument, you'll win every time because no one will know what the hell you're talking about.

So that's good advice on both of those points, right?

So I always look at it and I go, okay, so let's talk about those differentials.

And, you know, that free energy question that we just answered.

So I deal in policy.

I'm not a biologist.

I'm a lawyer.

OK, and a physics lab.

And the reason I'm interested in this stuff is I think you can access the external states.

And in fact, I think that's all we do as social beings is we that's what rhetoric is.

I am constantly trying to lasso external states of everyone else.

That's what politics is.

That's all the whole misinformation problem right now.

We're setting out now in a biological example, we kind of don't send around memos as much.

Now there is, there are communications obviously in, in, in the sciences and in the nature and all that.

But when you get into the human populations, we may have something more going on here.

Maybe mind is an emergent phenomenon, merely of the attempts at harmonically coupling with other minds.

Maybe a break, if we're successful in tuning into that local mind, we survive.

If I am dropped into France and I don't speak French, then am I going to survive?

Now, now I will, but what if it was 300 years ago or whatever, right?

So you need to, if the mind is feral and is trained, maybe that ability to affect the externality is everything.

maybe that's how we are humans in the way that we are, because we're pretty pathetic little organisms on our own, each one of us, right?

We don't have sharp fingernails, and our tooth and claw is not, we get bloody, but it would take a lot of biting, because we're kind of blunt, right?

So anyway, that's a bit of a tangent, but so the question is, are we, maybe if we look at the

Maybe we're not entering another brain.

Maybe the mind is where the action is.

And when we're doing this in training, maybe we're merely tuning into something that exists already in our attempts here at this active inference.

And we're just getting on board with the existing mind.

And so therefore, our steady state, our homeostatic state is the one that is most aligned with the externality.

That's drawing us there.

And as lawyers and as policy people, we create artificial externalities.

That's why I use synthetic intelligence in our title.

We're creating synthetic externalities and saying, hey, come on over here.

We got a good externality over here.

Check it out.

This one's resilient, sustainable, and the SDGs of the UN love it, right?

So we're creating realities.

What do you think about that in terms of the notion of,

the efficacy of the possibility of harmonic coupling with other minds and that as another active activity and activity is not just changing your internal model.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, that's extremely interesting.

So I mean, I think this question of how exactly the external states get into the picture is pretty fundamental for a lot of people who are in this area.

And I think you're right that it's essential, but it's essential in a strange way where it's completely inessential too.

So it's essential in that the reason that your steady state is what it is

essentially involves the environment, right?

So, like, in the free energy principle, the NEST, the non-equilibrium steady state, is defined with respect to the sort of a subsystem that's embedded in an environment, and that steady state wouldn't exist without both pieces of that, right?

And it's the fact that you're doing gradient descent on that that guarantees that you're

variational inference is going anywhere useful.

And that's sort of the magical seeming connection between actual accuracy and all of this just churning that happens when you're minimizing free energy over time.

But the way in which it's inessential is, of course,

I mean, I, I just, I guess maybe I'm, maybe I've been called a Cartesian before.

Maybe I am.

I don't know.

I didn't mean to be, but, um, there's a sense in which simply just the datum here is just that I can get things wrong.

And I don't see that there's any obvious way of limiting the scope of that, right?

So just fallibilism.

So I think there has to be some subset of states of the overall universe that you'd identify with you and your perspective.

And otherwise, right, you have, sure, the external states are essential to the story, and they drive the dynamics de facto, but

there has to be a difference between the actual external state at any moment and the external state that I represent by my hidden states or my internal states.

And so I think

You know, like, the reason any of this works in practice is because we've internalized the structure of the external environment.

And this whole point about harmonic coupling between minds is really cool.

There's something really cool and bootstrappy about that.

It's like, right, minds are things that harmonize with other minds, right?

And I don't,

Just to kind of pick out another piece of what you said, the way that I tend to think of this stuff is in terms of sort of imitation.

So the fundamental term for a lot of people in this area is prediction, but I almost think it's more that we just learn to, our brains learn to imitate the sensory, right, the patterns of

The processes that produce patterns of sensory input, but the reason it's not just imitation is that also the world is just made up of a bunch of these generative models that each have their own driving right.

signals so so that i'm not sure I don't know I don't know how to tie that up in a nice package but it's a cool set of questions and.

So the reason, though, that I stopped short of saying that the external states are as fundamental in understanding systems, biological systems, people, etc., as the internal states is simply things like Cartesian skepticism.

So we could talk about that.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, go ahead, Scott.

Just to follow up.

Well, it is interesting because our struggles in it, you know, I say on this podcast,

this group very often, the only time you see reality is when you see paradox, right?

If you're seeing an absence of paradox, you're intrinsically seeing a model of some sort.

And so we should embrace a confused state and know that that is a reality.

And so that

is not just a statement for this conversation, but in general, maybe what the mind is doing is the same thing that the body does when it's standing still.

You're actually never still.

You're always dynamically moving to maintain a semblance of stasis in a banded stillness, right?

So maybe we have a banded mind.

Maybe it's fully dynamic.

And maybe what we think of as us, an existential kind of element of it, is within a band.

right?

Do people change over time?

It's a ship theseus in a way, right?

You're still the same person, but some of the stuff has changed out, swapped out over time.

So maybe the embodiment helps us with mind as a fractal way at any level, because we can say, okay, if we have a system that's doing processing of dynamic

environment some of that processing may be internal some may be external i mean that's group formation and you know part of its genetic and consanguineous in terms of performance and some of it is people who are similarly situated right if you're in a disaster and everyone's all of a sudden has the same problems people band together all of a sudden very easily in their mind

morphs into that organism that is needed for that acute situation in that stressful environment.

And so that maybe it's always dynamic, but that we don't see the dynamics as much and they seem more leisurely when we're studying them in the abstract, but maybe they're highly dynamic in both directions, especially as we become information beings and more dependent on symbols.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, Scott.

Just one thought on the dynamics is anyone who's recorded a neuron or thought about that knows that just to keep an idea in your mind for a few seconds is being underwritten by vast numbers of dynamical processes that are quite rapid.

And the second point about the internalities and the externalities and the internal states and the external states

The Helmholtz free energy has this U, internal energy, and that's like the configuration of the molecule, usually thought of as, and then this negative TS is sort of those vibratory modes that can't be as easily harnessed.

But when you pointed to synthetic externalities, which is the same thing as saying reconstructing the internalities, it's like...

what if all of a sudden the organization of the system, we could partition it a little bit differently so that we had more U and a little bit less TS.

And when you think about a vibrating molecule, U makes it look like the covalent bonds and TS is the vibration.

But if you think about an ant colony, the movement of the pieces is still part of the internal dynamics.

And so, especially when we're talking about information, which isn't covalently bonded atoms,

internal energy is something about the model it's not just about how things are touching and can be broken and reformed so there's a lot of awesome pieces in what you added there stephen and then anyone else with a raised hand


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think building on that, you're right.

I think you're making the right choice here for this paper using the Helmholtz free energy.

I think that's a... Even if Gibbs free energy is used more in active inference, that adds an extra level of complication.

And I think this is actually useful then because you're able to look at some of these distribution questions and just how...

information is extracted but it's actually helpful for me to see you go back to the Helmholtz because it makes me realize well the Gibbs free energy which is more about how action happens how do you know what the internal energy change would have to do if it was trying to also keep within a certain constraint of volume and pressure which you don't have to worry about

with Helmholtz free energy, that would bring in action.

That would bring in the action part of active inference in some ways.

But the underlying principles still hold for what you've got.

So I think that's helpful.

So I don't know if you've got any thoughts on that.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, that is helpful.

I would just say that that is helpful.

And I would love if...

if in the future anyone worked on this same topic and unpacked the sort of, I was going to say generalization, but it's maybe the opposite, how this would work out in the case of action more specifically and using cubes-free energy and stuff, that would be really cool.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

And taking the temperature of a person in terms of going for a checkup to the doctor and they put the thermometer under your tongue and that's a thermal temperature.

And how are you feeling?

What does it look like to take the temperature just like Blue had been suggesting?

So maybe let's go to the transparent code slide that you added, Alex, because that was definitely something that we were curious about from the dot zero.

And we can just hear your thoughts on this, talk a little bit about this.

And then also anyone else can just write down a question, raise their hand or ask in the live chat.

But we'd be really curious to hear what you thought about this.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, sure.

So the reason, again, that I put this in was that Dean and maybe everybody in that point zero discussion had questions about this.

And I think the transparent code, it ends up sounding like a slogan that invites speculation and it's a mystery or something.

But this might be a case where I'm trying to say something so simple that it's like,

it's easy to miss, right?

So I'll, um, the role, let me just first frame this.

The role that this plays in the paper is that if you want it to be that variational free energy and, um, Helmholtz free energy in the thermodynamic sense, um, are the same quantity, then you're going to have to, um,

explain how, well, both of them are sort of made up of probabilities, right?

So you need to have a mapping from one set of probabilities to the other.

So there has to be a way of understanding how the probabilities of states, this is a big distinction in the literature, right?

How the probabilities of states could represent, could represent, so the probabilities of states in the system, the cognitive system that you're analyzing, which is also a physical system, how is it that those could represent

the probabilities that are assigned by that system to the external states.

So the idea of a transparent neuronal code or any code is just that the probability of, for example, so on the left hand of the diagram here,

If we had a transparent code in the sense in which I'm using that term, then, for example, the probability of neuron B firing, given that neuron A fires, right?

So if B is a postsynaptic neuron and A sends a signal to B, or A fires and there's a certain probability of B firing subsequent to A firing, that would represent...

the probability of some state of affairs Q obtaining, given that some state of affairs P obtains, where A, and this, we can talk about where this mapping comes from, right?

But the assumption is A represents P occurring and B represents Q occurring.

um so so that's really all i meant by a transparent code and it's it's not it's a simple idea but it's it's definitely controversial right like that that would mean that if you think that there's a certain conditional probability of you know the cat being on the mat given that the cat uh lives in the apartment um then you're sort of the probability that you would represent those things has to be tied up

with the probability that you assign to those things occurring.

And that's not at all a sort of uncontroversial statement, but it's a simple idea.

And this is an idea, by the way, again, that's used in some of the early connectionist literature on who mentioned Boltzmann machines, right?

So there's an early paper on Boltzmann machines where this kind of stochastic code is proposed.

And the basic, one more sentence on this, the basic idea is that the objective probability, sort of measurable probability of events within the system, maps onto the subjective probability that the system assigns to the states of affairs that are represented by those internal states.


SPEAKER_04:
interesting and in the context of the cognitive system of interest we're talking about the brain it's like we know that we're not going to get the transparent coding from the photons hitting the retina to what is the probability of the cat being on the mat

so with this multi-level processing as you've kind of hinted at with the multiple layers here it could be possible that at some neuronal stage or at some level of processing there is a pattern that maybe represents the cat being on the mat probabilistically which also invoked the whole representation questions which we had talked about months ago

So it's so fun to see how you delineated where there's controversy, sometimes even both sides of the discussion around a controversy.

And then it's like, great, here's the artifact.

Let's see which way we're going to push it.

If there turns out to be more evidence for transparent coding, then we'll push it that way.

And if there turns out to be less, then we can push it a different way.

so um scott uh if you're there i don't see you yet so stephen first and then okay scott go ahead and then steven


SPEAKER_02:
I just wanted to mention there was an article in Nature a couple years ago where there was an assertion made that consciousness, this is what caught my eye, consciousness, they asserted, arose 520 million years ago.

And I was like, well, that's interesting.

What's the evidence?

And what they found was some structures for, I think they were proto-noto cords or something.

But basically it was a ganglia kind of thing, a secondary processing.

And their assertion was,

that because they found physical evidence of a neuronal structure, again, in fossils, it was some structure that was able to be preserved in shale or something, but because it was secondary processing beyond the eyeball or the ear or the perceptual apparatus, that secondary processing they suggested meant there was

Consciousness because that's was their definition, but it was interesting reason I raise it here is It's interesting that notion of embodiment Right.

So we're talking again.

Let's talk about reaction chambers.

We have there's stimuli all over the world there's things happening and then we have perceptions ability to stimuli right in our the afforded to us and so

that comes in but we don't have the structure of it is tbd right and so then we the the organism embodies morphologically certain structures over time eyeballs and notochords and ganglia and things like that right

And those themselves are information structures.

They just haven't even embodied in the morphology.

So it's morphological computing for biological organism, right?

Because they now can do that thing.

I can't see an ultraviolet, but bees can, that kind of thing, or infrared, that kind of thing.

So I just wanted to raise that idea, that assertion that offended me originally that consciousness arose 520 million years ago is not so offensive in a way because what they're trying to do is grope at the notion of the layering on of morphology and embodiments and say, look, here was a ratchet.

Here's something happened here and we think, we don't know how much more information.

It's like Julian James when he went back and did the

Origin of Consciousness and the Evolution of the Bicameral Mind book in the 70s, J-A-Y-N-E-S.

And he was asserting from a literature search that the Wernicke's area flashed on at one point.

It was equivalent of Broca's area, language center in the other side of the brain.

And his literature search, he looked at Joan of Arc, he looked at the Iliad, and he said that morphologically, literature embodied

that notion of the mind actually changing.

In ancient literature, you can see the mind turning on an internal voice.

And so I just wanted to raise that notion, those embodiments of the external and internal states lying around all over the place, right?

And so your paper does a nice job of inviting

the treatment of those or those as candidates for looking at the mind being assembled, particularly if the mind is external to the brain and the brain is just an antenna tuned into the mind.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_04:
One funny little synchronicity there is that Julian Jaynes wrote the book that Scott mentioned, Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind.

But Edwin Jaynes was a very famous thermodynamics researcher who introduced the maximum entropy interpretation of thermodynamics.

So...

Related like we all are.


SPEAKER_02:
Were they related by the blood?


SPEAKER_04:
Aren't we all?


SPEAKER_02:
Come on.


SPEAKER_04:
Stephen and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just sort of coming to this diagram that you've got here.

So I think one thing I'd be interested in, I know she's saying neuronal or other internal systemic states.

So you sort of give a little bit of latitude to dynamical aspects of that.

Goes to cognitive states of the system beliefs.

And I'm wondering how much you're tied to those beliefs being...

statistical computational sort of separate things or how much is it beliefs on action policies?

I mean, I know I'm pushing active influence again, but yeah, what's your thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

I mean, there's all sorts of questions here about how we individuate representations and such, but I wouldn't think, I don't even, I don't really think of these as detachable, uh, separate entities at all.

So that note is labeled P.

But I'm one of these functionalists who thinks that the reason that the label itself does nothing, right?

The label is a useful indicator for people outside the system to understand what it represents.

But the representational function is just the role that that node plays in the network.

So, and that would, I think that it subsumes and includes connections to action, right?

I just tend to think of connections to action as the special case where what you're generating, what your generative model is generating are states of the motor effectors.

So, right, I just, and I think any kind of planning that,

organism learns to do can also be understood as learning sort of sensory motor contingencies which will influence how states of the motor effectors are generated in tandem with states of the perceptual system right how perceptual biases occur so um basically

Yeah, I don't think that there's any... These don't need to be cognitive separable features of the... These don't need to be separable features of the system.

They're just... When I say that a state represents P, because represents for me has sort of a functionalist meaning, I just mean that's just sort of a label for a set of ways in which the system can behave because of its internal structure.

So including sort of internal...


SPEAKER_04:
um dynamics right but it's really just a label for a property of the dynamics of the system cool and also beyond the action being at the gross organismal motor level potentially internal representations or states could be like hormonal or neurosecretory so the neuron can fire but neurons have other affordances like the little micro motor behavior with the motor proteins like releasing a vesicle of

of a protein that's been transcribed and translated, also tiny little motor behaviors of nested smaller agents inside of that neuronal interface.

So Steven, and then anyone else with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_00:
Actually, just what you were saying there, Daniel, does that mean that you can almost release hormones through the brain?

It doesn't have to be like through a gland in the body, but you've got smaller scale


SPEAKER_04:
releases neuro secretory cells and neuroendocrine biology are large areas so yes many kinds of cells pull in and secrete molecules and neurons are of various subtypes secreting specific hormones neuropeptides all kinds of hormones and signaling molecules short range and into the circulation


SPEAKER_00:
Got you.

OK, thanks.

And I let that process.

And that's really useful.

I didn't know about that.

And I suppose just adding on to this, when you mentioned about sensory motor contingencies and being able to, so I'm wondering that the scale of consciousness and things entering into consciousness or the phenomenological sort of awareness,

Do you sense that there may be, even if active influence is underwriting it all, other types of, like it doesn't have to be as pure active inference at that scale, and it could be working with other types of sort of architectures or process architectures?


SPEAKER_06:
I mean, well, one thing is that consciousness, so I think Scott brought up consciousness for the first time here.

That's really interesting.

I sort of deliberately didn't say anything about it in my paper because I find that it's a very thorny topic for me.

Of course, for many people, right?

It's notoriously not an easy problem, or maybe it is, and it looks like a hard problem.

But anyway...

Yeah, so I'm not sure.

I do think that all of the cognitive dynamics I'm talking about are probably more fine-grained than what shows up in consciousness.

So I wouldn't say that there's some transparent mapping from whatever you believe in the sense of belief that's implicitly defined here and what you are consciously aware of.

So there's all sorts of theories of how consciousness relates to this stuff.

There was a second piece to what you said that I wanted to address, but I don't remember what it was.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I suppose it's a scale, but I think you kind of addressed it a little bit there.

Sorry, Daniel, were you going to say something?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, we'll come back to it if you remember what it was.

Yeah, Scott, and then anyone else with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I wanted to go back to the notion of neurotransmitters for a minute ago when you were talking about endocrine neural function.

A couple of things.

There's a couple of books here I just want to hold up.

There's Cognitive Archaeological...

The cognitive archaeology and human evolution, kind of an interesting notion there.

A couple of authors there.

And here's another one.

Archaeology and memory, kind of an interesting one.

The reason I raise these is kind of interesting.

When you talk about neurotransmitters, I remember reading an article a few years ago that suggested that among all the animals in the animal kingdom, now the animal kingdom isn't old.

representation Corollas Linnaeus thing I get it but in any event there's only one animal that doesn't share any of the neurotransmitters with the rest of the animals like the box jellyfish or some kind of jellyfish I forget which one it was and I thought that was interesting just what we were just talking about a minute ago Daniel was noting about neurotransmitters well again it's morphological computing those are artifacts of earlier solutions their practices

of processing of information by these organisms right and so the fact that we can go back and say wow i wonder if these things were related given the fact that these don't share any neurotransmitters that's kind of an ethereal element it's not something that you get like bones and you know doesn't fossilize well but isn't it interesting that we can find the morphology of neurotransmission

in current organisms and use that to understand lineage and relationship so in fact that's a it's a morphological artifact and it's not epigenetic right but it's interesting the relationship of the the uh homeostatic state of uh thinking or cognition of a certain line of organisms and the

morphology of its neurotransmitters.

I'm interested in eusocial insects, for instance.

Do people do profiles?

If anybody here knows anything about eusocial insects, please type in.

What's the story with neurotransmitter analysis among eusocial insects?

Is the neurotransmitter specially invoked, and is the morphology of neurotransmitters perhaps where the organism resides more than other physicalities?

Thanks.


SPEAKER_04:
Great question, Scott.

So first on the tenofor point, and then the eusocial.

So the tenofor, indeed, it did suggest new evolutionary hypotheses when people investigated which neurotransmitters tenofors used, and they convergently utilized some of the same simple charged amino acid derivatives, but they used them in different ways.

For example, glutamate is not used in muscle contraction in vertebrates.

We have acetylcholinergic

receptors at the muscle, but glutamate was used, which supports Alex's point about functional representation.

There's nothing that says glutamate means muscle contraction.

It's a functional context with a receptor and a muscle cell and a neuron that generates the contraction.

potentially for a later day, maybe when we discuss active inference, the paper.

But we've done multiple studies measuring neurotransmitter metabolism and gene expression in ants.

And there's been a lot of work on honeybees as well.

And just the one point I'll make here, since it is a large area and people can look at the papers if they want, is that the neurotransmitters that are involved in the regulation of foraging

in ants and bees are inherited from the neurotransmitters that regulate foraging in solitary insects, like dopamine and octopamine in fruit flies, where it's been investigated in the context of solitary foraging.

But the inputs and the outputs of foraging for the eusocial insects are different.

So whereas in Drosophila, it's like internal hunger signals, representations, maybe some sort of neural hormonal encoding leads to foraging behavior.

And then that results in the acquisition of food that reenters that bodily system.

But in ant forager is foraging essentially food for the larva, a different part of the colony organism.

So the inputs like the stimuli that lead to induced foraging behavior and the outputs like where the food goes are different, but the foraging motor behavior is conserved and it's that rewiring of the motor motif of foraging via the same neurotransmitters, octopamine and dopamine and others that actually enable the colony life cycle.

So it's a really awesome area.

I hope we can talk more about how that relates to active inference.

So Steven, and then Scott, and then anyone else who raises their hands.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'd like to ask a question about, which sort of links to that.

It's a kind of a semi-theory I've got, but is it feasible with this that the brain, like an organism basically, the cells that become the brain effectively, they mutate and they transform into the unique form that the brain and the nervous system are basically like another organism growing into the main body.

organism right so you've got two organisms once they differentiate and their brain is like the control and the nervous system is like the control organization growing into and with the other the fascia of the other organism well in a human's fascia but obviously i just wondered if that would be plausible and that that would do anything with this brain organism boundary question

that I know you are kind of connected to in terms of wanting to maybe maintain more of that potential.

I don't know if that's something that other people are talking about or whether it's a little bit out there and just, um, yeah, biologically or from the sort of cognitive philosophical sense, how that pans out.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

Yeah.

I love, I love the, um,

like biology and biochemistry and stuff and all this wonderful fine-grained scientific life sciences stuff that you guys are bringing to the table on this.

That's not as much where I'm coming from, but I think it's really, really cool.

But so, Stephen, the idea that you just articulated sounds

Sounds out there and plausible to me.

So I think that like that's kind of what I would expect is that the same story can be told on multiple scales internal to the system.

Right.

And so the brain learning sort of learning growing.

I guess I've just been conditioned to think of all this as one type of process.

Right.

So I said learning, but.

morphological development and growing into its mature shape is a form of learning.

But so anyway, that happening and interfacing with the rest of the organism, I mean, I definitely don't see any reason that we need to draw a like,

joint in nature around the physically, right, the organism that we can perceive, there are going to be many similar joints that we could delineate within.

So I think that's a cool idea.

I don't know much about the details of that process, so I can't, like, check that and validate it, but it sounds plausible to me.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, Alex.

Blue, and then Scott.


SPEAKER_03:
So just to kind of maybe ask Stephen to unpack a little bit what he said.

So I think in terms of a brain-organism separation or duality, do you maybe mean mind-organism?

Because in my experience, it's like the...

like the brain is like the control center, right?

Like, I don't know that there's necessarily like a division between the brain and the organism, but definitely like the mind is kind of like this ethereal concept.

So maybe could you just unpack that a little bit?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I was actually thinking, partly thinking about the work of Mike Levin, Mike Levina or Mike Levin.

And so in a way, my understanding is that once a cell becomes a neuronal cell, there's no going back.

Like it's kind of like it.

So it's in some ways it's it's it's I was curious whether that whole structure, be it from a small organism, is effectively like we basically have two organisms in our body.

because our cells are differentiated into the bodily organisms and the neuronal ones.

And they've sort of, they work together in this symbiotic kind of cybernetic loop.

So that's the kind of thinking, but how it pans out, you know,


SPEAKER_03:
so I just, if I could just like speak to that a little bit.

So the neurons can de-differentiate and do in like, especially like in neural cancer types.

So we do see some, some de-differentiation there.

It's not as committal as we've thought before.

I mean, this it's kind of a budding field and the, the, you know,

antique way of thinking is that it's a set lineage, but there's ways that you can convince them to do otherwise.

I think Mike Levin's thing is the bioelectric field, right?

And so he separates the bioelectricity of the organism as maybe...

the overarching control center there.

But I've not seen like a neural, like a neuron body distinction.

That's why I was just like, what?


SPEAKER_04:
Sorry.

Well, one thought on that and also to Scott's point about the emergence of a second level of the nervous system

is to remember from developmental biology that ectoderm, the outer layer of the developing embryo, turns into neuroectoderm, which is the tissue that gives rise to the nervous system and gastrulation and the neural tube.

So the nervous system developmentally, neurons, share an affinity and a developmental proximity to the external layer.

And so when you start nesting internal layers inside of that tube that's closed,

you start getting higher order nervous systems.

And then also the pituitary gland to sort of close this with a neuroendocrine discussion, the pituitary gland is actually amalgamated from multiple developmental sources.

And so it's interesting that it has such a pivotal hormonal position, integrating hormones and the brain's function.

And it itself is like a refusion from a tissue perspective of multiple branches of the ectoderm that had branched.

And then they reformulate a new organ, which is the pituitary gland that serves a very coordinating role in organismal development.

So Scott, and then anyone else with a question?


SPEAKER_02:
know this is the best way i can spend my day with people who say the quote the pituitary gland is amalgamated from multiple ectoderm sources there i'm in the right place man you know when you you know this is the place for me i can tell you that hey um a couple things let's go back to this part in holland dynamic and cancer as an organism stuff for a second this is uh this is good stuff so you know the cancer analysis where they start to treat cancer as an organism in an ecosystem you know some of the

framings to think of it that way, a recruitment of a kind of chaotic, kind of like having a drunk uncle stay at your house is one way of looking at cancer, right?

It's a chaotic use of resources.

So that is kind of interesting, right?

So we're talking, and going back to Stephen's point about the mind being different, so I'm thinking of symbiogenesis here, Lynn Margulis stuff and the chloroplasts in all plant cells and the mitochondria in all

animal cells were once their artifacts of once free existing bacteria right they migrated on board with eukaryotes because it was a better deal right more leverage more de-risking higher levels of engagement with the outside right they change their internal physicality and morphology so they could think at way higher levels they could access way more complex levels of engagement than single cell organisms

including the engagements they could get through sexual reproduction, which introduced additional symbolic novelty.

So they could be more dynamically engaged with environments, right?

Clonal reproduction does not introduce a lot of novelty.

So it's hard to keep up with dynamic environments if you're clonal.

This is sounding like intelligent design, but it's not.

So it's interesting, Stephen, in your notion of the mind being separate, because in a way, the mind is formed by the social environment.

You know, I've told the story before, my sister adopting a five month old Chinese child who is now 22, who was raised in central Pennsylvania, speaks Spanish and English, does not speak Chinese, does not like Chinese food, does not like Chinese music.

And basically looks like a Chinese person, but is not.

So is that mind a Chinese mind?

The problem is we don't have any control groups on the mind formation, right?

Once you're formed, you are who you are.

And we say, okay, that's it.

But I like, Stephen, where you're going on that notion.

Maybe the mind is an independent quantity.

And again, the brain is an antenna to the mind.

So maybe the body contains the antenna components.

Again, I don't mean a real antenna, but sort of.

and it needs to be tuned it's feral and so maybe what's happening is the tuning actually creates a mind maybe the mind is not resident in the brain in a child and maybe Bayesian inferences construct a mind it's like


SPEAKER_04:
And to maybe direct it to Alex before we go to Stephen's question, Dean, you really focused on this sentence.

It may be, for example, that biological systems run an algorithm closer to contrastive divergence than to simulated annealing.

So what does that mean or what does that reflect on?


SPEAKER_05:
Can I ask?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, and Dean, maybe you want to give a little extra info on that.


SPEAKER_05:
Just a quick thing.

I want to hear Stephen and I want to hear everybody else, but I have a question.

In the background, sorry, I have to say this, in the background, I've got people taking the front of my house off.

So I haven't been able to do much other than try to control my ADD.

But I have a big question for Alex once we get through the part that Stephen and Scott want to have addressed, and it's specifically to what you just raised.

So thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Great.

Let's go to Stephen, and then we'll return to Dean and the contrast of divergence.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, maybe this will...

bring this together is I suppose what I'm just proposing is that there is some structural biological differentiation which is will have an impact in some ways and how we think about extended cognition but if we I'm very much of the

mind body environment dynamical system kind of idea so i suppose i'm i'm talking about there being a difference biologically but probably at the macro level i'm i'm trying anyway to formulate approaches which talk about a whole system and not anything else than that but i recognize that it may open up some other cans of worms but

I know that... I wonder if that's something that you're... Does this annealing relate to the mind-body-environment dynamic in playing out within that, or is it a little bit more separate or different to that?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah.

I mean, the use I was making of this contrast between contrast of divergence and simulated annealing here was just... was kind of more specific...

I was just thinking of so annealing the process of gradually lowering the temperature and simulated annealing was an optimization technique that mirrors that process.

And so, I mean, I guess the answer to your question, Stephen, is I wasn't really thinking about system environment relations here at all.

I was just thinking of

two different sort of internal processes and how they might be mapped onto these learning algorithms and processes in physics.

But so, I mean, I can wait to go on to that, to take Dean's question or whatever.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, maybe Dean, let's go for the divergence.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I'm not predictable.

I'm going to pull up the paper because I need to explain this.

Alex, in the paper, you talked in the subsection one to the role of internal energy.

Let me just find it here.

You talked about the inverse relationship between probability and energy is exploited in most uses of energy as a cost function and optimization problems.

So you made that clear.

And then a little further down in the paper, you talked about contrastive divergence, which in equilibrium distribution of a restricted Boltzmann machine.

And then you got into a little bit more about the comparison to the simulated annealing.

And then you got into section two, and I've just got to try to find it here, the ensemble piece.

So here's my question.

If I were to bring three things and cast the widest, largest frist and blanket yet around your paper, because I think that's what your paper does.

if I were to bring a Polaroid picture, a sprinkler, and an astronaut together, so if I were to bring identity, which was the primary attractor of your paper to me, identity, astronaut, that distribution piece and the first one, the Polaroid, the isomorphism, could you explain how

You brought these things that are so seemingly

distal into some sort of a coherence.

How did, when you were sitting down, because I know you did this on a very proximal level, but it has far reaching implications based on the kinds of questions that Steven has asked, ones that Scott's asked, the points that Lou and Daniel have made.

It doesn't just seem to be local.

It seems to be really distributed as well.

And so I'm just really curious,

You wrote the paper, but now that you've kind of been able to step back from it and sort of take it in in a perspective, that distance must have you really looking at this maybe in interesting ways, because there isn't just the stuff on the paper.

There's the stuff now that you've kind of reflected on and seen the inversion and wondered,

holy mackerel, did I open up a can of worms, or what have I done?

I'm curious about that on a personal level.


SPEAKER_06:
Right.

Well, just in general, the most striking thing about how this has played out is that people are really interested.

So Blue mentioned this in the discussion, and I had emails about it too, are really interested in the distinction between genuine minds and simulations.

which was completely an afterthought when I wrote this.

It was just like, oh, yeah, I better deal with the scope of this, and so I should put a sentence about that.

And I did put care into it.

You know, I put the best sentence I could in, but it wasn't my focus.

But, yeah, I mean, the thing, I guess the thing that strikes me about this, so it was, right, I mean, it was intended to be this thing

It was intended to be a very fundamental thesis that I'm considering here.

So I do think it has far-reaching implications.

I have no idea whether it's true.

But if it did, it would have at least far-reaching implications.

I guess what I'm less clear on is I'm still waiting for the other shoe to drop.

I'm waiting for someone to say, here's an example of a biological system in which there's no way that you can map the cognitive interpretation directly onto the physical interpretation.

If that's the case, and if I think it's a compelling example, then I guess I'm wrong.

So far, that hasn't happened.

There have been some interesting suggestions.

So I guess I'm... I don't know if I'm directly answering your question, Dean.

I'm just... To me, the devil is still very much in the details.

And this is essentially a defense of a... I was trying to...

I was trying to show that maybe some a priori prima facie objections to this kind of thesis were not compelling.

But there could be all sorts of details that emerge that might question it.

So I don't know if that really answers your question.

I'm sorry.


SPEAKER_05:
No.

And again, it was kind of like when I was talking with Blue and Daniel in the point O, and I

I brought up, so I talked to people who very much are in an activist camp and they wanna see that realistic and then there's the statistical camp and they really wanna have that sort of top down, where's the channel, what's going on?

And I just kind of thought what your paper did is it opened both of those perspectives.

I don't know that they even have to necessarily merge or overlap.

I think the fact that we can

use both and see both.

It's just a really interesting thing.

Now, I don't know whether that is disprovable or it should be.

I guess that would mean that inactivism is not a thing or statistical modeling is not a thing.

And yet we use these things.

So I mean, I guess they can be discounted, but I don't know that they'll go away.

That's all.

So I guess you have answered my question.

We can leave things open and up and not necessarily have them


SPEAKER_06:
provide everything but but we can't just sort of discount something and throw it away until somebody as you said comes along and and says no right it doesn't work yeah and just one quick follow-up on this this the one reason i wrote this paper is that i think what a lot of people find compelling about the free energy principle and the literature around that is the idea that there might be a link between physics and cognition right that there is a fundamental theory kind of emerging but

I think it's very hard to pin down what the precise relationship... It's hard for different people at different times.

It's becoming clearer.

This has been worked out a little bit in the pre-energy principle literature.

But it's difficult to articulate exactly what the deep connection is between variational inference on the one hand and the behavior of physical systems.

So I just wanted to

I wanted to throw out, here's one version, one possibility of what the, supposed to be a clean, precise, brief statement of what that relationship could be.

So that, yeah, it's open-ended, but so that it can be falsified, juxtaposed to other interpretations of that relation, et cetera.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, Alex.

We'll go to Blue, and then if anyone in the chat or if Dave has a comment, then feel free.

But first, Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
So Alex, I think that this goes back to what you were saying in the very beginning about scale, right?

So it's hard right now even to map like cognition onto like neural activation.

I mean, right now we don't know too much, like too many components in the system are murky for it to really be

clear what's happening and i think you know as we talk about information going from a cell you know to from a brain to a neuron to cognition to action to bodily regulation and these kinds of things we don't really know is information compressed is it integrated like what is happening to scale a system up or down right i think that that's a hard hard problem


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I mean, maybe I'm not sure what you mean by scaling the system up or down.


SPEAKER_04:
In this section, you talk about the scale-free nature of free energy dynamics and about how global and local free energy minimization could be understood as subsystems that are undergoing some sort of akin process at their own scales.


SPEAKER_06:
Right.

Yeah, so I mean, the thing that

So I mean, the thing that I wanted to react to in what Blue said was the idea that we don't really know what's going on in the brain still.

It's very murky.

I mean, I think that's true.

It's always relative, right, to some

ideal of how much we could know.

But what got me into this whole literature in the first place was, again, starting with the machine learning literature around 2012, 2013, I started to feel like we actually were getting a grasp on some of these principles, how this works quite generally.

So like the Helmholtz machine, for example, you talked about that in the point zero.

I think that's a model.

Now, if the model is accurate, then it seems like what's happening is as signals are sent from one neuronal population to another further from the sensory motor periphery, the information is being compressed.

So that's a particular hypothesis that there's successive compression of information, meaning that things are represented using lower dimensional

Well, vector spaces, if you want to translate between vector spaces and neuronal populations, right?

and that we have a pretty good idea, right?

Like this sort of architecture explains so many things.

I mean, this is what got people so excited about the predictive brain or the Bayesian brain type hypotheses is that there are just so many different things from different domains in psychology and neuroscience that this kind of perspective seems to unify.

It's to be expected in a sort of Helmholtzian architecture that like,

know uh the you can always sort of endogenous endogenously cause the same sorts of states that you could be in as a result of perception right and that imagination and internal generation of states has a particular role to play in learning and things like this so i'm kind of rambling but um my my my sense is that this um

this sort of Bayesian, Helmholtzian revolution or whatever you want to call it in recent years has shown that we do understand many principles of how the brain functions at the level of like at the human scale.

If the question is about like how do other scales fold into this, I mean,

There's some work that Maxwell Remsted and Kasper Hesp and people like that have done on understanding neuronal population dynamics in terms of active inference at that scale.

And so that's really interesting.

So what I would think of as a structural representation from the point of view of me or you, like a human being, you can also think of as a process of neurons performing active inference at their own scale.

But I think there's, to me, the hard question there is how do you relate the contents of the representation at the higher scale to the contents of the lower scale?

That's the thing that bothers me in this area.


SPEAKER_03:
If I could just respond really quick.

Yeah, that's exactly the thing.

I mean, we can see how this act of inference is happening at different scales, for sure.

But how scaling up and scaling down or the translation from one scale to another happens is very mysterious still.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, totally.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

So we have about 20 minutes left.

So if anyone has a question in live chat, otherwise, we'll go to Scott, and then Steven and be preparing our thoughts for what to continue discussing in point two.

So Scott.


SPEAKER_02:
So picking up on the last couple of points really interesting the I was thinking of what was the gentleman's name who Barrett sin who said information is the difference that makes a difference.

What was that guy's name?

Is it?

Anyway,

the difference that makes a difference.

And I always thought the first difference that he's talking about is a perceptual change in the environment.

And the second difference is, is that perceptual change relevant to you?

And so I want to unpack that a little bit here because contents, one of the things that I was talking about in my MIT presentation, one of the things I noted is Shannon tells us signal versus noise.

But I think but it doesn't tell us if the signal is a cancer cure or a chocolate chip cookie recipe.

Right.

And so the content is left undefined there.

Now, what if so?

So I define living systems as autocatalytic entropy secreting structures.

Notice I don't say they have to be embodied in any particular embodiment.

My son said the only reason I came up with the definition is I wanted to use the word secretion because it was juicy.

But he's right in part.

I wanted to make it juicy.

But the reason I raise that here is when you look at Berenson or whoever it was, Berenson, anyway, the difference that makes a difference.

Info, information really maybe is what we cognitive beings call relevant differentials that we perceive.

Irrelevant differentials are just noise.

And so the difference that makes a difference, we call it information, but there's a lot of differentials out there in the world.

And that's the reason I'm going there is since we're talking to a philosopher today and what I deal in as a lawyer is rhetoric.

And rhetoric is what you do to bring together incommensurables, right?

And rhetoric is not like crazy glue.

It's like epoxy.

It doesn't just bring things together.

It also brings them together and fills gaps.

So the rhetoric of information is our storytelling about relevant differentials.

And we seek to sculpt our internal model and entrain other people's internal models.

Because when we entrain other people's internal models with our rhetoric, then it de-risks our externality because other people's internal models are my externality, right?

So the rhetoric is the tool that we use to reduce differentials or to increase relevance alignment among cognitive systems running cognition.

How's that?

I wanted to try to integrate.

That seemed to me, that last couple of comments, it felt like maybe information is an article when we put too much in seeking information.

Maybe information, the difference that makes a difference, after the fact we can tell that because before the fact we can't tell what's relevant.

For instance, suntan lotion never existed because we didn't know that photons cause skin cancer.

Now there's an entire commercial factories and areas in the grocery store that sell suntan lotion.

Now, it doesn't mean that the sun became carcinogenic.

We just learned that it did.

So we were able to make that inference at large scales and now influence buying behavior, which leverages and de-risks future behaviors, which is the reason that we care about information.

That's the difference that makes a difference.

Anyway, a couple of thoughts on this last couple of things.


SPEAKER_06:
That's really cool stuff.

I mean, I really see things similarly, I think, on a lot of fronts there.

Yeah.

I think, so the question of, it sounds to me like you're kind of saying, like, we don't have to be too fixated on this term information, because it really, it means differences that make a difference, or being aware of differentials.

So, I mean, I...

I agree with that.

I mean, again, I always go back to just the sort of bedrock stuff.

So I think Shannon's interpretation of information was actually a little bit unnecessarily epistemic.

I think it could have been just doxastic.

So he says, you know, it's coming to know something.

It's like, well, but we could generalize that and just talk about what one comes to believe.

And then I think if we work with that notion, which isn't information anymore, as Shannon defined it,

because he talked about knowledge.

But whatever that generalization of information is called, I think that would really conduct logic things.

Yeah, so that's all that I think we're getting at with the concept of information.

But what I think is really interesting and difficult philosophically is, OK, so obviously there's self-information, right?

So there's just like something pings my retina and or, you know,

something downstream from that and I notice a little flip in my visual field, right?

And that's something I'm aware of.

So that's information about itself anyway.

But then the more important signals carry all sorts of information about other things, meaning I guess they lead us to predict and expect other differences beyond themselves.

And so the tricky thing to me is, okay, so

I take myself to be this system of interacting parts, neurons and also other things, obviously, that sort of embodies a perspective.

And the information that a signal carries depends on that whole system and how this signal impacts it, right?

And, you know, one of my neurons is an entirely different type of system.

Here's my daughter who has to tell me something.

What's up?

You got ice cream?

Awesome.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_01:
Um, sorry, that's cool.


SPEAKER_06:
That's awesome.


SPEAKER_04:
Um, yeah, so your generative models on a live stream right now.

I'm sorry.


SPEAKER_06:
That's cool.

Yeah.

Um, I don't know.

So I was saying something about neurons and then now I'm thinking about ice cream.

Um,

Basically, yeah, so the question for me is, so I think of content or the information content of a signal or a person as relative to the person, to the system.

And so if you've got a completely different system with a different structure, I think you can sort of compare the structures of the systems to see how similar the content is, right?

But I think it has to be at that whole level of the sort of holistic entire system level that you need to make these content comparisons.

So I don't remember whether that directly links back to where we started this, but...


SPEAKER_04:
nice yeah one one quick thought on that is the the difference that makes a difference which is also a big key term in the philosophy of biology like the mutation is the difference that makes a difference for something um in active inference it's the difference in observation that makes a difference for either the generative model updating that's inference or the difference that makes a difference for action so we have a way to talk about it and then also um the doxastic note

not my total area, but it looks like this is how we can work towards pluralism across perspectives.

Because if it's framed as one person believes that it's hot and one person believes that it's cold, if there's only one truth and we're gonna play tug of war, then we have to fight.

But if it's true that one person believes it's hot and it's true that one person believes it's cold,

there's no problem.

There still might be differences on what temperature the people want the room, but by framing things about what a perspective or a system or an agent believes to be true or just believes period, it could be an ironic belief.

All of a sudden we can interact with multi-agent systems and deal with them in a way that still has local logic.

So Steven, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_00:
So thanks.

Just sort of closing out, I suppose, in a way, I'd be curious how this work with beliefs that has a nice, as Daniel said, it bridges action-orientated approaches and pragmatic approaches with more epistemic approaches, because beliefs tend to be beliefs about what will happen when something happens.

done in the world often not necessarily and I'm curious how this paper and this kind of underpinning relates or helped to inform where you were going with a new paper that was intriguing about the folk psychology and how maybe that that there's some sort of that's where one of the bridges out from this paper into

you know, folk psychology being how we kind of intuitively believe the world is based on our experiences.

So there is a certain element of like, whether that's how it's structured in the brain, it's kind of how we might structure it before science tells us something else, in a certainly in a socio cultural sense.

So I'd be interested in how that extension plays out with this paper.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, so there's definitely a direct connection between this paper and that one.

I mean, I wanted to write a sort of sequel to this paper where I talked about specifically desires and how those sort of

the way those would be grounded in thermodynamics, according to this picture, or co-native states in general, like the states with a world-to-mind direction of fit.

And so then I started talking to Ryan Smith and others about this, and we ended up co-authoring a quite different paper that has some commonality, but I still want to write one that's more on the thermodynamic side of things.

But the connection is, in this sort of identity thesis at the end of this paper,

I argue for it by way of David Lewis, who one of the terms in the identity is the implicit definition that folk psychology gives us of mental states.

So we haven't really gotten into that.

Maybe we will next week or something.

I don't know.

There's Ramsey sentences.

I'd love to talk about those.


SPEAKER_04:
We got the Ramsey sentences.

We got the sleep-wake simulation.

We have a few other topics that we will really look forward to exploring.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, let's please get into that.

But like, basically, I mean, I don't know, as usual, I always feel like I'm not doing an adequate job of answering questions.

I'm sorry.

But by folk psychology in this context, I'm really thinking of just our, it's sort of like theory of mind, right?

It's like our implicit theory of the way people, including ourselves, function.

So I think that

that's essential even though it's not highlighted until the end that's essential to what i'm doing in this paper because if you don't have mental states to define then you don't have any identity relation because that's one of the terms in the identity relation although you could also i guess maybe if you're doing pure bayesian modeling you could just write down a bunch of states and equations for how they update um without thinking about folk psychology at all but but i guess the point of this is that um

if one of the terms in this relation is the mind, well, I think folk psychology, I don't actually love that term.

I mean, it's okay.

It's a philosopher's term of art, right?

I just mean intuitive human psychology, I think is one of the terms in this relation.


SPEAKER_04:
Ooh, scientists are folk too.

So cognitive diversity means that we have all different ways of knowing and there may not be one default or simply intuitive way of working or knowing because what's intuitive to one person will be out of the groove for somebody else.

And that's why the movement towards pluralism in terms of our understanding of ideas and of ecosystems is so interesting to talk about and see connected to active inference.

Any thoughts or what would be something that somebody is excited from the conversation today or thinking about how we could resolve or at least introduce again next week?

think a few of the things we have written down is the sleep wake simulation what is that agent doing what does it do in terms of your model we have the ramsey sentences and where does that style of logical representation come into play we have empirical validity what kind of experiments are you interested in or curious about what what else could be interesting


SPEAKER_06:
we could still talk about the contrastive divergence versus simulated annealing thing.

I just really briefly wanted to follow up and say I think when I say intuitive

psychology, I mean, I don't mean to suggest that there's just one of those.

I think that but I do think we can sort of average over different perspectives to get that.

So like the individual perspectives ultimately are what's real.

But if we want to talk about things at an abstract level, we could average over those.

And I think that's kind of what Lewis tries to do.

So maybe this is something we'll get into next week.

But really, when he talks about folk psychology, he engineers it so that it doesn't have to be that there's just one set of statements that embodies what people think about psychology.

It's like a disjunction of different sets that mostly overlap.

And just, yeah, I mean, pluralism is really, I think, is a good ideal in many contexts.

I actually think this would be interesting.

This might be controversial.

I think it's not always the goal in science, because if you start out with pluralism, then you just don't do anything, right?

It's like, okay, everything's fine as it is.

But I think sometimes we're seeking a unifying underlying explanation.

And if you accept pluralism at the start, then you won't get there.


SPEAKER_04:
that tension which is okay pluralism everybody must be pluralist and this is the only way it's actually absolutist and singular at a higher level and so pluralism means that we each do have our perspectives and yet there is a way of working it's not just the same thing as saying we have an absolute answer and it's that there's no answer that's the kind of local logical paradoxes that we see all around us that's a great point stephen and then anyone else


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's the rabbit hole of postmodernism.

We don't want to go, but it's good.

This is a really rich conversation.

And I think, like you say, to be able to jump from Helmholtz to some of these transcultural things is, you know, it shows you that it's pretty foundational, some of the stuff we're touching.

So that's great.

So thanks for a lovely talk today.

I really enjoyed it.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, thanks a lot.

Any closing notes there, Alex?

Otherwise, we're all going to probably re-listen and re-read and think about what would be good to ask next week.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, no, thank you all.

It's really fascinating and fun, and I just want to do more of it next week.

I'm very... I didn't have anything else to say, but I kept speaking.

I'm not sure why some of you do that sometimes.


SPEAKER_04:
It happens.

So thanks again, everybody who's participating live and on live stream.

And we will see you next week.

## wiUDw6vk644

SPEAKER_03:
okay hello everyone we are live welcome to act in flab live stream number 22.2 nice repeating digits there we're here with alex keifer and others we're going to be having our second follow-up discussion on the paper we've been discussing for the little last bit psychophysical identity and free energy

It's May 25th, 2021, and this will be a great discussion.

So thanks again for everybody who's joining live as well as watching in replay.

If you're watching live, especially feel welcome to add a comment in the live chat that we can address.

Welcome to Act-Inf Lab, everyone.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links that are listed here.

This is recorded in an archived livestream, so please provide us feedback so that we all can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for livestreams.

We are here in the second of the two discussions in late May 21, and happy to have Alex joining us for both of these discussions, which has been great.

Today in 22.2, quick correction, we will be just trying to learn and discuss.

Enjoying these conversations, seeing where they go, enjoying what questions bring up, and also carrying on with a few of the topics that we knew that we wanted to cover from last week.

and with that being said we can jump right in so we can go to the introductions and we'll just um maybe go around introduce ourselves say hello and then end with alex and alex would be happy to hear your thoughts or reflections in this past week so i'm daniel i'm a postdoctoral researcher in california and i'll pass to dean hi folks i'm dean i'm from calgary and uh


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I'll pass it to Adam.


SPEAKER_06:
I'm Adam.


SPEAKER_07:
I'm a postdoctoral researcher at the Johns Hopkins Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Science.


SPEAKER_03:
And Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, hello.

I'm in Stephen.

I'm in Toronto.

I'm a community development practitioner and applied theatre artist, and I'm doing a practice-based PhD at the moment.

And I will pass it over to Alex.


SPEAKER_05:
Me, Alex, or other Alex?


SPEAKER_03:
I think you're the only Alex right now.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, okay.

I wasn't sure there's a fellow jitster.

Oh, so I'm Alex Kiefer.

Thanks for having me back again to talk about this paper.

I'm a philosopher.

I'm currently affiliated with Monash University, and I'm also doing more applied work for Nested Minds Solutions.

It's a kind of active inference AI startup.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

There's a few ways we can start, but why don't you feel free to give any opening comments and then we can ask questions.

We have some other slides.


SPEAKER_05:
Right.

So you asked about my reflections over the past week.

I haven't reflected a whole lot on deep themes.

I did go through.

So in the point zero discussion, there was a

sort of a question about how we get from equation 2.1 to 2.2 with the flipping of the p's and q's.

So that strikes me as not the most central theme we could spend time on.

But I did just spend some time writing out the derivation, if that's something we can get to at some point.

But in general, I guess my feeling is I think last week was really fun, and it was very far-ranging.

I think it would be fun to drill down a bit more on some of the specifics this week, but it's also whatever people want to say.

That's what I'd be interested in doing.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you, Alex.

Welcome, Lou.

If you'd like to just say hi, we're having intros, and then we'll walk through some jokes and questions.


SPEAKER_01:
Good morning, I'm Blue Knight.

I'm an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

So there's a bunch of places that we wrote down to jump in.

Maybe actually we could go to Dean's three functions walk into a bar.

So it's slide 11 and I'll have it up large on the stream.

So Dean, why don't you unpack what you were thinking here and let's get some initial reads to get the contrastive ball rolling.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, essentially what the point two aspect of this process does is it takes basically what we've introduced as the topic, tried to gain some interpretation around it.

And then, so what does that mean?

What does that turn into?

And so one of the products of that for me was

I kind of went back and reviewed the 22.1.

And one of the things about what you mentioned, Alex, was the explication of a simple idea.

And I thought that was really important.

And so what can that turn into, that simple idea?

That was the three functions walk into a bar piece and essentially spoke to what Scott was talking about last time in terms of paradoxes and what do those mean and

when do we model and when do we follow?

But I thought the bottom part was an important piece in terms of you mentioning that you sought continuities, and I wondered if you were referring to cynicism and that idea of how we take discontinuities and turn them into continuities.


SPEAKER_05:
Man, that's really interesting.

So I had never heard of cynicism.

I keep coming to Paris through strange avenues that were not planned.

I never consciously thought of it this way, but this kind of nicely summarizes how I see things and the way I've just been sort of forced by experience to approach philosophy.

I found it difficult or impossible to draw

to draw boundaries that would create discontinuities between categories quite generally.

So that gets into things like the Serites Paradox.

There's plenty of examples of this.

But I think for me, it's much harder to find a discontinuity than the opposite.


SPEAKER_03:
Can you maybe just walk us through these three functions walking into a bar?

What is the narrative here, and where does it sit in relation to the paper?


SPEAKER_04:
You're asking me?

Yeah.

Okay.

So essentially, if we're going to talk about contrastive divergence, which I think is a critical path to understanding how we move down a gradient and arrive at some sort of...

generative model, I think that there are three functions that essentially exist in that.

It's an inversion process, which, again, I'm not going to go into the reads on that.

There's an identity piece, which is spoken to explicitly in Alex's paper.

And then there's the contrastive divergence piece, which enables a person to remain balanced despite the fact that they don't have

particular answer that there are hidden states.

And I think a lot of what was being spoken to last time, Scott mentioned some things, Blue, Steven, was things like scale, which don't necessarily, we don't come at it with the same perception as to what we're looking at.

Some of us look at things a little bit

on a grander model and some of us look at it on a granular model.

And I think that the part of being able to fit that into a form like the joke, the three guys walk into a bar or whatever, kind of speaks to the fact that

If you think that this is gonna be about stability, you're gonna get interrupted by the change aspect of it.

If you think it's gonna be all about the change piece, you're not gonna be able to realize any sort of conceptualizations because conceptualizations require stability.

So you have to kind of be able to play in both fields at the same time, and that's hard.

And I think that's why

Alex's paper probably knocked me down about five times when I first read it because he actually did, Alex, try to somehow pull together the idea of stabilizing something even though things were pretty choppy and

and rather dynamic.

So I don't know if this is an example of where the part two of us discussing your paper goes, but I think it's interesting, especially in the context of cynicism and your idea that we're constantly trying to move from the unknown to the known as opposed to the traditional.

This is what I know, and I'm moving into these unknown spaces.


SPEAKER_03:
That reminds me of then anyone, Alex or anyone else, reminds me of sort of two complementary ways of thinking about education with the tabula rasa, the blank slate that inscription is put into.

It's like filling the cup with knowledge or inscribing into something that's templateless.

And then the alternative is to burn away ignorance.

And so it's almost like whether we're moving from the known into the unknown or the unknown towards the known, there are left in our right hands of education.


SPEAKER_05:
Right.

Yeah, yeah, this is really cool.

I mean, it, it seems like, Dean, like you have, you have an act for like reading, reading things in a sort of very deeper, almost allegorical way.


SPEAKER_04:
We're like, I'm talking about a very... A Peirce-ian way, yeah.

I read Charles Saunders Peirce two decades ago before it became popular.


SPEAKER_05:
Right.

So, yeah, so I think it's interesting and it's all, these connections are really there.

But I just, just to comment on this for a second.

So I do think that there's something about just the, how ubiquitous sort of

dynamism is and all this and how, in a sense, there's no stable process that we can latch onto here.

But when I was talking about contrastive divergence, my main point was just, well, look, I'm thinking of that very narrowly as a machine learning, like an unsupervised learning algorithm, which I know you have that in mind too, but you're also taking a broader picture.

So my point in contrasting contrastive divergence to simulated annealing was we can suppose that the brain is running something like contrastive divergence, where it's trying to reach a lower energy state.

But the way that algorithm works, of course, you don't need to actually run the basic idea.

is that you don't need to... So, okay, sorry, let me take a step back for a second.

Right, so like one way of doing this sort of unsupervised learning would be to take the distribution over hidden states in a neural net that's induced by an input and try to...

lower the energy of those states while raising the energy of the fantasies that the network would produce top-down, right?

And so the ideal way to do that would be to run the network until it reaches its equilibrium distribution and sample from that when you're doing the negative phase of this, of increasing the energy of the, or therefore lowering the probability of the fantasies.

Contrast and Divergence just takes a shortcut and just runs this for like one step or two steps or whatever.

So I just want to make that clear.

I don't know if it's clear for everyone in the audience who hasn't looked at this deeply.

The specific contrast that I wanted to draw there was just

was just between that and a process like simulated annealing where if you run it to the end of the process, you end up reaching the lowest possible energy state.

So the brain, I guess my point is the brain doesn't necessarily need to be settling to, and this does, I think, connect directly to your point, doesn't need to be settling to a completely stable state or even any particular metastable state.

It just has to be

there has to be this gradient, right, that is available.

But I do think that there's a deeper point here, right?

So the NESS or the non-equilibrium steady state that organisms are approaching as they do this variational inference thing is not any kind of final

You know, it's not a static state, like some kind of ultimate equilibrium.


SPEAKER_04:
Right.

Well, going down a set of stairs, the one steady thing is that I remain balanced and not go tumbling to my demise, right?

That's the one steady thing, the one balanced thing.

And then there's the gradient itself.

That's why there's a next slide that kind of speaks to that piece of it.

And that's all I basically wanted to bring up because I think, and I think the cynicism piece embraces,


SPEAKER_00:
entails all of that there's a there's a dynamic piece and there's a balancing piece and you and you want to be able to sort of address both that's that's cool yep thank you dean stephen and then adam there's interesting questions here for pragmatism and social constructivism you know in terms of how these ideas roll out into how we might talk to other people in the world around

projects and stuff because of this implication so i i wonder how you you would bring in this kind of embodiment of that so um if the brain is an organ that is doing expected more than expected free energy with the nervous system to help

to manage the movement of the organism.

And the organism overall has got that variational free energy to maintain homeostasis.

You've got this energy balance piece, but you've also got that need for entropy.

So I wonder how this can inform us, just like people when we do, I don't know if you know about the Alexander technique, but it's when someone's, when you think about the body and the skeleton,

We think about it as just the bones, but actually it's really everything's held together in a muscular sort of watery soup and with the tendons and everything.

So there needs to be some noise in there.

That entropy piece needs to be there when you're going down the stairs and that.

You can't be frozen.

you're you're full yet you need to have some of that energy equilibrium because again you're full so there's i wonder how if we were to talk to someone out there about their life and their world um walking down the stairs what what would we translate this in their language alex if you want to give a thought on that


SPEAKER_05:
I'm thinking about it.

I'm not sure beyond saying that I do think that there's a balance of two sort of forces or quantities here always.

But this reminds me actually, I'm not going to try to put words in your mouth, but this reminds me of Adam of your remarks about free will in relation to degrees of freedom and entropy and stuff.

So

That's a segue, but it doesn't have to be taken up.


SPEAKER_03:
cool um yeah it reminds me of stream of consciousness or walking downstairs you can't just stop there statically you can't stop anywhere along the staircase and you can't halt the stream of thought so what is happening that's allowing time t plus one to be generated from time t the state only has to move by one moment at a time it doesn't have to do the ultimate um steady state to the lowest possible energy so adam and then anyone else raising their hand


SPEAKER_07:
um i re-read your uh paper last night and it's even better the second time um i'd like to actually talk to you later about like getting into the weeds about different um like mappings on the neural level of like between the thermodynamic and the informational um but uh before we move on i was wondering how you'd feel about um like

a multi-phase or a multi-part description of neural architecture where there's some aspects which might be more annealing-like and some aspects that might be more contrastive-like.

So you could, for instance, tell a story of some sort of predictive workspace where you can think of it as the model selection as iterative annealing, potentially, in terms of some of its aspects.

But then, like, it's just, like, around.

Like, you could think of, like, DeHane-style ignition event as you're generating this big high-temperature complex that then settles down and selects the model.

But this would just be, like, one of the things that's happening.

Like, something contrastive could be, like,

the thalamus, maybe orchestrating different cycles and comparing them, or the hippocampal system.

And that could be doing your contrasts.

Would that be copacetic, or would that... Right.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, no, that sounds awesome.

I mean, in general, it seems consistent with the way I've just... I've learned to see these things, you know, just paying attention to all these different sources of evidence.

It seems like... Yeah, this kind of...

It sounds right to me.

I guess my only uncertainty is the reason I focused on this contrast was in part because I wanted to argue for an identity between the

the free energy in the thermodynamic sense and in the variational sense relevant to variational inference.

And so I needed to make explicit the argument that whatever is going on, even if there's sort of a multiple timescales in which this is happening, or if there are different parts of the system that are in effect being annealed to different degrees,

that the whole thing... it's not plausible to think that the whole thing settles to, like, you know, the lowest possible energy state while it's alive.

So anyway, I don't mean to, like, deflect... I think what you just brought up is really interesting and you probably know more about the relevant, you know, neuronal mechanisms than I do, so I can't, like, critique that idea but it sounds, as you said, copacetic.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, Adam, you want to add something there?


SPEAKER_07:
Oh, I mean, yeah.

And I wouldn't want to like distract from like the point of like, if we, you actually, you have to not be at equilibrium.

You have to have this like open-endedness and dynamics to keep the process going.

But I, and I don't know like how productive, like sometimes like I'll squint at like different machine learning algorithms and like, you know, push them a little bit further.

It's like, you could think of this iterative Bayesian model selection.

It's like a kind of annealing, but that could like,

not be productive potentially, even though aspects of it could be described that way.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, well, that's a good, I mean, it's kind of a good way of framing it.

Like, I think this goes back to this cynicism thing.

Like, I think you can probably always re-describe something in terms of something else, but it's a question of how useful it is.

And I never exactly know where the boundary is, right?

What becomes just kind of a fanciful, like, philosopher's trick versus what's useful.

But the thing that you're suggesting sounds like it would be a useful way of thinking about things.


SPEAKER_03:
And when I contrast of divergence and annealing, when I think of annealing, I think of DNA in the test tube as you turn the temperature down.

So you come to a final frozen state that's like a fixed crystal, essentially.

Whereas the idea of contrast of divergence, it's more like cybernetics.

It's like a guiding and a navigation on a flow already.

And so even if you didn't have any divergence at all between your North Star and your header,

where you're going and where you want to go, you still would be moving.

And so in that sense, even if you're trying to minimize the divergence, there still is a sense of movement.

Whereas in simulated annealing, the idea that there's no difference is more associated with a crystalline or a static state.

So they have very different sort of teleos almost.

And for dynamic systems, that person going down the stairs, stream of consciousness, action selection in an uncertain world, that feels more like the cybernetic navigation rather than the DNA in a test tube, though those are just some aspects.

So Steven, and then Adam.


SPEAKER_00:
That idea of how things keep going and the dynamics, I'd be interested in your thoughts about how that might play out in...

in behavior or in the world.

So I could imagine annealing being a little bit like if things are trying to hibernate, there may be a state where they can go closer to like glass.

Glass gets annealed, basically.

That's how you plunge it into water and it holds that liquid state even though it's colder than liquid.

But the question I have is how do you...

reconcile some of these questions around where we can get caught in loops.

For instance, Caspar Hesp talks about depression, where you're seeing a lack of affordance in the environment, and that could be confirming your predictions.

You can get kind of caught in a loop.

And some of those challenges in computational psychiatry are

they're sort of low energy.

I actually haven't got an answer.

It's made me think, but they're sort of low energy states, but they're also like looping confirmationary states, you know, where you get a reduction in free energy relative to some, some sort of stick in the sand, um,

that has been established for the priors and the dynamics and then it kind of gets stuck in that you know be it you know hyperactivity something that's outside of where the organism would want to be but it's still going there and i don't know if that's quite the same as um going into the sort of a low energy equilibrium you're not going to it's not necessarily going down in energy it's sort of getting caught in a loop though of variational free energy


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, that's really interesting, actually.

Sorry, someone else wanted to... Oh, no, Alex, go for it, and then after your thoughts, we'll go to Adam.

Yeah, so, I mean, my intuitive reaction is that, yeah, something like that happens in depression.

There's a sense in which it's a low-energy state.

In my paper, which is kind of like a sophisticated argument for a really simple-minded idea, I want to identify those two things and say, yeah, it's physically a low energy state as well.

But it's a local one.

So again, this is my intuition at the moment.

I don't know if it'll be borne out or if it'll work.

But it seems like sometimes in depression, maybe we reach like a local energy minimum in a certain part of the network or something.

But it's not part of an overall optimal state for the organism when it comes to behavior and things like that.

It's really interesting to think about how that happens.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep.

Thanks.

Adam?


SPEAKER_07:
Actually, to speak to what Stephen just mentioned, there's a, within like the psychedelic research communities, there's interesting models based on therapeutic change through annealing, where

Mike Johnson at the quality research Institute has something called like the neural theory or theory of annealing where it's the psychedelic state increases the temperature helps you to break out and then you can crystallize the new regime.

And Robin card Harris has described in very similar terms.

One thing about like generalizations of annealing that came to mind when Dan was talking was

Doug Hofstadter and Melanie Mitchell with their copycat architecture, they said it's different from annealing, but they had something that was kind of like ant colony optimization annealing, where there would be a temperature parameter for when your analogies weren't fitting.

And so you can think of like some sort of contrast of bits saying like, how good is your like matches?

How good is like these analogical matching, like discrete comparisons.

And then this parameterizes the temperature of a continuously adjusted annealing process that doesn't settle.

And more recently, really interestingly, from the beginning, the language was completely workspaced up.

And more recently, Melanie Mitchell has explicitly drawn a connection to the global neural workspace theory.

And so there could be a generalized annealing that has a contrastive bit and an annealing generalized annealing bit that does give you two kinds of psychophysical identity mappings, maybe.


SPEAKER_03:
And a total a total speculatory note would be sometimes we have, you know, accuracy minus complexity or pragmatic versus epistemic gain.

Maybe some decision making approaches are able to hold both together and maybe even rebalance between those different modes.

Dean, I'd like to actually go to 12 and hear a little bit more on what you thought about contrastive divergence before we head to the next topic.

So what did you see or find interesting on slide 12?

What brought you to that slide?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I'd actually looked at stuff from Oliver Woodford before.

And so that was kind of why, again, I was connecting dots in my own head.

And it's interesting because the parts that Adam and Stephen just brought up, in part of our conversations offline, one of the questions I asked

Daniel and Blue was around the idea.

So you have the physical math and you have the statistical math and somehow they come together and make babies.

And that's what we kind of have here.

And so what is this project?

And all I liked about the, not to,

not to discount or put aside the simulated annealing piece, but to give what I think happens as a, for example, when the person goes down the stairs under control, as opposed to falling to their death, lowest energy state.

I thought that this essentially spoke to it by just giving a nice metaphor in terms of shining the torch beam in our chosen direction of travel.

which allows us to see the lowest point in the field in that direction, which I think Alex was again addressing.

I don't think, Alex, you meant to make this such a central point of your paper, but I thought in terms of trying to explicate the simple idea, the fact that you didn't

just focus on the fact that there's a gradient, but how does a person move down that gradient and not lose control was kind of what I wanted to bring forward here.

And in the notes at the bottom, which I can't see on my screen, there's a really nice explanation for what contrastive divergence does in terms of being an assistant.

That's why I want to bring that one forward.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Alex, if you want to give a thought on that, and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_05:
I don't have much of a thought.

I mean, I think it's a really cool angle that you have on this.

And I think, again, it's something that's there, even if it wasn't my intended focus.

And it reinforces, I think, some of the themes that I was focusing on.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Stephen?

So what I think is quite useful

And I'm kind of bringing this idea of if I was trying to explain this to an arts practitioner or someone who does psychotherapy or something, how to explain the implications.

And one thing that I think is important here, when you talk about that energy minima, if I jump to the bottom of a hill,

I metaphysically I might know that I'm at a lower energy potential energy overall but actually I'll probably be at a higher energy when I hit the floor for a while right as I start to uh get stressed and perspire and assuming I'm not just completely squished to oblivion so you're in this interesting you know I suppose we do that on roller coasters a little bit but we we there is

there's what we are inferring about our states isn't what it is because we don't directly experience being at the lower energy state we experience what our sensorial states enable us to infer about the results of our actions so and then from that we compare that to our expectations

based on the stick in the sand or the big sticks in the sand, which is our phenotype, which is what we can then use as something to anchor against.

So I'm wondering, that has an implication about how people think about the world because of these types of ideas.

You know, there's a sense that they are...

connected and interconnected at the same time they're always separate in terms of being able to touch something because they're not touching something they're getting sensory data which makes them get that allows their model to predict what they've just done but they didn't actually touch in the way that people might think they've touched so i'm just putting that out there as some question


SPEAKER_05:
yep Alex go for it yeah that so there's there's this piece of what you keep doing Stephen you keep trying to make this like put like put all this in touch with like the body and the world and stuff and I'm like no let me just stay in my internal model and not worry about that but so I don't know actually I don't know if I if I understood the thrust of just like the last couple sentences but I think the point that there's the the fact is we don't we're not yeah we don't just want to like

leap to the lowest energy state possible come what may.

It's much more about the process.

And I think what you said about this thing being anchored in the phenotype and the priors in general is really important.

One, another paper that I wanted to write, or I don't know if it's a paper, maybe it's just a blog post or a tweet or something, but it's just on the fact that, yeah, so like you always have to bear in mind when you're talking about this energy minimization process that this is all relative to a phenotype, which itself embodies some amount of energy, right?

And so, in fact, you might even say that the stable phenotypes are some kind of like optimal

trade-off between accuracy and complexity right just in themselves um so there's this force that's sort of pushing up from below which is just the having a phenotype complex enough to predict anything and you have to work within that like those boundaries so i don't know if that really addresses your point because again i totally missed the embodiment part just like flew by me but


SPEAKER_03:
It's nice, just one point and then Adam.

So I really liked that example of a person or a body in motion going down the stairs and the difference between the controlled walking down the stairs or maybe even using an assisted mobility device and then falling down the stairs.

And both of them can't stop at one moment, whether you're tumbling or whether you're walking, you still can't stop there.

So it's always dynamical and you are going downhill and you are converting your potential energy into going to a lower energy state.

So those two are good ways to think about where does bodily control and motor coordination, which we'll talk about in 23 soon with embodied skillful performance.

But let's think about a mountain climber.

that's somebody who's actually contrastively diverging uphill.

And so that shows us that it's not just like the die is cast and then whether you fall or control on the way down, but there's a way in which going to the top of the mountain is like going downhill or annealing or reducing the contrast and divergence relative to your expectations of where you want to be.

And now you can imagine if the water level's rising, going uphill is the survival strategy.

So we want to have a way of describing where does control and bodily control come into the picture, going downhill, and then even generalizing beyond just bodies with mass falling in a controlled or uncontrolled fashion towards the kind of cybernetic planning that could actually result in a mountain climber, for example, going a little downhill and a little to the side and then making their way up the mountain.


SPEAKER_05:
so alex then adam then stephen yeah yeah that's really it's a really good point to bring up especially in this context of you know of the thrust of trying to simplify things by identifying physical and you know psychological things like no sometimes you want to climb the mountain so i mean my my my

immediate way of trying to summarize how that would work is just, well, you've got a strong prediction that you want to be at the top of the mountain, right?

That's your sort of desired distribution.

It defines your desired distribution over observations.

And so that's going to drive you to climb the mountain.

But I think that the way it does that is, proximally, is that there's going to be an actual

I would say an actual physical disequilibrium in the brain, right, that's caused by the discrepancy between your predicted state and the state that you're inferring from your observations.

And lowering that, you know, that potential is what drives the action of actually climbing the mountain.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Awesome.

Adam, and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_07:
Head's spinning a little bit, but hopefully this works.

Because like up, down.

But I'm wondering in terms of something like depression, could we think of it as like a very high...

local minima.

And if we thought of what we'd expect, so I guess, OK, what is it that's being predicted at which level of the generative model?

What's being predicted inactively between the organism and niche, and what's being predicted

over the whole skin-encapsulated organism, the brain, and then subsystems.

Ultimately, they have to come to some kind of harmony, but they could diverge.

But the idea would be thinking of

a landscape that when the energy is high, it might be more jagged and you might be more likely to get stuck at local, you're stuck at this local minima and you want to get to the really low one.

And so you could think of something like niche construction as looking for a catalyst to try to smooth out, make a more navigable landscape.

Or you could think of

the psychedelic would be like interning the heat.

So I'm thinking of the difference between like a thermodynamic versus a kinetically favorable chemical reaction.

So like you might like, yeah, it's theory if you can get from there to there, you come up ahead with the enthalpy, but you can't get there.

It's not kinetically favorable.

And so like the different things we're doing is trying to like find ways of getting kinetic favorability for this thermodynamic favorability and bring those into alignment.


SPEAKER_03:
Very nice.

Adam, you can build that bridge.

You don't have to afford the river or swim across, or you can just pray for the quantum tunnel to appear.

So I do Steven and then Dean.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow.

Okay.

There's something very quite important here, I think, because

Okay, we're minimizing this energy gradient.

Okay, that's fair enough, particularly for robots, which are using reinforcement approaches, and they're basically working on energy gradients.

And then you've got the idea of, okay, you can work with variational approaches, i.e.

more like this

Gibbs free energy where the reaction can slightly have entropy.

But the big key thing as well, if you're going to take your agent, is that we're at the level of the chemistry is the chemistry is all non-equilibrium chemistry.

So the whole of the Gibbs free energy is built on equilibrium chemistry.

Here we've got non-equilibrium chemistry when you get to the level of the organisms and cells and everything.

I think what's an interesting point here is, so you're going down the stairs, you're trying to fall over, you're being a rock climber.

So overall, there's this energy piece around how the agent moves.

But for the agent to move, unlike a robot where you might have little...

pistons the actual cells in that are operating at this non-equilibrium state and quite how different actually this gap between these attractor basins versus energy basins which we normally think of i actually don't know i don't know i'm interested to ask carl friston that like what is how how much does it shift things to have any basins to do with the tractors as opposed to just basins to do with energy like equilibrium energy gradients

And that's the thing that's different in terms of what's really going on when I'm climbing a mountain or that, is all my muscles and that at the actual level of making things happen are swarming and trying to enable this kind of biological process to happen.

And okay, from a system perspective, I can see the energy being less for me falling on the ground, but for my muscles to move and everything,

they're operating at this non-equilibrium process, which will have energy impacts, but also has some other types of dynamics which you don't have.

You have this non-equilibrium steady state dynamic, which you don't get in traditional chemistry.

So there's something there.

I'm not saying I expect an answer on that, but I think it's an important point that seems to be a gap, and it really shone out for me there.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.

Thanks, Steven.

It's kind of like if it's a ball at the bottom of a bowl, then that's the annealing.

It's the crystal state with the ball and the bowl.

But then if you have a neuron that's holding a resting voltage, that is being actively maintained with an enormous expenditure of energy.

But it's its own kind of bowl

that it's converging to, whether it's above or below its set point, it still is doing a type of convergence, but it's a dynamically held state.

And you're absolutely right that sometimes the lower level entity or the entity which the larger one is composed of, they have their own active dynamics, even when the top level system is at rest or appears to be unmoving.

So Dean, and then we have a few other fun topics that we'll get to.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I'm going to see if it's okay to ask Alex to jump to a third rail at this point, because I'm really, really curious about the modified Ramsey sentence aspect of his paper.

And what I was hoping he might be able to speak to a little bit about is not just what the Ramsey sentence is talking about, but the implications in terms of different time intervals and what role that plays in us being able to understand how

the modified Ramsey sentence works in your paper.


SPEAKER_03:
Perfect.

I switched to that slide 44.

So yeah, I was definitely curious about that as well.

Alex, what does the Ramsey sentence or this entire area of formal logic, how did that come into play?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so, right, I kind of trumped up the Ramsey sentence thing in the last episode, but it's kind of silly of me because there's not a whole lot to it in a way.

But then maybe that's just how it seems to me from the perspective of where I'm coming from.

But the reason this is in here is that the whole identity, the philosophical mind-brain identity piece of this was based on

I was mostly inspired by David Lewis's approach to that topic.

And so there are a couple of influential approaches.

There's Lewis's and there's Smart, I guess, are the two big papers.

But basically, what this piece of formal logic is doing is just trying to capture what a theory says about the entities that it sort of implicitly defines or how you could get from

this isn't all explicitly spelled out graphically, but how you could get from just a collection of statements that you might have sent to about whatever the topic happens to be, in this case we're talking about mental states, from that to a theory that's expressed in general terms and that, again, implicitly defines the entities that figure as the values of these variables here.

Um, so the re so, I mean, we could briefly talk about this, I guess.

Is it useful to go over this?

Yeah, you guys.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
So, um, read out the sentence, um, or translate it or provide an example.


SPEAKER_05:
Sure.

So I guess I'll start with just the Ramsey sentence, so we can talk about modified versions in a second.

So the first symbol here, as you guys discussed in point 0, is just an existential quantifier.

It says there's some x such that whatever follows.

The second symbol is a universal quantifier over the variable y. So it says there's some x such that for all y, blah, blah, blah.

And here, T, the predicate, is just literally, like, so say that you had a collection of platitudes or, I don't want to complicate things, just a collection of statements.

Like, when I see

When I see a cat, I'm happy.

When I think about happiness, I tend to think about sunshine.

Things like that, right?

Just some examples.

And so you just conjoin all those.

Just put an and between all of the sentences of that type that you could think of in this domain.

In this case, it's folk psychology.

So then you'd have a long sentence, right?

It's a giant conjunction now that has some terms that refer to mental states like believe, arguably see, although maybe some people would interpret that as a physical state.

There's definitely blurriness here at the edges.

But in any case, things like believe, desire, think, these are clearly mental state terms, right?

So you'd have this long sentence that has those terms and also other terms.

And so essentially you just, you replace each of the...

terms in question the mental state terms with a variable and what's left over is the predicate that defines what the sentence is saying about those the values of those variables right and then you just append these quantifiers to the beginning um just to to sort of spell out um what your what kind of claim you're making um about the states in question namely there is such a there is something such that it relates to all other things in this way

And so that's the basic Ramsey sentence.

It's just a, it's an abstraction that allows you to spell out in formal logic and first order predicate logic, like what a collection of sentences says about something.

And the last piece here is the, so there's the if and only if, the three bars.

That's the Russellian uniqueness condition.

So this goes back to Russell's theory of definite descriptions.

So like I got, I mean, my start, by the way, was in sort of philosophy of language and stuff.

So that's why this is in here.

I came to all this sort of statistics and physics-based stuff much later.

So Russell had this theory of definite descriptions that he was trying to explain how you could have a meaningful expression like the present king of France, even though there is no such thing.

So how do we philosophically handle failures of reference and things like that?

And so his suggestion was that you can think of definite descriptions like the present king of France

just saying, well, there is something such that it is a present king of France, and there's only one of those things, right?

So it's like a uniquely satisfied description.

And so that's what this end part does here.

It says, this predicate T, which encompasses all of the implicit folk knowledge about mental states in this case, holds of something only if that thing is equal to X. And so one last piece that's important here is that

I took the bold letters here, x and y, to be vectors, essentially.

So we're talking about many different mental states in parallel when we do this.

But if you want, you can just think of it simply as being about one mental state, but then you generalize to all of them.

So I don't know where.

How clear is that?


SPEAKER_03:
it's it's let me try a uh little bit of a physical example it's like there's the stream of consciousness the stream of statements what you said with an ant i saw a cat or photons hit my eye and i perceived a cat so one of those is more of a physicalist claim and one of those is more on a mental side and it's almost like we're going to draw a line around the mental claims

just so that they can be definitely interfaced into a form of logic, even if the contents of that mental experience might not even have a reference in the real world, or it might not be something that exists in the same way that those photons hitting the eyes exist, but it allows us to interface with those kinds of statements by agents in a formal logical framework.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, I mean, I guess one part I'd push back on a bit is, I mean, this sentence here clearly states that this X exists, whatever you take that to mean, right?

So it could be that there's different criteria for existence, right, in different domains or something.

But it definitely says that there exists something such that it's related to all the other things of this kind in the ways that are specified in the predicate.

So, like, yeah, I think...

I think the main, I guess the main point here, so I focused on the Ramsey sentence because people were interested in it, but like the main point is just that you can take all the things that people say about mental states as implicitly defining them in a sort of theory, right, and that that's

that's um and so lewis used this explicitly in the context of trying to identify mental states with brain states right so just to i'll just say a little bit more about this piece and then i'll shut up for a bit but like um if you have this network of relations that's described by a sentence like this uh you can take that as implicitly defining the mental states while being neutral about their sort of ontological character right so um so it could be then that if you do some you know neuroscientific investigation and you find hey there are these

you know states in the brain that are they seem to bear the same relations to one another that these mental states that we were talking about bear to one another uh you know lewis says well then because this the sentence says that the mental states really are just the things that uniquely realize this structure of relations well you've just empirically discovered the mental states um so it's a really cool way of

theoretically bridging something like psychology, intuitive folk psychology, and neuroscience.

And Lewis's point was, once you have this structure, if you could extract this structure from folk psychology that's implicit in it, and if you made the empirical discovery, there'd be no further bells or whistles needed to say that there's an identity between them.

Because that's just what the sentence says, is that the mental states are whatever things satisfy this description.


SPEAKER_02:
Very interesting.

So Dean, then Steven, then Adam.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so Alex, I mean, as it's written out here, it's really stable.

And I'm really curious, because I really don't know this.

Do different time intervals, like really, really short time intervals or longer time intervals, if I've got a day to go down the stairs versus I've got one second to decide whether the 96-inch drop is less harmful to me than the lion that's chasing me, do time intervals affect


SPEAKER_05:
the stability of this right yeah so sorry i neglected that part of your comment earlier um i think no is my short answer i think that this is meant to be a static a static sort of description of a of a implicit theory right which which will include statements about short time scales and long time scales so i would say that that anything about time scales

in theory, should be captured by the folk psychology that you embody or that you have in mind at the moment.

And that might change from one time moment to the next also.

This doesn't need to be a temporarily static structure.

So maybe that speaks more to your point.

But I think the possibility of spelling this structure out, even for one instant, is the lever that Lewis uses to draw his philosophical conclusions.


SPEAKER_04:
OK, thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Stephen.

And then Adam.


SPEAKER_00:
This question about prediction and time, I think like you were just saying, there may be a sort of time scale at which things are just flowing.

Like what sort of speed is it that...

Things are just doing their thing, i.e.

cells are doing their processes.

But what Dean was talking about is longer timescales than that.

And I think, like you say, there's something different there.

Everything beyond a certain point has to be imagined, I suppose.

Anything that's not possible to do variational free energy on, you've got to do expected free energy.

And to do expected free energy, you basically have to imagine things.

imagine in a different way to just our limited sense of imagination, like our body has to imagine at some level the expected free energy, basically what expected free energy is.

So I think that then does bring in some interesting ideas around folk psychology.

Would you say that those mental states can ultimately be

action and sensory states that are being predicted so the mental states are basically the recapitulation or expectation on sensory states and resulting beliefs on action states so they they could be seen as mental states but actually there is a more distributed realization of that i'd be interested if that that sort of is something that could hold


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I mean, I think the spirit of Lewis's proposal is also functionalist, right?

So the basic idea of functionalism, of course, is that mental states, in the philosophy of mind, is that mental states can be defined in terms of their relations to inputs and outputs and also to each other.

And I guess it's the to each other bit that distinguishes it from behaviorism.

But yeah, I think that these implicit definitions that Lewis talks about would rely heavily, it would depend heavily on

Things like when I believe that there's a cat present, I expect certain visual appearances to occur and I'm disposed to act in certain ways.

And maybe you want to cache the... I tend to want to cache the actions in the sensory step out in terms of proximal stimuli and like motor effector states rather than distal things and extended things, that's just...

I don't know.

I don't know if it's a bias or what.

It's just the way I tend to think of these things.

But definitely, I guess I would say that the relations between the mental states, though, are just as important as the relation to the active states and the sensory states when it comes to this kind of formalism.

I feel like I missed an opportunity to... It was a really interesting comment, actually.

I don't know if I did it justice, but I'm still thinking about it.


SPEAKER_00:
Can I just add one little thing to that just before... Yeah.

Okay, very quickly.

But one thing that sort of comes to mind that I think might connect what you're saying, you were talking about this and, and, and.

So there seems to be something there about...

the combination of ands and what's, you know, so for instance, and there was a dog and there was a woman with the dog and we're in the park and the dog was wagging its tail and then there was blood on its teeth when it smiled and I'm like, suddenly that's changed it, right?

So the triangulation of the ands

flips once you suddenly the dog bares its teeth and you see blood on them right so that links into what they do in qualitative research where they often triangulate to get something which has got trustworthiness rather than accuracy and I think there's something interesting there about

what you're saying in terms of that.

My knowledge of that field of linguistics is that if I can bring it back into embodied work, I find it easier, which is what I'm trying to do.

But this and, and, and, that has got some practical applications, I think, in a number of areas.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Definitely.


SPEAKER_03:
Yep, thanks.

Adam, if you can return.

Yep, okay, go for it, Adam.


SPEAKER_07:
Hey, making coffee.

So...

Eventually I'd like to get to free will and actually loop around a little bit to actually depression as a case with respect to that.

But before we move on from Ramsey's sentences,

Not to belabor it, but is the idea that you strip away the specific entities being signified, you look at the syntax, and then you're saying, can the same syntax apply in another system?

And then you have the mapping that this would be the map.

So is that the basic idea?


SPEAKER_05:
Essentially, yeah.

If you take syntax in a slightly broad sense, then totally, yeah.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay, so I guess I'd be wondering, like, in terms of, like, active inferential modeling, would it be something like with, like, the graphical brain?

Like, you have, like, this Forney factor graph where you have, like, the continuous regime down below, but then you have this, like, discrete regime up top.

And, like, maybe something in, like, the factor graph portion, you could look for, like, some sort of, like...

of homomorphism or isomorphism there.

Or if it's the brain, you would look at ensembles and describe them as attractors moving along some sort of manifold.

And then when you coarse-grain those or throw a blanket around them or reify them in some ways, if the syntax of their interrelations matches people's subjective reports of their experience,

then you would be able to actually potentially identify physical and computational substrates of consciousness.

I mean, yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
Is that a bridge too far, or is that where we're going?


SPEAKER_05:
I think that's where we're going, except I never made the bridge all the way to consciousness, because that's one thing that I reserve the right to not decide about.

I think your work on this is really cool, actually.

I kind of suspect that most of the main theories of consciousness kind of overlap a bit, and there's a core that's, you know...

that's sort of like uh getting at the way things are which i think you've written about but um so so i want to just bracket the consciousness thing for a second although maybe that totally ruins it for you i don't know but like yeah but that's that's exactly the idea like i think you just expressed it very well that um if you look

with, yeah, you have to squint, you have to do some coarse graining, but if you look at the dynamics of the physical system, you'll be able to discover, in the ideal case, some of the same sort of syntactic relations that you would get from the psychological perspective.

And I think that's also very consonant with the way

know connectionist modelers describe their work sometimes so like you know you think a connection is a simple you know neural network made of these simple processing units uh you can derive that architecture just by looking at the brain and sort of very much simplifying things or you could derive the same graphs in some case just by looking at cognitive processes and so you know it's the idea that you have two perspectives on one thing exactly


SPEAKER_03:
you have a graph isomorphism then that is what was being hinted at with it being sufficient to find that there's relationships amongst mental states like i always feel like i feel this way before this other feeling and then if you found that there was some brain state that always preceded

Is that the end point or is there still more to explain in that context?

Let's actually get to another topic that we highlighted last week, which was the sleep wake example.

So I'm here on slide 40 and we're considering a system whose analysis is tractable, at least according to Alex.

And we have an agent whose behavior as far as sleep wake is concerned is defined by equation 3.1.

So could we walk through what is happening in this simulation?

What is the agent doing?

What does the agent consist of?

And then what does the equation show?

And then how does that relate to what we're showing in this paper?


SPEAKER_05:
Sure.

So I think this is another aspect of the paper that was

maybe seemed to be making a deeper point than it was.

But I'll just talk about this briefly.

So this was actually just meant to be sort of a slight modification of just like a Helmholtz machine running the wake-sleep algorithm.

So I don't know if I need to set that up.

Blue talked about that a little bit in the point zero.

But the idea was if we just have a generic, we have a neural network that has a generative model that's sort of encoded in its top-down connections and an approximate recognition model in the bottom-up connections.

So one way of doing this is to run the wake-sleep algorithm, where you basically generate states of the network top-down, like fantasies, right, functionally speaking.

And then you adjust the bottom-up weights so that they're likely to produce those fantasies.

And then you alternate this with a... So that's the sleep cycle.

You alternate this with a wake cycle where you use an input of the kind of sensory data that you want the model to learn to...

generate, and you do a bottom-up pass and then adjust the top-down generative connections so that they're more likely to produce those states that are induced by input.

So all I was doing here was saying

look, if we suppose, just make the assumption that this is a real system we're talking about.

It's ridiculously unrealistic, right?

So that's why I said it's something that's tractable to analyze, but it's also quite a far cry from anything biologically plausible.

But it's also not completely off the mark, right?

So I think there's a reason that the Helmholtz machine was kind of like,

a seminal moment in the evolution towards what we have now.

Because it got a lot of the coarse-grained sort of conceptual structure really down that I don't know if it had been pulled together before in this form.

Anyway, so let's suppose that the wake and sleep cycles of that machine occur with equal probability.

then we can talk about probabilities of certain states occurring in the network, just period, right?

Whether it's during a sleep or a wake cycle.

And so if you just grant, if you ignore the fact that this is a really only, it ends up being an approximation to an approximation, right?

So it's wake, sleep, wake, sleep, wake, sleep, wake, sleep,

ends up being a sort of an approximation to the EM algorithm, which is itself not quite full variational Bayes.

So anyway, lots of approximations, but if you ignore that for the moment, I just wanted to make the point that you could talk about the,

you can thoroughly, completely characterize the probabilities of various states of the system.

And so you could use that to define this.

This R here is just the probability of a certain state, of the system being in a certain state.

I hear the SI is referred to like the states of the individual neurons, but that's related in a simple way to the overall state of the network.

So you can talk about the probability of the system being in one of these states, regardless of whether it's running a wake or a sleep cycle.

And then that gives you a, if you have a probabilistic description of the states of the whole system, then you could use that as, to define the relevant terms in thermodynamic free energy.

So the entropy and the energy and such.

So that's the basic idea.

But the part that you were wondering about, what is this system simulating?

What does it perceive and such?

This example is completely agnostic as to any of those details.

So once again, this is highly, highly abstract.

And I apologize.


SPEAKER_03:
No, it's cool.

And what do you think this model would allow us to continue developing towards?

Or what does it show for the argument that you put forth as far as the psychophysical identity thesis?


SPEAKER_05:
Right.

Well, I don't know that it shows anything in itself.

I think what it was trying to do was write down a system in which the target would be clear.

So you want it to be the case that this R distribution

so so let me put this way so the r distribution because it's it's essentially made up of or it's it's factored into these wake and sleep cycles right those have direct um interpretations in terms of variational free energy and inference um and yet we have a well-defined distribution over the states of the system that we could use to describe its physics so i just wanted to show that there's one simple case where

where we can write down a distribution that bridges these two descriptions.

And then in the subsequent paragraphs, I try to argue that we can generalize this beyond equilibrium.

And that's the very tricky bit.

And I don't claim to have shown it by any means.

I'm just, again, I was trying to remove obvious obstacles to this being true.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

So Adam with a raised hand, and then Blue, or if anybody else wants to go for it.


SPEAKER_07:
In terms of wake-sleep, there could be some potentially biologically realistic implementations of something like that.

O'Reilly has a paper, Deep Predictive Learning, where he describes a model of the thalamocortical system doing predictive processing that's very wake-sleep-esque.

I'll send that to you.

I'm curious to know if you thought that was a good psychophysical identity mapping there.

The other thing would be if we think of experience as being the ramification of experience, the mapping would happen at the level of predictions.

And if the predictions are the sleep part,

Is there a sense that experience is always, kind of paradoxically, it's always the dream?

Like the awake part is the stuff that's just updating it, but the actual thing generating the experience is the dreaming part.

Is that correct?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

So I have an unpublished paper on this, too, on the representational division of labor.

So people in predictive processing literature say things like, yeah, we experience our expectations of the world or whatever.

But I'm not so clear that it's that way.

I don't know.

I guess if you think that the predictions are the carriers of the experience or the neural correlates of the experience or something, then that would be the case and the wake cycle would do nothing.

But I think it's, I don't see the reason to embrace that interpretation of what's going on here.

Because it's awesome.

No, I mean, I'm all about the idea that we experience sort of virtual models in a way, right?

That's cool.

I don't interpret that in terms of, like, it's just the top-down driving signal that leads to experience.

Although, maybe, I'm not really against that either, and I can see why you'd want to say that.

Anyway, I just don't think that there's any inference from, like, the Helmholtz machine to that.

Like, because...

And I would love to look at this paper you mentioned, by the way, on biologically plausible versions of this, because I think there's a lot that's right about it.

The reason I say it's so impossible is just that it doesn't have any role for top-down modulation of bottom-up signals during perception, which was by design so that it would work quickly.

But that's the main limitation that concerns me.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool, thank you, Alex.

Stephen with a raised hand, and then anyone else, and also anybody watching live, you're more than welcome to write a question in the live chat.

So Stephen, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Just to help me clarify, so this being a tractable analysis, so the key point is that by going to stochastic, it shows in principle how...

recognition and generative densities can be used together.

Is that the kind of the point that this shows?

And just because I'm struggling, I think I'm just I'm not so good with the formulas and exactly get it.

But I think the general point you're making is that you're going to stochastic algorithms.

And therefore, you've got this potential for the recognition and generative density, which is basically sensory and

potentially, to be reconciled and shown even a very simple case.

Would that be a correct reading of it?


SPEAKER_05:
I think so.

I think definitely it's in large part, right, so the idea that we're dealing with a stochastic system is kind of important because, yes, I want to claim that, or I want to advance the suggestion, the possibility that probabilities are encoded by probabilities, so then you could have an actual identity.

Whereas if you're just encoding, like, if you're using, like, I don't know, the

a scheme that's more like what Carl Fristen talks about often, where you have sort of neuronal states that are encoding the sufficient statistics of the distribution, then I don't think you could get an actual identity because you'd have a clear representation that has a certain

almost convention built in of how things are represented.

Whereas I'm arguing for the possibility of a much more direct encoding.

And that does depend on this being stochastic.

But the other part of this that I forgot to mention that sort of I think maybe crystallizes the point this is trying to make is that if we're at equilibrium with respect to the network, if we're at the Helmholtz machine's equilibrium distribution, then

In that case, if you do take R as describing the physical probabilities of the system that you would use to specify the thermodynamic properties, then you could show that in that case, at least, the variational free energy and the thermodynamic free energy would be the same.

And then generalizing to non-equilibrium, of course, is the hard part.

But that's more concretely what I was trying to show there.

Yep.


SPEAKER_03:
thanks so i'm gonna go to a question from the chat and then we'll go to adam so cambridge breaths asks can this model describe or map the transition between focused attention and mind wandering grateful for any elaboration thanks everybody um anyone want to take that i i


SPEAKER_05:
I don't know.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I don't know.

Just maybe the dream versus the sleeping versus the waking.

But then even within the waking state, we have a wandering phase versus a very tightly focused phase.

So there's sort of what is happening, if that reminds you of anything.


SPEAKER_05:
I mean, I'd say if we're talking about this model, talking about the Helmholtz machine or this slight elaboration on the Helmholtz machine, then I don't think it would do anything that sophisticated just because... So as Adam says, there are biologically possible ways of implementing this kind of thing, but anything as fine-grained as a shift from attention to mind-wandering, I think...

It's probably going to be left out of a model that's at this level of sort of abstraction and approximation.

That's my thought.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks.

So Adam, then Blue, and then anyone else with a raised hand or a question in the chat.

Adam?


SPEAKER_07:
Not sure I can address the mind-wandering exactly with psychophysical identity, but in terms of the mountain climbing analogy, I'm wondering if it's like...

mind wandering is kind of like exploratory hill climbing with a little bit of quantum tunneling, something like that.

But that's a, I mean, what you would think, actually, it might loop around to the brain in an interesting sense.

And that there's, like, if we think of, like,

lower levels of like a cortical hierarchy as doing something more like, um, uh, variational inference, uh, via like continuous message passing, maybe with like some discreet updating there too.

Um, so.

That seems to be one kind of implicit representational regime.

There might be a sense in which you're getting probabilities in terms of the attractor dynamics along this hierarchy corresponding to probabilities of a hierarchy of nested events in the world and a deep temporal hierarchy and the deep temporal hierarchy of the latent causes of the world.

But there seems to be potentially, as we move inwards, another level where these get re-represented into more like, when you go into deep association cortex, it might be a different game.

And then when you're getting coupling with the hippocampal system,

Now it seems like you're getting something almost like explicit syntax with discrete semantics.

Because you can map, there's these pointers going from the relationship among these, you call them bump attractors, the hippocampal system, or these place cells.

But they can be used to contextualize the whole overall system within some sort of structured syntax.

Um, I'm, I don't, I don't know, like, would, do you need something like that to have the probabilities where, for, um, is that what you're looking for?

Or could there be more like this, like an active hierarchy of, uh, like a hierarchical Boltzmann machine that has a nested type of cause there.

And that those are probabilistic, like both do it or would only like the re representation.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I don't know.

I think a lot about this issue of re-representation and how much, you know, if it happens and what it's doing and stuff.

But I think... I guess I need to understand more, and this is totally just my ignorance, about the kind of models you're describing with hippocampus and such.

Like, I tend to think of...

I tend to think of semantics in the brain just in terms of vector space models.

And so I'm just curious.

I don't know if we could talk about it now for a bit, maybe.

I don't know.

It's up to Daniel and others.

But what is the explicit syntax in this case?

It sounds like something that would be friendly to what I'm trying to do.


SPEAKER_07:
Um, so I guess like, uh, so this explicit syntax, it's like still heavily researched.

There seems to be kind of like a gold rush, uh, among different.

Like AI companies and like cognitive labs are trying to figure out the hippocampal system, like deep mind.

This is kind of like what started them.

It was like, it's like.

making discoveries about this.

But the idea would be that you have this graph structure that would be, that originally would have evolved for just locations in like meat space or physical space, but then got repurposed for any kind of space.

And so this gives you like structured state spaces, whether you're navigating through the world or you're navigating through like a spatial topology.

And this would basically, the content would be these,

And so it would be at the top of the cortical heterarchy.

And it would have pointers that could be unpacked in terms of these more modes of inactive engagement.

There might be another intermediate level that could be associated with consciousness where you're getting more concentrated attractor dynamics with potentially a quasi-topographic relationship

to events in the world.

And so the principles there, graph neural networks might be relevant there, where basically you get this orders of magnitude greater representational efficiency by actually making the geometry of the system over which you're doing the deep learning

resemble the thing that's being uh modeled so like um there's like graph uh grid neural networks that could be used for like spatial modeling or there's like graph mesh neural networks that could be used for like uh modeling of like someone's po like a pose of a thing or an object and so in theory some things like this might form at the intermediate level and these might be the ones they're most heavily coupling with this hippocampal system which is giving you this syntax of state transitions

with structured composition.


SPEAKER_05:
That's really cool.

Can I comment on that for a minute?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Alex, go for it, and then Blue.


SPEAKER_05:
okay um yeah so there's a lot there that's that's exactly along the lines of what i've been thinking about this i've written a bit about these like conceptual sort of grid cell type things uh that it seems like there's a lot of evidence for that it's really awesome i know like numento is doing some research that's related to this stuff um so that's okay if that's what you mean then i'm totally on board like i wasn't sure if you meant that or something more language like with like discrete tokens with

other parts.

But that might be encompassed by this as well.


SPEAKER_07:
It seems like people are finding also encodings of the hierarchical structure of the grammar of language is also encoded.

It's found to have a correspondence with the structure of the relationships of these bump attractors.


SPEAKER_05:
That's amazing.

Yeah, I was going to mention also, so you gave all these examples of neural networks that are sort of isomorphic with the domain that they represent.

I was going to mention recursive neural networks used for language processing as well.

The network topology matches a syntax tree or something like that.

So that's very much along the lines of where this is going.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Alex.

So blue, and then Dean afterwards.


SPEAKER_01:
So I want to kind of loop back around to what Adam said about dreaming, because he totally took the words out of my mouth.

But maybe also touch on the question that was asked by the person in chat about mental wandering.

So is it possible?

So Alex, your objection to the dreaming and the physicality was that there's no evidence for top-down control during the wake cycle.

Is that correct?

Is that what I heard you say?


SPEAKER_05:
Sorry, no, I actually meant to say kind of the opposite.

I meant to say that the problem with the Helmholtz machine as a model is that it doesn't model top-down effects during waking perception.


SPEAKER_01:
Right, and that's what I interpreted.

Okay, so if it doesn't model top-down effects during the wake cycle, is it possible that maybe there are overlapping Helmholtz

functions happening right like so you know your mind wanders off or you're not paying attention and like maybe you're consolidating like you're you've got like one set sleeping one set waking and there's maybe like an overlapping construct of this like wake sleep learning cycle happening like while you're out mental wandering i'm consolidating you know the information from you know what i learned at breakfast or or something like that


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, yeah, I mean, I think there's I think there there are like like this model is adjacent to like many really interesting, plausible variations, right?

And slight elaborations.

So like what you're talking about sounds to me like in that vein, like I saw amazing git repository of just like.

Helmholtz machine variations, where they just tweak certain parameters, like let's see what happens if we propagate a few steps down during the wake cycle as well, things like that.

So I think, I don't know.

I don't know if I fully grasped exactly what you had in mind, but it sounds pretty good.

And thanks for, I mean, go ahead.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, no, Alex, go.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, no, I was just going to say thanks for also trying to address the comment, because I felt like I wasn't able to answer it very well.


SPEAKER_03:
nice and there's definitely um wandering in dreams and how is that different than the wake wandering and could that get at what the difference is between sleep and wake and could this model maybe give us a bit of a wedge to enter into that discussion so dean and then anyone else with a raised hand so alex


SPEAKER_04:
Back to analogizing.

So I'm reading your paper and I read something and I go, well, my goodness, look, there's the world's biggest nickel.

And then I continue reading and then, oh, look, there's the world's largest corn cob.

And then I have a chance to have a conversation with you.

And you're like saying to me, well, let's bring this back into some sort of proportionality.

So explain to me what is the

two-carat deep diamond that you were trying to allow readers of your paper to get to?

Because I know I blew it out of proportion because when I first read it, it was a big deal.

But maybe you can help me bring it back into some sort of scale as to what was your deep hope here?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, it's interesting.

No, I mean, I didn't, I don't, I also don't mean to suggest that you got it wrong or anything with, I think the proportion, you're finding interpretations that are consistent with what I said, you know, it's not like it's not there, but it's funny that if I'm trying to, if it seems like I'm trying to put that, you know, to put things in proportion or ground it in any way, it's kind of funny because I feel like other others are trying to, are trying to do that.

Like,

you know, relate this to embodiment and activism and things much more concrete.

And I keep trying to keep it abstract.

But anyway, the main... I don't know what the hope was here.

I think...

Yeah, I'm not sure.

I think I just really wanted to point to the possibility.

It was really about this identity thesis, which I'm not even sure that a priori I agree with, by the way.

I'm not sure that identity theory is the way to go in understanding the mind's relation to the brain.

I'm not really a reductionist.

But it seemed like there was a possibility of articulating a quantitative version of that

right, using the tools that we've developed over the past several, you know, couple decades that Lewis didn't have access to.

And I just really, I just love David Lewis as a philosopher.

I think he had some amazing ideas and I wanted to, and it just seemed to me, it's not so much that I wanted to show anything in particular, it just seemed to me that there was a natural convergence here that could be spelled out.

So that's kind of what I was trying to do.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.

So Stephen with a raised hand, and then anyone else who raises their hand, and also in the last half hour or so, anyone who wants to ask a question in the live chat.

So Stephen, then Adam.


SPEAKER_00:
I was just tying in a bit with what was also said by Adam around the hippocampus.

So you've got the place cells in the hippocampus, which gives some way to bring the environment in, potentially, in this semantics.

I'd not heard it thought about as semantics, but a semantics of place, if that makes sense.

So now we've got our environment external states potentially being brought in in an attractable way.

You've got action states, could be the grid cells with the what-ness of what's out there.

And the sensory states is this lower level flux that's coming into the bottom of the brain.

And then the generative model would be the higher level

kind of, well, I'd be interested in what the generative model is in all of that, if that makes sense.

If we were to play in that sandpit, it would give that way to bridge, I'm a big fan of the hippocampus, but I'd love to see how it all fits in with some of these pieces.

But I'm just curious around if that kind of

role for these grid and place cells could be quite useful to do this tractability between higher and lower level states.


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

Alex, if you have any thoughts there.

Otherwise, I'll go to a question from the chat and then Adam.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I mean, I guess just really briefly, it seems to me that if we are using these place cells in this sort of, we've leveraged this thing that was originally meant for physical spatial navigation, and we've transposed it to like conceptual spatial navigation, essentially, that's really cool.

I could see it being the sort of the thing that conditions expectations for the sensory motor stuff.

And it would just define the generative model, I guess.

The dynamics at that highest level would be the thing that sets the set points for things.

But I think Adam might have more to say.


SPEAKER_03:
So just to the question, which is also for Adam, says, thanks.

Adam did mention that the transition process probably involves quantum tunneling.

May I ask if he thinks the same for the transition from mind meandering back to focused attention?

So Adam, feel free to take up that question as well as anything else you'd like to add, and then anyone can raise their hand.


SPEAKER_07:
Oh, boy.

I guess there's a sense in which one of the quantum tunneling events, I guess I would have in mind,

there'll be like these regimes of sense making where the hippocampal system will lay down a given tiling of the hippocampal system in collaboration with the entorhinal cortex with the grid cells will lay down this tiling of some domain within which you're doing this modeling with where you can get basically the relationship among these bump attractors.

You can get this like structure, the syntax and through the pointers, the kind of semantics.

And also with themselves having a semantics of space maybe just in the relation.

But the, so I guess the quantum tunnel, like, so, but then if you get enough prediction error from the overall system, this seems to trigger these resetting events where you'll break up the frame and then you'll do a new tiling.

And it's kind of like a re grip on the active inference.

It's like a new kind of engagement, a new set of policies that could fit within this different,

conceptualization of the safe space you're working with.

And so these events of remapping, I guess you can maybe think of them as like the quantum tunneling.

It's like, you're just, you're not doing, I don't know if this works, but it's like, they're called like, some people call them like levee flights, like an animal's like foraging in a patch.

And then it's like, eh, and it'll just like jump to a greater patch once it's like not getting enough.

And so it'd be like, you're kind of like imagining in this place and you're simulating this place.

And then you're like,

okay, a little bit bored, not quite the thing.

And then now you're imagining something else.

Then you're imagining something else.

I guess you can think of those as like quantum tumbling.

Like you're not just like working within one regime of simulation, just fixing that thing.

You're moving from here to here to here.

But the question I had when I raised my hand was,

So there's a sense in which you might think of predictive coding style models of cortex.

I know it's more complicated than predictive coding.

But there's a sense in which something like that is probably true.

Because if you do a primarily suppressive regime, you end up inducing sparsity.

And if the events that are in the world are clocking slower than your internal updates, you come out ahead in terms of like,

I mean, that's why they did it for video coding.

It's just more efficient.

And so I'm wondering, is that enough to give, like, a psychophysical identity mapping in terms of, like, there's a sense in which you will minimize predictive coding mechanisms to the extent we go with just those.

They should minimize activity.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

Yeah, that's actually kind of where I'm coming from with this paper.

To a large extent, I was thinking about predictive coding as a way of understanding neural networks.

So I think although this perspective can encompass active inference and such, I think that's sort of the core of it, is that the brain is literally trying to, yeah,

right sparsity as you said right and do sparsity minimize activity only pass forward signals that need to be passed forward and that means that you're sort of quelling activity that doesn't get passed forward so i think i don't know if that's strong enough to get you an identity but i think it's uh it's consistent with the identity idea and it's um i think it's a large part of the inspiration for me awesome steven with a raised hand and then anyone else


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

If you could just speak to how you see that predictive coding, predictive processing be more or less useful at certain times, um, as the sort of the, the, the, the discourse, um, and when maybe active inference is not as needed at certain times, you know, maybe thinking in applied context, but, um, I'll just be curious.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

It seems to me that if you want a... The main advantage of active inference, practically speaking, to me, seems to be modeling explicitly how policies, actions are chosen, like decision-making, based on how you expect...

your actions to change the way states evolve.

So I think that happens implicitly in a well-trained predictive coding architecture.

And I don't see any fundamental theoretical advantage to active inference there in terms of explaining how things work on an in-principle level.

But that said, it's really hard to just train a recurrent neural network or whatever to do what you want it to do and then interpret its states and so on.

So if you have an idea of a generative model,

of what the agent's generative model should look like, then it makes much more sense to write it down a priori and try to build an active inference model than to just learn it from data.

So that's as close to maybe an applied setting as I could get, but I hope that sort of speaks to it.


SPEAKER_03:
yeah let me let me try to get another view on that from you alex where would you put active inference in relationship to supervised and unsupervised learning for those who might be less familiar with those topics when you're talking about learning from the data versus a generative model where does active inference fit into that yeah that's a great question um


SPEAKER_05:
it's a bit tricky because there's this issue of preference learning that's kind of not settled in the, you know, like as far as how much of the feature of real biological agents learning do we think that is.

But like, so to me, the most natural way of thinking of unsupervised learning happening in active inference is that you've got sort of a,

you've got a phenotype, some aspects of which are going to be immutable over relevant timescales, but some aspects of which will change.

So we're talking about synaptic weights.

You could think of that as an extended part of your phenotype, and that will change over timescales of perceptual learning and during the organism's lifetime and such.

That, I think, is neatly... You can categorize that as a form of unsupervised learning, but that's also not really... Again, it's not... There are people who are active inference sort of practitioners who don't really think that preference learning is a thing that happens or... Yeah, it's not clear what role it plays.

But overall, I mean...

Well, there's also got to be a role for something like supervised learning seems to me the closest thing that we have to that in real systems is reinforcement in a way.

And that's certainly got to play a role that's complementary to unsupervised learning.

I don't know.

This answer is kind of shit.

I'm sorry.

I'm happy to take it up more.

I'm just not sure what... I don't know how to tease apart the parts of active inference that should be understood in terms of unsupervised learning versus just like...

learning in general and how much of it, I suspect a lot of learning in general has got to be unsupervised.

And I think active inference is sort of naturally interpreted, predictive coding certainly is an unsupervised learning paradigm.

And to the extent that active inference reduces to that, it is too.


SPEAKER_03:
great thank you and these are definitely all topics we're always trying to think clearer about and communicate clearer about so stephen and then adam i think this is a useful conversation i know it's a bit off it's put you on the spot a little bit but i think as a group it's quite useful this question of um


SPEAKER_00:
when a generative model comes into play.

So with reinforcement learning, I suppose there's a generative model in relation to like an induction, an inductive reasoning in terms of the goal.

Like you're trying to narrow the gap between the target that you're reinforcing the reward and reducing the gap.

Whereas there's this abductive potential in active inference too.

And I wonder whether,

in the population or the populating of the brain's attention, I'm sort of wondering if place cells and the sort of more granular parts of the lower levels of the neocortex, or I'm not sure if that's the right term,

basically that kind of more unsupervised, very unsupervised, very abductive kind of potentially ways of engaging.

And then these grid cells, as they get more populated with what things are, become kind of more top down, maybe more

let us go back into, say, a more reinforcement learning or supervised learning.

And then you don't farrage as much, so to speak.

You just go straight to the point, which probably I should do now and let someone else take over.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Steven.

Alex, if you want to add something, otherwise we'll go to Adam.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, no, just to say, I mean, that kind of makes sense to me.

I think you need unsupervised learning for representation learning of whatever isn't innate, right?

And then once you have that framework, then you can start to think about, like, meaningful interpretations of sensory stimuli that you could associate with rewards.

So that's all I'll say for now.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.


SPEAKER_07:
Adam?

A quick question, but a quick comment on what Stephen said.

I mean, interestingly about the hippocampal system is there does seem to be this very contrastive thing to it in terms of comparing between current states and then imagined states.

And at different duty cycles of theta, you'll be seeing there seems to be this comparison operation going on.

So it could be very much like this highest level supervisor

in this like Matryoshka dolls of like quasi homuncular things that we're thinking of.

But the question I was wondering, there are people who don't believe preference learning is a thing.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, I shouldn't put anyone on the spot.

It's not necessarily that they don't believe it's a thing.

It's that it's not clear that we need to invoke it to explain behavioral things, at least in many cases.

So I feel like I'm going to be speaking for people who are colleagues of mine who I don't want to misrepresent their views, so I'll shut up about it.

But there's definitely controversy about the extent to which it happens, I suppose.


SPEAKER_07:
I mean, I'm wondering, I guess, to what extent, so there's things like meta-learning principles where you have

you're figuring out new ways of approaching policies.

So you're realizing goals and you're building up these policies in an exploratory fashion as part of your phenotypic plasticity.

But I guess there is a sense in which if we're subscribing to the free energy principle,

you can only prefer one thing, and that thing never changes, and everything else is just instrumental.

You could just only prefer to be basically Agent Smith for the entire world.

You could, like, my pattern, me, me, me.

Right.

But, you know, ultimately, this should be, like, we, we, we, in terms of, like, evolutionary favorable equilibria.

But it seems like, I guess there is a sense in which that never changes.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

I mean, just to say one thing to try to defend the people that I have been talking about.

When I say preference, there's controversy about preference learning.

I mean, there's clearly something that

that looks like preference learning, right?

It's just a question of whether you're really learning preferences or you're just learning new associations with the things that you prefer.

And those two processes are conceptually distinct.

They might lead to similar results.

But yeah, the point you're raising is interesting, is that really your preference is like you, right, literally, your phenotype, so.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I have a question for Adam.

Yeah, that's exactly where I was going to go.

Could there not be a cultural scaffolding that's developed over ecological and evolutionary time that values diversity of perspective?

And so, yes, it is true that at different scales, some type of active inference could be happening, but I don't think that Agent Smith would be the only attractor at the bottom of that bowl.

It'd be more like maybe a plate with a lot of different wells, a lot of different kinds of food that could be converged upon.

why would it have to be converging on one specific um especially hollywood represented version of what efficiency is just a thought but yeah i don't think agent smith would win like villains usually lose you know steven uh


SPEAKER_00:
Well, this this could be though, when you get into that non equilibrium, equilibrium dynamic is like, once you get a dictator who establishes an equilibrium, that's an energy equilibrium, which is, that's going to be more powerful than the more subtle, organic, non equilibrium states, it just dominates times.


SPEAKER_03:
And if there is made an equivalence in some near or distant future between actual energy usage and governance, for example, some sort of crypto system with energy and voting and information and finances all being mixed together, it'll be an enormous nexus of power.

And maybe we'll be able to use these kinds of frameworks to describe them.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
And also going the other way then, this is my belief, I strongly believe that to create community engagement in meaningful ways, you have to create the container

for those more subtle non-equilibrium states to have a chance to breathe.

This woman, Ariane Munchkin, she's a theatre director in France.

She talks about don't crush the butterfly.

She would tell the actors, don't crush the butterfly.

The butterfly is like the idea.

So don't grab hold of it because you'll crush it.

So it's quite a nice metaphor.

You have to hold it lightly and allow it to... And there's a certain...

Because equilibrium dynamics or somebody who comes in and basically starts shouting at people will always overdominate someone who's trying to do some let's all come together and find each other's plurality.

So anyway, that sort of dynamic sort of ties in with what you're saying.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

So I flipped to 49, where we have our usual set of just closing discussions.

So in these last 10 minutes, we'll just be remarking on what we thought was interesting or important from the conversation.

What would we like to pursue next in terms of our own work or Alex, in terms of your research?

I'm sure we're also all curious as well about how you apply these ideas.

in terms of your, you know, whatever non-proprietary applications you think that this bears on, if none, then that's its own interesting claim.

Or maybe there is something that this helps us do in terms of practice.

What are the next steps here?

Maybe Alex first, and then anyone else can give a thought.


SPEAKER_05:
Sure.


SPEAKER_03:
So, I mean, I could address these questions on the slide or... Yeah, let's hear your answers to these questions on the slide.


SPEAKER_05:
So I mean, this also speaks to what you just asked, but really, I think that this is just a way of thinking about things.

The main thing I think it enables is just allowing you to infer from what you know about cognition or the cognitive states of some system, including yourself, to physical states.

If it's true, then, for example, yeah, you can say, well, I'm depressed.

There's not a lot going on.

you know, I'm ruminating a lot, you can infer that there's something physically happening that mirrors that process.

And you can take either a physical or a psychological approach to solving any problem in your body, right, in theory.

Now, there's a lot of working out to be done of

how that would work in specific cases.

But that's the kind of, like basically just sort of smoothing the path for inference from physical to psychological states, I think is the main thing that I think is practically important about this.

And I'm still curious about how to spell that out for specific types of states, like depression, desires, things like that.

And I'm also curious about whether any of it is true at all or whether it's just complete nonsense.


SPEAKER_03:
big questions adam and then anyone else who wants to give any thought or address one of the questions on the slide


SPEAKER_07:
If it's complete nonsense, I'm not sure what would make sense.

I'm not even sure what sense would mean.

Later, I would really want to talk to you about the degrees of freedom and volition issue and the different ways that could play out.

And also, I want to drag you into consciousness because you are precise, my friend, and you're helping me think better.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Thanks, Adam.

Happy to.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

If anyone else has a thought, otherwise we can sort of look back.

Oh, yeah, Stephen, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I just want to say thank you for bringing this foundational build-up into the thermodynamics.

And I'd be interested to maybe sort of see if there's any... I did physical chemistry, so I've got some background, but I'm curious to see if there's any ways to bring in some elements of...

sort of Gibbs free energy and into some of this.

So I'd be glad to chat about that sometime.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, Blue.

So when you guys are done talking about degrees of freedom and agency, you have to come back to the chat because I want to hear all about this.

I have some thoughts that have been cooking about agency related to active inference and other ideas also.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

And maybe Dean, I'd like to ask, where does the .2 get us?

What do we do at the end of the .2?

We took that step to the .0 with yourself and Blue and I, and then we take the .1 and .2 steps, ideally with an author, especially when it's an awesome author like Alex, who's engaged with the material before the .1 and between the two.

What's our next step on that staircase?

What do we do after the .2?

How do we make the best of this?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, this is a sample of one.

But for me, it's... So how do you remain stable and dynamic at the same time?

How do you move through these gradients, whether it's ascending or descending, and also keep in the front of your mind how you're going to keep your grip if you're ascending or maintain your balance when you're descending?

and for me that's what alex's paper essentially pointed out there is a there's a physical piece to that and there's a statistical piece to that and i don't want to become a statistic of another old person who falls down the stairs so how do i pull all of that together and have it make sense especially if i don't want

to give somebody a training exercise if I want them to be able to model how to get down that descent or up that ascent, and I can't give them a map.

So what do I give them?

What do I replace that with?

That's what Alex's paper gave to me.

Gave me a little bit of confidence around it.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

One more staircase thought and coming back as well to the up and downhill.

So when you're going up the staircase,

you'd grab onto a certain spot on the rail, and then that helps you ratchet up.

And then when you're going down the staircase, you're unlikely to grab on tight to a rail.

You kind of want to loosely have your hand sliding down the rail so that you can ratchet if you needed to and stabilize.

But if you ratchet while you're going down, then it's going to prevent you from continuing this sort of natural descent.

So it just makes me think about different modes in understanding, especially because as we talked about with the mountain climber, it's like going up and downhill in their own way.

If the top is your goal, they're like both going downhill.

So when in our process do we want to...

grip the rail lightly just like steven said not crush the butterfly just slide along and just go with the flow knowing that we can stabilize when we need to and when do we really want to grip and ratchet because we're working against one energy gradient but we're working towards our goals when we do that so

I hope all of these mixed metaphors come together for the listeners in an enjoyable way.

And Alex, we really appreciate your engagement with Act-Inf Lab here and everybody else.

Awesome conversations.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, thanks.

Thanks, Blue, Dean, Daniel, Stephen, Adam, people who were here last week.

Also, I'm happy to be put on the spot.

I'm glad this was of service to people.

I think it's been a really interesting discussion.

And thanks for having me.

Thanks for all that you do.


SPEAKER_03:
Great.

Well, everyone's always welcome and we'll see you all in another stream.

Bye.