## Dl6v-3COgCo

All right.
Hello and welcome to ACT-INF livestream number 42.0.
It's April 16th, 2022.
Welcome to the ACT-INF lab.
We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.
You can find us at the links on this slide.
This is recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us feedback so we can improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following good video etiquette for livestreams.
And Sid, thanks a ton for joining.
Really looking forward to this conversation.
If you want to learn more about ACT-INF lab activities, check out activeinference.org.
Okay.
We're here in ACT-INF livestream number 42.0, and we are starting to learn and discuss this paper,
Robot Navigation as Hierarchical Active Inference, in the journal Neural Networks, October 2021.
It's by Ozan Katal, Tim Verbellen, Toon Van de Malle, Bart Dote, and Adam Safran,
and some of whom we're looking forward to speaking with in the upcoming weeks.
And this video is an introduction for some of the ideas and just some background and context
and rapidly assembled fun and memes that we'll go through.
So it's just an introduction of a discussion, and we hope that if you're watching live or later
that you can still contribute to this.
And we're going to go over the main aims and claims of the paper, then the abstract and roadmap,
and then walk through some cool keywords and context, which will be great to hear.
Sid's perspective from working with robotics, which is an area that certainly I've never actually been
involved in.
So going through some of the more applied work that we're going to see with robotics, and also some
of the more formal aspects from active inference, and then this third vector that maybe we both share,
which is some of the biological basis of navigation.
So we're going to just go into the introductions first.
I'm Daniel.
I'm a researcher in California, and I'll pass to Sid.
So Sid, I'll walk through your slides, but yes, let's hear it.
Yeah, let's go to slide nine.
And before I even address myself, I would say that we need to address the elephant in the room,
that this is live stream number 42, which is one of my favorite numbers.
And the favorite number for a lot of people, because it's the answer to life, universe, and
everything.
So this is the first time that I am coming to an active inference live stream.
And I'm actively inferring the whole idea of active inference itself.
I'm very new to the field.
So yeah, I'm very excited to learn a lot of things.
And yeah, just as we are on this slide right now, 42 has a lot of other references that you can check out on that Wikipedia link.
Okay, moving to the next slide.
So I usually document like the many things that I've been up to at this particular link.
And in the next slide, I highlight like the few places where I have had the fortune to be at.
So I formerly have studied computer science and design.
And I've like meandered by accident and by intention in a lot of different places that you can see here.
So I studied computer science at a university in India, which practices a lot of hands-on experience.
And that's where I got my start in robotics and a lot of other things.
Then studied further through various participatory workshops and internships at space organizations, media labs,
and then spent two years at financial services to understand how money works.
And was introduced to robotics mostly through open source software in the bottom most thing that you see here.
That's the Google Summer of Code program.
And I would go into more detail about how that robotic journey even started.
These days, I'm very much interested in how coordination happens and how we can think about security of countries and communities in general.
And more importantly, all the emerging aspects of society.
That's technology, economics, culture, and policy.
So I know that active inference is a study of autonomous behavior.
And we are moving into this era where decentralized and autonomous organizations are gaining a lot of popularity as well as mainstream acceptance increasingly.
So it's very interesting to see where this new field of study that's active inference, that is a field that is invented in our lifetime.
Like it's very rare to see that you get to explore a field that is so recent and has a long history, like through connections to other fields.
So it's definitely an evolving area which can help explore other evolving areas.
And that's what I find very fascinating about applying active inference in the way that it's applied in this paper as well.
So I'll try to explain like the history of robotics in a way through the lens of my experience with it.
So one of the first things that I did when I started studying.
So as you can see, I started studying in 2012 and immediately jumped into like all the robotics labs that I could get my hands on in university.
And one of the first tasks that was very appealing to me was like multi-robot teams.
Like how do teams operate?
Teams have been like a constant like fascination for me throughout life, like human teams, teams of biological organizing, like organizations and organisms such as ants and bees.
And then teams of like robots.
And we derive a lot of like inspiration as well as a lot of like biomimicry kinds of techniques in multi-robot exploration as well.
So the specific topic that we were studying is in the next slide, which is multi-robot terrain exploration.
So if we go to slide 13, these were the different like techniques we were studying, like just like ants leave pheromone trails and different signals for other members of their colony.
We tried to model these kinds of similar techniques like recency, like how recent was it that a robot that was covering a particular terrain that has been that hasn't been explored before?
How recently was that covered?
So you can imagine this as like a grid.
So a two-dimensional grid.
And you see the green squares.
Those are the multi-robot teams.
So the green square represents a robot.
And they are trying to explore and map out this entire area as a team.
And the assumption is that they can communicate amongst themselves.
And in certain cases, they cannot.
So the red squares represent obstacles.
And you will see a similar obstacle map in this paper, which in which they use a warehouse.
But we were using similarly configured different obstacle maps, both in a simulated environment as well as a physical environment.
So we explored different approaches back then, which is things like just representing them as an automata, like giving them very simple deterministic rules, which they can follow.
And those could be imagined as simply as Conway's Game of Life, like the glider pattern or similar patterns that you might know.
And then we moved on to more animal-inspired or bio-inspired techniques, which is a technique like recency, in which the robot leaves pheromone trails in each square.
And each square has like a countdown timer.
How recently was it visited by any other robot?
So this can be understood as ants leaving trails, which decay over time.
And this gives other ants an idea of how to map that surrounding region effectively.
And then there were very simple approaches, which were more suited for the digital world, such as simply node counting, that how many robots have visited this node before.
So every time you visit any square, you just increase its count, visit count by one.
So that helps the robots in understanding, okay, this area has been visited five times and the surrounding squares have only been visited two times.
So I should maybe explore the unexplored regions first.
So these were different techniques that were used.
And we moved on, published a few papers and were also inspired by military organization techniques.
The typical OODA loop or the observe, orient, decide, and act, which is kind of applied active inference in a way.
So we did explore that, like clustering approaches and different ways of conquering the whole map.
So this was an exploration and exploitation problem that I had the opportunity to study in second and third year of my undergraduate computer science.
And then I went on to, like, fancier things, thanks to the Google Summer of Code program.
So this was a project with the Italian Mars Society, which reports to the European Space Agency.
And here it was more about autonomous navigation working with a human.
So this was a robot and a human team working together.
And the next slide shows, like, how it actually happened.
So if we go to the next slide and play the video, we will see that it is meant for an astronaut who is safe in a Martian habitat.
And the robot is a rover, which is exploring the Martian terrain outside in a more dangerous environment.
So every movement of the rover comes from the astronaut's movements, which are mapped from an omnidirectional treadmill that the astronaut is walking on.
And similarly, there is feedback received from the rover's camera, which feeds into the astronaut's virtual reality headset.
So do note that this was back in 2015 when headsets were clunky, when things moved very slowly.
But Kinect was all the rage, like mapping body movements, mapping, like, robot movements in unexplored territory using 3D cameras, which is a technique that this paper also uses, using RGB and depth cameras.
So those were the techniques which still are very popularly used even today.
So this was my introduction to understanding how different, like, robot and human teams can work and how telerobotics and telepresence can work.
So my responsibility in this project was to do the entire networking architecture and ensure that there's no latency or there's no feedback in which a robot can enter a dangerous state just because the astronaut did not receive the information on time.
So this is how we began.
And the operating system that we used in that particular experiment is on slide 16.
So whenever the video is done, we can move to the next slide.
So in slide 16, you see a husky robot.
So these are open source robots that are very popularly used with the robot operating system.
And we'll keep coming back to this particular framework of ROS.
So ROS became extremely popular.
It gained its reputation from the earliest DARPA challenges in which a very popular car just crossed through an entire desert terrain navigating autonomously.
So ROS was an open source robotics library, which was built out of that.
And you see many different sensors and actuators on this particular rover.
So you see a lot of symbols which will be repeated in this particular paper as well.
So the task of a localization technique is to gather all these sensor inputs, fuse all those inputs.
So the sensors can be understood as IMU or like measurement units, inertial measurement units, such as like accelerometers and speed and all those measurement metrics.
Then you have camera, which is similarly RGB, that's red, green, blue colors of the visible spectrum.
And then you have 3D sensing in the sense of the connect sensor that you see on that particular robot.
And you would see a similar setup in this paper as well.
They use a turtle bot to wire robot, which we will get into, which is also using ROS.
And it uses the same concepts as we used in that particular paper.
So all these different attributes such as GPS, 3D sensing, odometry, camera, and IMU are inputs to the robot localization technique.
And all of this together is meant to estimate the three-dimensional surroundings of a particular robot.
And all these techniques do not use active inference.
They used probabilistic methods, which we will slightly refer in the paper.
So it's very promising to see that if we are inspired so much from biological ways of navigation, we should rather use a technique which organisms have evolved to be so effective at over so many years.
And as humans, wayfinding was considered a survival skill for a long, long time before we entered the era of Google Maps.
And we just totally lost the technique of finding our way around rural, urban, and natural settings.
So wayfinding and navigation and localization and mapping was a technique which is very familiar to anyone in their 70s or 80s.
If you ask them, how would you find your way around a city block or the jungle?
They will have their own ways of navigating that.
So they will either use natural cues like wind direction, the way the sun is setting, the map that they have already covered, asking people around.
So these kinds of techniques are built in our human brain.
And it's very natural for animals to use that as well in urban as well as their own natural environments.
So this paper goes into these many big questions, which is in the next slide, slide number 17.
So over to Daniel, where he illustrates all these wonderful connections.
Thanks for the innovation on the live stream format.
A lot of fascinating backgrounds.
And it sets us up really well to discuss some of the big questions of this paper and some of the big questions in general.
So one big question, just the kind of thing that would bring somebody to want to even read this 2021 paper or future work is how do biological, like evolved and human created mathematical, statistical and robotic.
So several different kinds of human created entities.
How do biological and human created entities engage in actionable, tractable, adaptive navigation in complex, conditional and changing landscapes?
And that's a question that one could ask about everything from the organismal level to the colony level, arguably also an organism, but in a little different way.
And all manner of biological systems.
And then here is a really nice slide from this Bill Ant Robotics Project, where they did a direct side to side of the harvester ants anatomy and also their robots anatomy.
And that's kind of like a bridge that takes us into a different space first with the walking around the warehouse.
And does it stay standing when it gets pushed?
And can it localize when somebody turns off the light in the room?
And these sort of basic, though still relatively advanced, but also relatively basic tasks and settings.
And then off on the right side here are some of the visions and representations that people use for when those low level activities are such that if a robot can resist being pushed over, then how does that have complex feedbacks with society?
So it was just something that you also impressed upon, like the very holistic nature of this area and also just how to keep a lot on the table talking about it.
So that's what will be fun to talk about.
What do you think?
Yeah.
I think before we enter into the paper itself, I would want to understand from you, like what has been your learning from observing ant behavior and studying their actions in such an environment, like in natural as well as artificial environments?
I can hopefully accurately relay an anecdote for my PhD advisor, Professor Deborah Gordon.
And she would often talk about how there would be at a conference or some type of competition.
And this is something I've observed, but to a lesser, smaller extent is there'll be a presentation of an algorithm or a robotics implementation of so-called swarm algorithm or ant colony algorithm, ant colony optimization.
We see it on the pure optimization or computer only, but also a lot of bio-inspired robotics design.
And one common feature of these algorithms is that there's some like underlying map that's shared.
Like when you mentioned the grid counting, of course, there has to be like a mesh network so that the robots kind of have basically either telepathy or some kind of common signal, even if it's asynchronous or something like that.
But there has to be some sort of like updating of the grid in their mind.
And being in the field and also drawing upon what we know about what we know about ants, the nest mate, when it's deciding to forage or not, it doesn't know how many seeds the colony has, how many seeds are out there, what the right decision would be.
So it must use stochastic interactions that it receives locally and cognitive constraints to make its decision.
And then once it's out there, there's no telepathy amongst the ants.
There's no queen control.
There's no forager groups that all like tell each other orders and all of that.
So that navigation is also multisensory and related to their cognitive constraints, but also their finesse in a certain niche and a harvester ant is not going to forage well in the Arctic.
And so understanding how it's that interplay between the nest mate and the colony and the variability of the environment, it's a really rich area and it's easy to bring in other modalities that humans can use like long range communication and understanding how those novel affordances for decentralized systems design do or don't relate to some of the ways that biological systems work.
That's a really fascinating area.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And the reason I think that this paper is relevant, first of all, because it's based on active inference, which is like the study of how the human brain would react in certain scenarios, but more broadly, how a biological organism or an organized colony would react in those kinds of situations.
And just like you said, the map may not be shared in certain cases.
The map, the team might be decentralized.
Communication might be unavailable.
These are extremely realistic situations, even for groups of robots today.
So you can imagine these as robots who are exploring the fallout of a nuclear situation, like when a nuclear plant needs to undergo maintenance and humans cannot enter that area.
So you cannot assume 100% communication when the robot is mapping out that area.
So this is one of the important reasons why some amount of cognition and some amount of active inference of the terrain is extremely important.
And our infrastructure in robotics as well as communication is only now getting there.
Like with the new standards introduced in 5G and 6G networks, we will start getting into scenarios where robots become parts of our daily lives and they already have.
So I'm based in Singapore and it's very common to see cleaner robots and teams of helper robots moving around, like in university campuses, as well as airports and shopping centers.
So these robots have covered the entire terrain already.
So they use like very basic approaches of obstacle avoidance and trying to clean the entire area and complete their objectives.
And there is very little stochastic action going on there because most of those tasks can be completed in a hard coded map that is shared among those robot teams in a very specific, highly connected way.
environment.
But when we start moving into more urban environments where this cannot be guaranteed, we definitely need approaches like the one described in this paper.
So, yeah, with all that context, we can jump into the aims and claims of this paper.
Awesome.
So just to read some of the aims and claims, which we're going to revisit a bunch.
The paper is Robot Navigation as Hierarchical Active Inference.
And some of their main claims were that they are going to first propose a hierarchical generative model casting navigation as minimizing expected variational free energy.
So that is what brings all of these areas of navigation and robotics under the umbrella or drawing an edge to active inference framework.
We show how perception, localization, mapping and navigation naturally emerge from optimizing this hierarchical generative model under active inference.
So that's sort of the theory and background and some of the formalisms that we'll go through.
Then they implement the system in silico on a real world robot platform, navigating a warehouse environment using camera sensor input only.
And then they also have this third angle, not just the theoretical and the robotic implementation of that, but the biological.
And they relate their work to various findings and hypotheses in biology about navigation in the rodent and primate brain.
Okay.
Yeah.
Do you want to read that?
I mean, these are wonderful claims.
Before we jump into the claims, I was very fascinated by like the list of authors of the paper.
So I'll just zoom into that a bit if that's visible on the slide.
So, so you see that three, three of those authors are located in Belgium and the last author really fascinated me because they come from a center of psychedelic and consciousness research, which happens to be one of my favorite facilities in the entire world, focusing on these kinds of topics.
So, um, I would also like to ask you that how do these, uh, kinds of, um, like multidisciplinary research, um, like show through in this particular paper.
So obviously we have teams of engineers and researchers from Belgium, but we also have an author from a very different field.
And how do you think that contributed in this paper?
That'll be something great to ask them when they visit.
But I think at the general level, we see, uh, several factors, including like, of course, a shared interest, common framework in active inference.
Also, I'm sure some, uh, we'll have to find out in this specific case, but it's a great question and it's an important question.
Okay.
So, um, I'll read the abstract first half and then, uh, or the first three.
Localization and mapping has long been a standing, uh, localization and mapping has been a longstanding area of research, both in neuroscience to understand how mammals navigate their environment, as well as in robotics to enable autonomous mobile robots.
In this paper, we treat navigation as inferring actions that minimize expected variational free energy under a hierarchical generative model.
We find that familiar concepts like perception, path integration, localization mapping naturally emerge from this active inference formulation.
Yeah.
Moreover, we show that this model is consistent with models of hippocampal functions and can be implemented in silico on a real world robot.
Our experiments illustrate that a robot equipped with our hierarchical model is able to generate topologically consistent maps and correct navigation behavior is inferred when a goal location is provided to the system.
So, um, yeah, I mean, that's a lot to get into.
Yeah.
I mean, so the paper makes a very simple claim.
Like if we broadly look at the paper, it makes a very simple claim that active inference works and it's able to consistently reproduce maps, which are, um, representative of the physical world map.
Um, so, um, this also goes into, um, this literally goes into the map is not the terrain, um, kind of discussion that we have been having in active inference live streams.
Uh, and, uh, in this case, they are able to consistently reproduce a particular kind of map.
That is a warehouse kind of a setting and they compare it with many different approaches and there's many different tasks that you can see here.
So the highlighted tasks, uh, tell you that there's perception, which is understanding the entire environment, then combining all the parts that can be taken from point A to point B and then localization, which is understanding your own position as a robot in that particular environment.
Um, and then mapping, uh, as you are doing all of these things, simultaneously localizing your position and state as well as mapping, um, the entire region.
Um, while you're doing that.
Um, and all of these are naturally emerging from like formulating it as, um, like active inference, which is minimizing, uh, expected variation of free energy.
So, um, so yeah, just before we go into more detail, like, do you want to explain to robotics, uh, researchers who might visit this live stream about why they should, um, care about variational free energy.
And probably these new words that, um, that might be very important for them.

Thanks for that.
Very clear summary.
Nice.
Thanks for that.
Very clear summary.
And definitely we hope that this kind of a presentation, at least in the dot zero and also in the group discussions, it's like a two way street.
So people are going to have different amounts of familiarity with some of the robotics as well as with the active inference.
So to anyone who's anywhere in that space, I think there's a lot to be said for just taking a first principles approach.
That's sort of a simplicity and elegance route.
There's value to be found in transdisciplinary approaches like localization and mapping and cognitive affects and emotion.
Some of the cycle logical frameworks that we've been discussing in other live streams or other papers.
And so there's value in not just simplicity, but in finding connections like complexity and patterns across systems.
And I think also for something that is clearly so nascent in its development to be able to, as Sid is describing, have some functional closure of maps and cast this problem of like, where is one and how should one act?
And what is the bigger space map look like and all of those things, which as discussed in the real world, have all these other challenges like the communication of those maps and everything.
However, just at the individual wayfinding route, drawing on first principles from biology and being a part of a conversation that's clearly already functional, but also has a lot of potential is probably a good thing to at least listen to.
Okay, so how do they do that?
Here's the roadmap.
Here's the roadmap.
In the beginning, they introduced the problem and some of the background, just like we've done in these last minutes.
They then discuss some biological perspectives on navigation.
They then formulate in sections three and four, the hierarchical active inference model for navigation.
It's going to be a two layer model, and we're going to go into it a lot and there'll be colors that are consistently associated with the levels.
They then discuss the experiments, which is the implementation, the mrobotment embodiment of the robot, and then they have some discussion.
Okay.
Yeah.
Before we enter into each of these specific topics, like I would share what I had shared with Daniel a week ago when we started approaching this paper.
So, I mean, this paper is exceptionally well written, even if you're not from any of these fields.
So, just looking at like the language that's used, it's very easy to follow for the most part.
And they make references to like topics which people will be familiar with.
So, they explain active inference, free energy, and all these different concepts of SLAM and very technical terms in an extremely simple language, which is why I think it's a great paper to start with if you are new to either of these fields, robotics or active inference.
Very true, because I know I was looking up a lot of robot citations, watching videos and learning a lot because it's just totally not my area.
And I can imagine somebody with a different background would have a different experience.
So, it's, I agree, an awesome written paper and it exists for anyone who wants to go into more detail and check out the citation networks if you're in the future.
They listed several keywords, active inference, robot navigation, deep learning, SLAM, simultaneous localization and mapping, and then RAT SLAM, which is a biologically inspired version of SLAM.
So, let's just go to your active inference meme.
If you would like to give a real time meme reading, please feel free to.
Yeah, so the meme explains itself.
And this is essentially the teaching robots, like as if you're teaching a child.
And I think that is essentially what all kinds of learning techniques come down to.
And there was another meme of like a toddler reading neural networks for babies, which is not in this presentation.
But that meme essentially meant that a neural network is learning how neural networks work.
And so, this meme is inspired by that, that in order to solve a particular purpose, you need to infer actively, which means you need to firstly be active.
And that's the first condition.
And the second condition is that you need to be constantly inferring like your own assumptions about the environment, about the observations that have transpired in the last few time steps, and then continue to do both these steps in a loop.
And in that combination of those two loops, you are able to solve that purpose.
So, the meme is inspired from Rick and Morty, in which the only sole purpose of that robot is to pass butter.
And in this case, that sole purpose of just implementing active inference in a robot is all that's needed to solve that particular task.
And that is intended for the claim of the paper.
So, that is why active inference as a whole, I think, is like all encompassing when it comes to like doing all the steps that we covered in the last seconds.
Rick Archer, I'll only comment on what you said, because it's so true that as a holistic and composable model, it'd be possible to bring in different sensor modalities, different communication, connectivities, different actuator possibilities, and active inference could grow in terms of how it's being used.
Rick Archer, So, this is like relative to some other possible algorithms, which would have to be composed in a bit of an ad hoc or in-principled way.
This is a way to explore just that you infer actively could be for the robot in condition A or the robot in condition B, depending on the generative model and the Markov blanket and the external states in the world itself in the context.
Rick Archer, So, let's just go straight into the meme analysis of this second video meme you have prepared.
Rick Archer, Yeah, meme analysis is something new that might be unique for this live stream, at least in this animated format.
And as you can see in this particular meme, and in the previous meme that a robot has to forget all their existing SLAM techniques that robots are popularly used.
Rick Archer, So, we go into many different techniques that are cited in the paper.
Rick Archer, So, one of those techniques is obviously RAT SLAM, which we will go into next.
Rick Archer, But probabilistic robotics is like this popular book, this classical book, which was used by robots of the last decade or two.
Rick Archer, And it describes many different approaches of how SLAM can be implemented.
Rick Archer, And all techniques that we see in conventional robots today, whether it's like a robot that's cleaning your house or a robot that's serving you food in one of those experimental restaurants, all of them use probabilistic robotics techniques.
Rick Archer, And this meme in particular goes into firstly the mission of this entire participatory lab, which is ACT, INFER and SERVE.
Rick Archer, And once you do that, once you do all these three things as a robot, you're able to successfully navigate your way around these very confusing terrains, which might be complex and dynamic.
Rick Archer, And on the top you have a diagram which describes how deep learning methods typically work and how this paper implements one of those techniques with an active inference flavor on top of it.
Rick Archer, So, Dan, do you want to describe like how active inference and deep learning like how this like combination of these two fields has come through in this paper?
Dan Kaur, Sure.
Dan Kaur, First, I'll interpret the meme and then describe the deep learning, but then we'll get into more details as we actually walk through the paper.
So, I see the ACT, INFER, SERVE of ACT, INFLAB, which is open to anybody who wants to participate.
And then it's a little bit like the experiment where people are passing basketballs to each other and then something unexpected crosses the screen and many people will not report seeing that other thing crossing the screen.
But there's a lot of analogies to other cognitive contexts.
So, it's like we're focused in the lab, but then also we have to be aware of the unknowns and the unexpected and the anomalies within the anomaly space.
And then that's how we get to four, which is like the tetrahedra, which is bigger than just us, anyone.
So, how to be doing that Nestmate thing that we can juggle and three numbers in our head at once or seven numbers in our head at once or can only grab two things at once or even fewer.
So, how do we actually use these limitations that we have and be part of still a bigger navigation?
So, it's a nice meme.
Basically, this paper is going to present a method that uses some model structures from active inference, but also uses some more mainstream deep learning and machine learning techniques.
And those methods we'll talk about more like the specifics of how they're combined, but it contains both things that are like machine learning, neural network type approaches, as well as that being structured in an active inference way.
And that active inference structure, when it's just with simple matrices, can be looked at like in the model stream one or in active inference, a step-by-step guide.
That's the very simple matrix multiplication, very austere kernel of the active inference structuring.
And then here, because some of the data includes like video data and it's being implemented on modern hardware, it does have like a deep learning, machine learning aspects and modules to it.
Okay, so here's SLAM. Finally, finally, the keywords.
So, researching it, I found this paper, Are We Ready for Service Robots? and presenting a dataset for SLAM.
And on the bottom right, it's showing some different scenes as well as how they change.
And the paper concludes that with respect to this challenge of simultaneous localization and mapping, that various factors can often confuse a robot.
And so, one can imagine this is just like an algorithm that has a blind spot or some sort of area of poor performance for any number of reasons.
And that's exactly how these authors begin the paper with being able to robustly explore and navigate an environment has been a longstanding challenge in robotics.
So, the paper just begins with what we've been talking about, which is that this is like a perennial and a cross system problem, but also in hashtag 2022, it's far from solved in real world settings.
What else would you add?
Yeah, I mean, I especially like the title of the paper, which describes why we are doing all of this.
The title is, Are We Ready for Service Robots? And in the previous meme, we saw that the third pillar of the trifecta after ACT and INFOR is serve.
So, all the robots that we are building and most of the applications that we focus on are meant to serve.
They have service as an objective function. And that is what makes this task challenging, because if you are replacing human actions by a robot, you have to forget all the assumptions we make when dealing with human teams,
because human teams are dynamic and they learn on the fly. And obviously, they might not be as effective as a robot who might be better evolved to or better suited through its architecture to consider depth and different kinds of attributes in a changing environment.
environment. But that group organization poses a lot of challenges to traditional SLAM techniques, such as changing even one thing in that environment can greatly modify what map the robot had made.
And you can imagine this as there's a map and you had localized your position with reference to particular objects in the map, and then you move those objects. So the robots world just shifted all around it.
Literally. And that simple change might be very obvious for humans to detect. But for a robot, which is using those reference points to localize itself in the world and construct the map out of it, that is a big challenge in traditional SLAM approaches.
So, so yeah, many people who have tried to train a robot before it cleans their house by like driving the robot around in different rooms, is very familiar with this particular problem that when you move a chair in between the robot just completely forgets its entire sense of its surroundings.
So, so yeah, that's why I really like this reference.
Yeah. Yes. And that's going to come into play with the internally maintained hierarchical generative model that the robot has on board.
And that may offer it some resilience against these kinds of changes.
So that's why we're going this route at all.
And one adjacent work that's discussed in the paper is RAT SLAM.
So I will play the video, Sid, if you want to maybe describe or contextualize RAT SLAM.
Yeah. So RAT SLAM was this bio-inspired technique, which really solved SLAM in a very simple manner, which is that you, it, it could perform as effectively as other SLAM techniques, which relied on like expensive equipment and replaced it with like a simple camera, which has imperfect information.
So the video goes into it in a lot more detail and we'll cover it in the next slide as well.
But essentially it's a hippocampal model, which means that it, it models like a rat's brain and is able to like map the world and localize the robot that way.
So I think the video is very self-explanatory and the next video will explain it even more about how the map is constructed.
So yeah, let's look at that one.
Okay, go for it.
So what is happening in this second video?
Yeah. So the second video is one instance of RAT SLAM, which is open RAT SLAM.
So this was a code base that was released both for C++ as well as the ROS operating, the robot operating system.
And here you see this one particular robot called the IRAT robot mapping out an Australian environment, which is an urban environment that you see on the top right.
And you see the robot making specific circles around certain loops and making both exploration decisions along the boundaries as well.
So this is very similar to how a rat or a biological organism would explore a particular territory.
So all of this is being done with a single camera.
And that is the main like achievement of this particular piece of work.
So through this paper, you see that the inputs on the top right are mapped into the images that you see on the bottom right.
And those simple images are what's being used to map out the terrains.
So to the human eye, that particular input is extremely blurry and not high fidelity enough to map out a terrain effectively.
But as this paper explores, it can very effectively do that even when we degrade the image quality by a lot.
So that is that is why RAT SLAM became very popular as a cited reference in this paper,
because it's one of those bio inspired techniques which comes very close to active inference techniques that this paper goes into.
So, yeah, that's what this video covers and it explores different kinds of terrains, as you can see.
Awesome.
So the paper in the introduction introduces the relevance of this necessity of the deep navigational functions that humans and other organisms have,
but also that robots we would want to design having.
That's the main theme here.
If we learn from biology and bring action into robotic SLAM, we may be able to have a way to approach these questions.
And then they say, OK, well, how are we going to bring action into SLAM?
Because this is sort of the inactivist insight that having the perfect map in one's head is like the knowing.
But then the knowing how to act is not always trivial, even with the most high resolution map.
Like one could know exactly every molecule of the car and still not know how it would fail in an environmental situation.
And that's what inactivists and inactivism gets at, which is like, what if somebody doesn't have the digital twin model of where things are in their body,
but actually the representation, if there even is one, is more about how the body should move or how one should act.
So that's called the pragmatic turn or the inactivist term.
And in the terms of cognitive science, that's the 4E cognition.
So even though that is about the richness of usually human cognition embedded in culture, extended, et cetera, et cetera.
It's interesting to, again, see that come into play with this discussion of robotics.
Like what if there are cultural practices around movement in a space?
How could that or be integrated into a robotics model?
So there's a lot that goes with this taking serious of action selection as a real primary imperative, not just the hypothetical mapping.
So they say, well, let's use active inference as a process theory of the brain that casts action as perception as two sides of the same coin.
Not sure if it was action and perception, but still maybe it stands both ways.
And a process theory is just like a way that it gets done.
So how do organisms get it done or taking one step removed in the instrumental direction?
How will we model organisms getting it done?
And then people can debate about what organisms actually do.
But this is like us actionably mapping that territory.
In section two, they introduce some neural correlates of navigation, which we're going to discuss in the next slide.
And in section three, they bring the question of navigation in terms of active inference.
And so that's when they go from this hierarchical Bayesian generative model of localization.
And on one hand, connect it to the active inference framework and on the other to this prior work on machine learning in robotics.
And that was also related to their previous paper.
So the authors, of course, have previous work and there's related work too.
Okay.
So the H slash E.
Do you have anything to add there, Sid?
I mean, yeah.
In the introduction, they raised two very important points before they start to go into the actual techniques they have implemented.
So they say that humans easily explore and map their surroundings without much extra thought or considerations.
Like intuitively, we build a logically consistent map without needing accurate distance measurements.
And we find it natural to think about navigation in terms of sequences of moves towards locations.
And when we are considering moving to that new location, humans typically do not consider lower level tasks such as opening doors or lifting feet.
In this paper, they go into like lower level tasks as well, because those kinds of assumptions cannot be made for robots.
And they also mentioned an interesting point, which is that the working of the human mapping and localization hasn't been thoroughly understood.
But the best models we have so far are present for rodent navigation, which is where RAT SLAM and other techniques come from.
So this like predicates the work that goes on into this paper and how they model this as a multi-agent active inference task.
Great.
So the H slash E system is the hippocampal slash entorhinal system.
And homologous brain regions are here shown for the mouse, the rodent, the macaque, which is a type of primate and the human.
And these brains are sort of aligned.
And shown so that one can see how these regions are evolutionarily related to one another.
And then on the bottom are some examples of histology or tissue stainings showing like kind of a cross section and a little bit more detail at the cellular level, because as one might imagine, this has been studied.
And there's many, many copious numbers of like review papers.
And so it's like a whole thing, how people have studied this like many others.
But here is a citation that they provided in the paper, I believe, which was a Buzaki paper about memory navigation and the theta rhythm in the hippocampal entorhinal system.
So suffice to say that the function of this coupling of brain regions has been modeled in some very fascinating and rich ways and trying to understand how the same brain regions in different functional ways can be integrating different aspects of selfness and memory navigation, wayfinding, some of the complexities of how these different functions are related to each other.
Anything to add on that?
Anything to add on that?
And then we'll look at how that has been addressed in the active inference framework.
Yeah.
The only thing I would add is one particular image that I'll paste in this particular slide, which is like, look at the similarity between the tasks done by the hippocampus and the entorhinal system and the similar set of sensors on this particular robot.
So we use extremely similar architectures to center ourselves in the world, which is we use sensors in the form of sensory organs and obviously ears and eyes and all these are sensors.
But all of that is computed in that particular region of the brain, which is considered the robot localization module in this particular robot.
So, yeah, that's what that analogy I find interesting.
Awesome.
And that's with the action states and the sense states, like just like the sensors and the actuators, we could have two of the same kind or 50 of the same kind or 50 different kinds.
And that's like the kind of multi sensor fusion that's also interesting to think about.
And they write in the paper, we will ground the following discussion of the hippocampal entorhinal system in terms of its role in generalized search and navigation.
And the citation here is to this Kaplan and Fristin paper.
We're not going to go over this model right now, but people could pause, look at the graphical model, go to the citation and we'll hear about it more from the authors.
So, there's how did they build on prior work?
I'll add here, unless if you want to ask something, it's totally chill, would be they use a Bayesian graphical framework.
And we're going to see a lot of Bayesian graphical frameworks.
The nodes, the circles represent statistical variables of different kinds.
And then the edges reflect the sparsity of influence of connections amongst those variables.
So, like two variables that influence each other have arrows pointing between each other.
And this is a Bayesian graph way that is sometimes used to represent models graphically.
And that's kind of playing on graphical in two senses.
Like it's visual, it's graphical, like a picture, but also it's a graph like a network.
So, it's something that is a representation of models at the intersection of those two senses of the model.
And we use them a lot in active inference.
And in this paper, they made active inference models for navigation and search,
and they overlaid it on some of the plausible neuroanatomy of the brain
and some of the functions that those regions of the brain have been modeled or seen as performing.
Great.
Okay. Yeah.
The paper also on the biological section explores the grid cells.
And we saw the grid cells also in rat slam.
The grid cells are in the entorhinal cortex.
So, it's in the HE system.
And they represent a largely triangular or hexagonal tiling of space organized according to egocentric reference frames.
Now, it's hexagonal in the flat plane, but what shape is it in higher dimensions?
And they write that the regularity of these repeating grids provides a basis for path integration via estimating distances and location in terms of the direction and frequency with which this metric grid, metric tiling is traversed.
And this was pretty interesting to hear how they framed it.
In physical domains, it has been observed that the spacing of grid representations varies as a function of the space being tiled,
e.g. smaller and more fine-grained if an agent is situated within an enclosure or larger and more coarse-grained if it is situated in an open space.
The granularity of tilings appears to be influenced by brainstem locomotor nuclei, potentially reflecting an inductive bias for greater speed being more likely in larger spaces, as well as by exteroceptive stimulus such as optic flow.
So it makes me think about driving at 70 miles per hour.
And it's like one still has this extended sense of mobility.
And, well, I could make a left turn over that space and time scale.
And that's as natural feeling to somebody who's familiar with driving in a certain context as like I'm running at this speed and I could make a certain turn at a certain speed.
And then the optic flow reminds me of a great experiment with honeybees where they had them forage, but they had to go in and out through this long section where there was an alternating stripe pattern.
And so when the stripes were thick, like let's just say a meter of dark and then a meter of light, then they would forage a certain distance and they would be able to do the waggle dance and communicate it to their nest mates.
But then when that was replaced with a very fast alternating stripes, it increased what's known as optic flow, which is just the simple rate of change, like the frame differencing across the retina.
And the bees were foraging a shorter distance because it was like their estimates of optic flow were higher.
And I think that speaks to also a point that Steven has raised in the chat, which is the information geometry versus information geography.
And that could be connected to a lot of different other areas.
So that's just something to think about with how is the actual space represented?
How is the perceptual space represented?
And the grid cells are something that people have modeled as being at the intersection there from cognitive perspective and from a tissue perspective.
So, yeah, Steven has raised a great point about the geography and I think in humans and organisms like ants and bees, it's more about survival.
And that is why they like attach a different kind of grid sizing for different kinds of terrains.
And yeah, your description of driving in an open wide road is extremely accurate and so is the bees one.
And I think it comes down to minimizing error or being more specific in constrained environments.
So, so if their actions are as wide and as like broad ranging as an open environment that might like be harmful for their objective function, which is not only like reaching from point A to point B in that small environment, but also like survival, like just banging into an obstacle if they are not being very specific.
About their grid size.
So, so I think, yeah, it comes down to optical optic flow as well as I think these survival functions, which are like hidden states in like the models of all these agents.
Awesome.
Awesome.
Awesome.
Um, they move from the biological towards the formal by writing speculatively.
If hippocampal pattern completion is inherently predictive or generative in a Bayesian framework, then this could help to scaffold the development of more sophisticated predictive abilities for the rest of the brain.
So I think this is a very deep area that'll be fun to explore in the conversations, but it's almost like you can bootstrap more complexity off of something that is already providing a more complex and oscillating signal.
So I think the richness of self and the place based based and learnability there is quite interesting to explore.
And they also, uh, note that there's ample evidence that spatial awareness is at the core of the mammal brain with explicit representation for pose heading and location.
So what I wanted to explore here in the discussions was location is the core of the mammal brain or cognitive functions in general, or in insects to or something.
No, it's all faction.
No, it's emotion.
No, it's this.
So where do some of these core functions fit?
And then they close the section by just writing, uh, taking it from the introduction with the robotics to the biological in section two.
And then they say in the remainder of this paper, we will further build on these insights using a process theory of the brain deeply rooted in predictive processing, active inference.
So you'll note that other than our additional context, like we haven't gotten into active in the paper, but that's when they cross the Rubicon.
And from here on out, we're going to be talking about the active inference formalization.
Anything else to add to it?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, I really liked how you framed that particular importance that different kinds of organisms and like robots have to be assigned.
When, when we are dealing with like their objective functions, which is, is location, like the most important state for them or are other senses more important.
And if you're thinking about like self driving cars and, uh, like evidently like Tesla is very particular on not using LIDAR and like laser depth sensing technologies.
It it's trying to just use RGB depth cameras and trying to navigate, um, the world.
And I think the same is true for, um, comma, which is, um, another open source self driving toolkit.
Um, so these kinds of, uh, toolkits that exist for navigation in the physical world, they, uh, just rely on location and, um, like vision as their only source of input and not other senses.
So, so yeah, it's interesting how you can modify the importance of these different attributes to achieve different tasks.
Right.
So into section three navigation as hierarchical active inference.
Okay.
So this is where active inference gets applied in the theory level.
And then it gets applied in another way when it becomes simulated and then in another way, when it becomes enacted, et cetera.
So we cast the slam problem in terms of a hierarchical Bayesian generative model, the agent reasons on two different nested levels.
So there's going to be the use of a higher and lower to describe these two different ones, but one could use different spatial metaphors like inner or outer or however else on a higher level.
But this is going to be consistent with the coloring and which one is placed above or below on a higher level for long-term navigation and on a lower level for short-term perception.
On the higher level, the agent is capable of reasoning in terms of sequences of location.
It wants to visit.
I want to go to the post office and then to the university and then back home without having to worry about the intricacies of how to control its actuators to get there.
Like I'm not overthinking the footsteps and how to cross the street.
On the lower level, the agent can reason and plan in terms of observation sequences without needing to think too far ahead.
Short-term action selection plans based upon ongoing input.
We will distinguish between the higher level and the lower level actuation by calling them moves, M, and actions, A, for the two higher and lower levels.
And the sensor readings like the visual input, but other sensors could be added to at the lower level are called observations and that's modeled with an O.
And that reminded me of the relationship between strategy and tactics in chess.
Whereas in strategy, there are more heuristics like control the center or the knight on the rim is grim because it has reduced mobility.
That doesn't actually suggest how to do it or what kind of a direct or oblique strategy would actually be realized in which way.
It's just sort of like general ideas.
And then there's the tactical and the rollout and all of that in the specifics of the situation, which cannot be really thought too far in advance.
Because even just two or three in advance, the branching is so complex that it's not really useful all the time.
Although some brute force approaches have used that to great success and it may work in certain cases, but it's not a general strategy just to roll out tactics further and further and then hope that strategy just falls out of rollouts of tactics.
So I'm sure you'll have some thought on that, but how do you think that frames this as a multi-scale statistical problem?
And then it's going to be approached from this Bayesian active inference way.
Yeah, I think it perfectly models it.
So you added strategy and tactics.
I would only add objective objectives like as the third element to that.
So objective strategy and tactics are like these different levels of tasks that people want to achieve.
And this is not only true for the tasks that that you refer to like chess or other applications, but also like when we go about in our own life, like our higher level task can not just be going to the post office, but achieving some objective as a result of that, which is I am going to the post office because I might have received an admission letter from from a university.
And that has a higher level task on top of it, which is this has broader implications to my career or life in general.
So one person's or one robot strategy can be another robot's tactics.
It's the way you define moves and actions is totally arbitrary and dependent on like how reliable your sensors are.
So I think the levels are the place where we draw the line between lower, higher or inner and outer levels are dependent on the sensors, which is the ground truth that we can reliably measure in that particular moment.
So the only thing I'll add there is that also, just like you said, where one robot strategy is another's tactics.
This nesting of Bayesian generative models can be three layers.
It can be four layers, et cetera.
So there's arbitrary design of these graphs.
And we've seen like in metacognitive papers, like act in five stream number 25 on metacognition as mental action.
It actually is like action and perception all the way up, all the way down.
So just because I'm a layer isn't modeled, we have an interface for the unknown through the blankets that we do specify.
Okay.
So let's look at it specifically.

On the left is figure one.
Figure one, it is the prototypical generative model of an active inference agent.
As we discussed a little before, the nodes in the graphical model represent random variables where the gray color is indicating the observed variables.
So the observations are observed in gray and then the actions are also observed.
So one could complicate this assumption, but we're assuming that like if the robot is hitting the gas, that it knows that it's actually doing that motion.
So an observation at the current time step O sub T is generated by the hidden state S.
So it has the white node.
So it is a not directly observed, but it's like a parameter in a model, the generative model of the robot, which in turn is generated by the previous hidden state and action at time step T minus one.
So it's like here's S in the past and it's marching forward.
And then it's influenced by its prior states, as well as by how actions influence states, if at all.
And future states and observations depend on future actions, which are determined or not completely determined, but that's but have a statistical relationship with the policy pie.
And policy pie is sequences of actions.
If one has a policy depth of one, then the action at the next time step in the policy are the same inference.
But when we have a horizon of planning that's deeper than one, it means that policies are actually sequences of action.
And that's part of the complexity of cybernetics and so on.
And on the right, I have a little bit cut this generative model into a grid.
So the now time step is the action that we took in the past, the hidden state inference at that time unobserved and the real time observation.
And then the left to right is the past time step, the now time step, the next time step, and then just deep future time steps, whatever the horizon of planning is.
And this is a discrete time model.
There's also continuous time active active inference models, and they can be used together, but it's not in this paper.
And at the top is policy selection.
And there's a lot of cognitive apparatus that might connect to this pie, but that's also not modeled here.
Action selection is these A's, and those are just your actions through time.
I moved E2, E4, and then NF3.
And then the hidden states are whatever the hidden states are that are being tracked as being influenced or related to policy selections via action.
And then hidden states emit observations, and that's what makes it a partially observed Markov process.
And then because it's a policy variable that's being modeled here, it's a partially observed Markov decision process, because it's not just the Markov process inference.
It's also having action as a parameter that's planning as inference.
Anything to add on one?
Yeah, I think adding the grid really helps.
Simplify the different steps that the agent has to take and how it's composable with different policies that might connect from different objectives.
So, yeah, the observed and unobserved are, I think, the more important key pieces here, which again can be, have like, which can have different probabilities.
Because as you go through deeper layers, you can consider the previous layers observation, previous layers unobserved state to be your current layers observed state.
So, it depends on how much probability you assign to the strength of that particular observation.
And yeah.
I just want to add one last thing, which is the observations in the future are unobserved.
So, just to note that there's a difference between the past and the future.
Yeah.
And one could also imagine that maybe there's a forgetting or something like that, but that's a very key difference is that the same type of variable, like actions are unobserved in the future.
We can't say, well, we'll make these three moves.
It's like, but what if another chess piece blocks that specific move?
Well, that would be dumb of them to do, but would it?
So, that's part of the complexity of strategy.
So, figure two is where they go from this single layer model.
This is kind of the kernel of the model, and they're going to introduce a slightly more complicated graphical model.
This is going to specifically cast navigation as a hierarchical generative model for active inference.
And so, the lower level is this, again, more tactical, more local visual perception on the bottom, filled in observations.
That's the real-time camera data coming in is one way to think about it.
But another way to think about it is actually by looking at the arrow direction, it's being generated using some underlying states.
And then the actions at that lower level are also being observed in the past.
And at the lower level, highlighted in blue, the model is entertaining beliefs about hidden states, S, that agents and the agents pose, P.
So, here's the S and the P.
Like each time step, there's a hidden state and the pose.
The hidden states are giving rise to the observations, O.
And then the hidden state and pose are influenced by the previous state.
That's the arrow coming horizontally.
Pose and action, or the higher level model in the case of the initial states.
And so, here is like at each time step.
So, here we're like in this blue block with a T.
Like at the faster model time step.
And then at the slower level, there's an injection from this like slower click that shoots something in.
And then that influences the rest of this blue block.
And then it's carried forward.
And there's another injection, like a slower timescale at that more strategic level.
And at the higher level, highlighted in red, the agent reasons about locations.
The next location is determined by executing the move on M.
So, here's the more slower updating movements, like where one is in that map.
And then this is the more fine-grained action selection.
What do you see in this figure?
Yeah.
So, yeah, it's like it's a continuation of the previous figure.
And like the speed differences are what's interesting here.
Like the higher level being just a two-step process, whereas the lower figure has more involved actions involved.
So, yeah, you see that observations exist in both these layers.
But there's more depth of unobserved states in that particular lower layer.
I hope that now by filling in some formalisms related to this, that we can put a little detail because there's a lot that could be said about this.
And I hope that we've been at least consistent in our descriptions, but we'll look forward to hearing from the authors on it.
So, they write, in active inference, the agent will infer beliefs over these hidden states based upon experience, looking back into the past observations.
Those are the observations from the past that the computer has access to, as well as infer future actions through a process of minimizing variational free energy.
This is where they're going to introduce this free energy minimization as kind of like a model metric that helps do parameter selection, parameter optimization on this type of graph.
So, we have some graphical structure, believe it or not, and it could look different, that does strategy and tactics.
It's like the skeleton.
But then the real challenge is to have the video data come in and to have the movement data actually modeled and to make that happen on limited hardware and so on.
So, what they do is first describe that in terms of equations and then they're going to talk a little bit later about like how the equations get adapted into using neural networks and actual cameras and sensors.
But this is just going to be still at the equation level going from this graphical intuition about how to do strategy and tactics and how to have them modify each other into an analytical way of framing it.
So, P is the joint model of OSA Pi.
That's the observations, the video camera data, the hidden states at this layer, and the actions, and the policy.
Different aspects of the past, present, and future are modeled as sparsely connected.
So, one could believe it or not that those are sparsely connected, so-called, in reality.
But in this model, there's actually quite sparse connectivity amongst variables, even though if it's new to you, it might look like a circuit board or something.
But relationship to the all versus all that it could be connected, this is a quite sparse connectivity.
Like this bottom left one doesn't influence this top right one, for example.
So, factorization is a way that that sparsity of the variables can be converted into a factorized equation.
So, we have this joint distribution, which is like the ultimate panopticon distribution.
But because there's sparsity of connectivity, different parts of the model can be like partitioned out differently.
So, it's like this big joint model that gets separated into separate parts.
And each of those one can interpret as being like the distribution of that.
So, like there's the distribution of policies, over two policies or over continuous policies.
Then there's the distribution of action states that are taken depending on the policy.
So, like given that I intended to move A and then B, did I actually take A?
Then there's the state underlying distribution in green, hidden state.
So, that's not directly observed.
The blue is the distribution of observations conditioned on hidden states.
That's like a Bayesian hidden Markov model.
And then there's this relatively more complex and combinatoric term that is asking,
well, how do states depend on past states and actions?
And then how do actions actually depend on policy decisions?
And how do the observations in the future depend on the hidden states in the future?
So, it's taking this joint model and breaking it down into a few different pieces that, as we'll see, can be simplified.
And that makes this problem tractable in a way that just the all by all non-factorized, non-factorizable model is much more difficult to fit.
Yeah, absolutely.
And yeah, this goes into like the practical implementation of how such a thing can be done.
And the interesting factor in this formula for me is like the combinatoric term, which takes in the previous states and like multiplies it with the current state.
And like this is one of the ways active inference can be modeled.
And I think in previous live streams, like there might be different implementations of the same framework,
where OSA and PI are used in many different like formulae and arrangements.
Great point. Yes.
Though there are some differences in notation across papers, there is hopefully more coherence than not.
So knowing this framework helps one understand active inference domain, different domain models.
Okay.
So how is free energy going to be used to fit this model, both on the sort of perception as inference side?
So that's the part of the model on the bottom.
That's more like a, what is my pose given the visual input and what action should I take in the short term?
And this deeper, more navigational layer in the red, how are those going to be reconciled and parameterized, which includes action selection and policy selection?
How's that going to be parameterized using a single criterion?
So they use the variational free energy and it's calculated up to the current step T.
So variational free energy as contrasted, which we'll get to with expected free energy.
Variational free energy is like the parts that are observable are easier to calculate over.
One can imagine. So that's the variational free energy.
The expected free energy is going to have continuity with the variational free energy, but it's going to introduce this complexity of calculating expected free energies about unobserved observations and actions.
But they're similar, but it goes like from first variational free energy is looking back and that's the more perceptual component.
And then there's a deeper expected component once a time horizon is considered.
So we can go into this more with the authors, but briefly in the first line.
F this variational free energy is being defined as the expectation.
That's the fancy E of the difference between the Q distribution, which is the variational distribution that's under the control of the experimenter of the robot.
And that's like a simplified distribution family.
So just like fitting a linear model can be done, even if the data are super nonlinear and you're totally misled, fitting a linear model can be quite fast or fitting just a parabolic.
model can be quite fast.
So if you constrain what model family you're willing to use for Q, though there are still some quite expressive families that are also tractable, then you can try to minimize the expectation of the difference between the distribution that you're controlling and this distribution that you'd like to know.
That's going to help you go a long way towards doing policy selection.
This expectation can be rewritten using a KL divergence.
And that can also be rephrased as a difference between a KL divergence and another expectation.
So we can go more into this with the authors and I think that will be great to hear their explanation.
But for now, I just want to leave it at that level of detail.
Yeah, I agree.
And I mean, the broader point that I see from this particular framing is like representing it in terms of divergence and evidence.
And this is how not only they use it for their experimental setting, but this is how the actual free energy model will be implemented in a real life situation as well, in which the first term which is in their control may not be like in their control when the robot is in a dynamic environment.
Like that.
Like that.
So in this particular paper, in a warehouse environment, this kind of a framing makes perfect sense.
But when the setting might be different, the framing might also need to reflect that.
Nice.
And also there's that complexity minus accuracy interpretation.
Yeah.
Okay.
So here's where they move from the variational free energy F to the expected free energy G.
So they write crucially in active inference, the agent will not only optimize its generative model by minimizing F for past observations.
In addition, the agent will also select actions that it believes will minimize its future surprise.
However, future observations are not yet available.
The free energy F cannot be computed and the expected free energy G is used instead to compare the effect of various policies or actions in relation to the goal of reaching the preferred state.
So wouldn't it be simple if we could just infer how the map looked in the past and then make decisions based upon how the map looked in the past?
But that opens up to all these basically failures of function in changing environments.
G in formalism three is a sum across over a given time horizon T.
So the expected free energy G of pi and T policy and time for a given certain policy pi and time step T in the future is defined as, and this is going to be another set of formalisms, but we can just pull back and remind ourselves of that sentence from the introduction.
Active inference is a process theory of the brain that casts action as perception as two sides of the same coin.
So variational free energy, which is more perceptual like because it's looking in past observed states, and then G, which is going to introduce the uncertainty of action in an uncertain future.
How are F and G similar or different?
How are they being cast as two sides of the same coin?
How through the present are those two processes being reconciled because time step five from now is going to be like now then.
So how will we have continuity in dealing with certain moments like now, but then there's things that we're uncertain about in the past and the present and the future.
And they're all very quite different kinds and they have different relationships to past actions.
And that's like the blockchain angle.
You can't change the past.
You can change your interpretation of the past, but then there's a different kind of variability or openness in inferences about the future.
So these are great questions to learn about and think about.
How are F and G similar and different?
What is variational free energy?
What is expected free energy?
What is free energy of the expected future?
Which Baron Milledge et al. have introduced.
And what other kinds of representations of this nexus are relevant to think about?
Because these cited papers and shown equations do not exhaust the richness of that setting.
But it's awesome how they pulled back to just this.
It's a function G of what you do.
Pi and what horizon you're considering it over.
Tau.
And then implicitly how you think about all of that and how you think about that.
So they both pulled out to a level that I think will provide a lot more discussion, but also we have to get specific in order for that robot to be in the warehouse.
Yeah.
And the only fascinating observation for me, like obviously there's a lot in this slide because this is the entire model.
This is the crux of the entire calculation where you have variational free energy and the expected free energy.
And you see the similarity between both these formulae where divergence and log evidence is mentioned.
And then complexity and accuracy are terms of that formula.
And eventually it comes down to risk and ambiguity in the expected free energy formula.
When all the probabilities are given a certain policy and on a particular time horizon.
So which is represented by Tau.
So these terms like divergence, complexity, risk are like in one bucket.
And log evidence, accuracy and ambiguity are like in the same similar category in those two formulae.
Awesome.
I think we will, as we expect the unexpected, we'll start to actually accelerate through because the goal of the dot zero is really to set a lot of that context, because that is what brings one to the trailhead, so to speak, for a lot of the details that they're going to present.
And of course, the accuracy of their experiments and the implications and everything like that.
So we're just going to sort of continue on knowing that that getting there is getting quite a far way with this paper.
And then we're going to go slightly faster through many other aspects of the paper just to like give it a first pass.
So here in formalism five, they are casting P of pi, the distribution of policies as a soft max sigma of the free energy on policy and this temperature parameter gamma.
This is casting planning as an inference problem, which allows one to go from like the relative free energies of different policies to a decision on those policies.
And when there's high temperature, it's like the pie chart is made, but one is still just picking from the different policies as if they had relatively more equal pies.
Whereas when the temperature is low, like absolute zero, then one is selecting the best policy, like more than it should be expected in a way.
And so that gamma reflects the confidence that the agent has in current beliefs over policies.
So when there's a lot of confidence, then the most, the best expected policy selected always when there's low confidence, then it's not taken into account as much.
And that's, of course, a fun to think about in the context of like expecting the unexpected.
I think I can. I think I can.
And then it says on the bottom right, no one had the heart to tell him he was going the wrong way.
So one can think they can and be acting consistent with their model and going the wrong way relative to what?
So there's a lot again there that connects like the math to some broader questions that we all have.
What do you think?
Yeah, totally agree. And the meme really brings the point home. So yeah, let's go to the next one.
And in 37 live stream number 37, people can read about this dual interpretation of preferences and expectations and about how they co realize each other.
So section 3.2, they move to the hierarchical generative model for navigation.
And here it's the same higher and lower model with blue at the lower timescale, red at the higher level.
And it's going to be basically as we spent more time on previously, but just applied to this multiscale navigation problem where it was being approached a little bit more abstractly before.
So in Formalism 6, they're going to have their big joint model be all the things that one would want to know in this whole nested model.
That's why previously when we saw the p distribution, there was only four variables because it was considered at like just a more simple kernel layer.
And this is writing it out for the whole nested model where there's actions and moves.
So moves across these two layers being jointly considered.
And then it's going to be like this multiplication between the lower level distribution and the higher level distribution because it can be factorized across these two levels because they're sparsely connected because of how it was designed.
So that simplification takes like sort of an all by all model.
And just at this level that corresponds graphically to the sparse connectivity allows those two to kind of twist a little bit independently from each other, yet also containing a common basis in this joint distribution.
Anything to add?
No, I think this will be clarified further in the next slide, which goes into global policy selection.
All right.
So in the higher level red, the global policy is omitted.
Every move is treated independent of each other.
This hierarchical arrangement allows the system to reason about its environment further ahead, both temporally and spatially.
And so then they take this joint distribution and it gets broken down into these three terms.
From Formalism 7, we can see the generative model decomposes into terms for both the lower level dynamics blue, i.e. how actions influence the next state and pose.
So we broke the blue out from the red, and then there's this other term which we can talk about from the joint distribution.
What do you think?
Yeah.
Yeah, I think this is where it comes to expressing in terms of G, which was the expected free energy.
And we see those terms repeat here.
And I think this is, I think, the most important formula of this paper in which the global policy selection happens.
And at the higher level.
Yeah.
Okay.
So as we saw before with a simpler version, first, there was a decomposition on P.
There's a factorization on a P distribution.
We saw this with like with a simpler P here that then got turned into an F and a G.
Here, we have a more full-featured P.
It is also going to be turned into an F, which is that variational free energy, and then a G.
So this is F of the hierarchical model.
They write, now that we fully specified our generative model, that was P, the factorized joint distribution.
We again turn the variational F and then later the expected G free energy that will be minimized in active inference.
So it's a variational distribution Q that they're fitting and they take the same approach as they took earlier with the single layer model.
And they reach this hierarchical free energy that can be rewritten by the bottom row as the decomposition of the free energy of the lower model and of the higher model.
So I think it'll be great to hear the authors, like how did they reach this and what do they think it means and so on.
But I think the awesome question to think about here is how do we think about free energy minimization in multi-agent and multi-scale systems?
How do free energy decompositions work and what if nine do really well, then one doesn't?
How does that group outcome get traded off against, well, everybody's doing a little bit worse, but isn't that better than one person doing a lot worse?
Well, it depends by how much you mean by a lot and a little and the situation and so on.
So how does all of that going to be amenable to these kinds of seemingly cut and dry decompositions?
Yeah, that is an excellent question.
And another question that I would add to this is how many terms can you decompose this into as you think about more and more models?
So here we have a lower level and a higher level, but can there be multiple levels for different kinds of scenarios?
Awesome. Okay. So they are now going to pick up on that bottom line.
There's a low and a high decomposition of the hierarchical variational free energy.
And they write, this falls apart into a term for the lower level and the higher level of the hierarchy, which we can further unpack.
For the higher level we get, and then they provide expansion of that F high and F low.
And these have the same complexity and accuracy interpretation as we saw with the previous F,
except that this complexity minus accuracy can be understood as being about only the higher level.
And this complexity minus accuracy on lower level can be interpreted as being about only the lower level.
So it's like been a separation of consideration between these levels.
But again, they're coming from a common joint distribution.
So that is just like a example of taking the analogous logic and path that was followed on the single level model,
then using this composable framework, making the nest degenerative model,
and then being able to apply the same kinds of techniques to reach the same kinds of conclusions.
But now in this different context.
Anything to add?
Yeah, totally agree.
Yeah.
Splitting it into like these very specific terms and differentiating the forest from the trees,
where high is the forest and the lower level are the trees, is very, very helpful.
And it also shows how they are related and not related.
Awesome.
So now they're going to make that F to G move.
When considering future time steps tau, the variational free energy becomes an expected free energy,
which again unfolds to a term for each level in the hierarchy.
So they're going to do that F high and F low type decomposition,
but it's going to be about G, the expected free energy.
And so here's the low on the right and the high on the left.
And so here there's that same risk plus ambiguity,
but now it's being applied to the decomposition between the high and the low.
And so similarly to equation four, this unpacks in a risk term to reach a prior goal location and an ambiguity term.
Intuitively, this means the agent selects a route to its goal location with the lowest ambiguity.
Hence, if the agent operates in a completely static environment without uncertainty,
this basically becomes equivalent to shortest path planning.
So that's was really interesting to hear about again, in the context of what you described,
like well mapped, well connected, real time updating, highly controlled settings.
The future is more like F than it is like G, because it's like, you can just trust in the future that you'll get a snapshot update
and you'll be able to make the perfect move because you'll be able to do shortest path planning and traditional optimization techniques,
because you'll have no ambiguity about the future basically in the short term.
And then that gets more complex when there actually is different kinds and different patterns of ambiguity in the future.
So it's just like such a cool way to hear about it now.
Yeah. Couldn't have said it better.
Similar thoughts on this particular framing.
Okay. So that was section three.
In section four there.
Now we still haven't seen active applied yet.
We haven't seen any action perception loops.
It's been like very analytical to this point.
So now in section four, they're going to actually bring that generative model into active inference.
So they write, now we've established our generative model in the variational free energy optimization objectives.
We present how to instantiate such a model in silico for navigation on a real robot with camera input.
So it's kind of interesting because in silico often means like we only simulated it, but here it means we implemented it on a silicon processor.
Yeah. In a real embedded situation.
And so the observations are the raw pixels from the camera sensor and the actions consist of the commands specifying the linear and angular velocity.
So that is just taking that generative model structure that we described kind of abstractly.
Like the, we just talked about the observed observations, but is that a one pixel camera?
Is it a 4k video?
Is it lidar?
Like this is where they are going to connect it to the specifics of what they actually do in the robot?
Yeah.

The only thing I'll add is again, this picture because it's such a helpful picture in framing the pixels and the sensors that are being captured in their case as well.
case as well. So they are taking just this camera inputs, which is R, G, and B values for this
particular paper, as well as like the IMU units and the odometry units, which is velocity.
Awesome. So in section 4.1, they highlight the visual perceptive aspects of their model. We're
not going to describe it here. We'll hear about it soon. But 4.1 focuses on that visual perceptive
aspect. 4.2, which we're also not going to focus on here, takes it a little bit out from the visual
perception. You know, how is the tree recognized given the retina? And this is like the path
integration around those trees. So this is a path integration approach. And then they also bring up
some points about how this has some similarities on the biological side. And also they introduce
this topological map component of the higher-level generative model, the red model. Do you have
anything to add, especially maybe about that topological basis of the higher model?
Yeah. So I mean, this is where it's attaching it to like the physical world. This is where
the lower levels and higher levels get connected through these particular formulations. So yeah,
this is a question I will have for the authors as well. Like how is this CAN-CN network represented?
And why did they choose this particular framing of connecting the two levels?
Yeah, they write, the posterior distribution, that's the one that we control, is represented
by a continuous attractor network, a CAN, a 3D cube that wraps around the edges with these
different dimensions. So that might enforce some type of closure on the network, which we also saw
happening with the RAT SLAM. But that'll be a good thing to ask. Okay. So then in Section 4.3,
they highlight the localization and mapping. These are being simultaneously inferred, so it's a SLAM.
And this is the localization and mapping features, which are another level kind of above or different
than just path integration. And they relate that to the higher-level model. So they provide some other
formalisms. And maybe this gets at what we were discussing.
Due to odometry integration drift. So inaccuracy about how many footsteps you took. Like that's the
kind of the reason why people apparently walk in a circle when they're lost in a feature list landscape,
because they have like a little bit of a different step length. And so they have drift in their heading.
Matching experiences will not have exactly the same associated pose. These displacement errors are
distributed throughout the graph by use of graph relaxation, shifting the stored pose according to
equation 16. This enforces the map to be topologically consistent, even after loop closures,
which is often challenging in metric SLAM systems. So that definitely gets at Stevens' information
geography or information geometry versus information topology. Because if we enforce a rigid geometry,
then tiny differences might drive us wild. But if we enforce topological closure, then even if a road
like became 30% longer, we'd still be able to navigate from city one to city two, and it wouldn't be so
bothersome.
Yeah. Yeah. And including drift is like one of the fundamental things all robotics experiments have to
do because everything that we formulate via math never seems to work out well in actual physical sensors
and actuators. There's always that drift term that needs to be added. And I like how they have handled
like the drift here. Awesome. In section 4.4, they discuss and highlight the navigation features. And
here we'll talk more. I just want to raise these questions because they make up like three of the
perspectives that are really getting integrated and recombined here. And you spoke to it right there.
How do mathematical entities navigate like Bayesian graph models and generative models? How do biological
entities navigate and how do robotic entities navigate? And what are their similarities and differences and
different opportunities and challenges? And how will we generalize and make the right kinds of
connections across different systems within these domains and across and among these domains? So that's
an awesome complexity question. I hope a lot of people can enter into these questions and like provide
their thought and be involved in this. Yeah. I mean, this could be a whole section on navigating navigation,
which is like an interesting topic for complexity. Awesome. Okay. Section 5. And this will be,
I think, just fascinating to hear their hands-on experience about these experiments, which we're not
going to go into too much detail in, but in section 5, they describe their setup and implementation. So this is a
tele-operation of a mobile robot in a lab with a warehouse style. And they describe some details
about like what kind of robot they used, what kind of camera was used and how many data points existed.
And then they talk a little bit about their implementation of how that generative model
became basically implemented using machine learning as a LSTM network.
Yeah. Yeah. This is where this is, this is the most fun part of the paper for many robotics,
like researchers, because this is like the standard robotic toolkit that's used in almost all robotics
labs around the world. Turtle bot has become like this raspberry pie of robots in which every lab has one,
and anyone can replicate this kind of an experiment easily. And it's interesting that they have access
to like all these sensors that they talk about, such as LIDAR and millimeter wave radar, but they only use
like the minimal set of sensors they need, which is the RGB data. And that is what they use to collect
data points. And they are sampling it at like an interval, which is very close to human perception,
like 100 milliseconds, it gets close to like biological level perception, like the frame rate that we have for our sensory organs.
So that is very interesting. And the implementation is even more interesting where they,
which we have to definitely ask the authors about how they use this setup.
So thank you. Great. In figure three, they show on the right side, a picture of the bot turtle bot. So there it is.
And then on the left side, we see some still images of the lab warehouse seen at different points. So I hear
point one on the map is corresponding to what was seen as like approaching this wall and kind of doing a U-turn.
And so this is the path that was taken as it was kind of circulating these warehouse shelves, basically.
Yeah. And also, I really appreciate how you like you described the commonality of these techniques,
because those I just didn't know that this was such a common hardware and it'd be awesome to see like what it will
look like when people start to deploy it in different settings. Yeah. And it's important because they use ROS.
First of all, TurtleBot uses the robot operating system. And like, if this is the first time people are looking at a TurtleBot,
and by just looking at the image, you can tell that it's a Roomba with like a shelf on top of it with many different sensors.
So honestly, that's all there is. So the movement is done by like the vacuum cleaner on the bottom,
the cleaning robot module on the bottom of the robot, and then the rest of the rack. The rack is full
of sensors where you see the cameras attached. So earlier, there used to be connect cameras attached,
and you can attach any sorts of additional units on top of it. And then there's a processing unit
there which like takes in all those inputs and does all the calculations on board. So yeah,
reproducibility in robotics research is extremely rare. And using a technique like this definitely
helps for other labs to reproduce these kinds of results. Yeah, thanks for that. And I'd be really
curious to learn more also about like the edge computing implications. Like is that a mini PC? What
exactly is needed here? What if the model were 100 times simpler? What if it were
100 times more complex? So in figure five, section five, three, they discussed the results, and they
asked three research questions, and those are addressed in the following section. So they ask,
does that lower level model learn accurate representations for inference and prediction
by minimizing free energy? So does the lower level work? Two, can these representations be used in the
hierarchical model for generating topological maps of the environment? Because although we kind of didn't
discuss it in detail, that is that topological closure that's impressed upon at the higher level,
but not at the lower level. So can the lower level work? And then can it be used as a useful interface
with this totally different in type topologically closed higher level model? And then the holistic
question is, does the system infer sensible moves and actions by minimizing expected free energy to
engage in navigation? Like, okay, given that the two components are interfacing, does the whole thing
do free energy minimization in a way that ends up doing so-called sensible moves? That is maybe what
a person would do if they said, just patrol that warehouse, just walk around without any too specific
of a goal, but just make sure that you walk everywhere pretty much. That's pretty sensible.
They didn't spend any time over here. They didn't just go up and down one shelf. So that's sensible,
even though there's not quite a heuristic for that. But I think that's really a fascinating question.
What is sensible behavior?
Yeah. And I think they go into how they quantify sensible behavior by comparing it with other approaches
in the results. So it will be interesting to ask the authors about that.
Yeah. Okay. Table one just goes into some details about their neural network parameterization.
We'll hear about it from the authors. So how did neural networks come into play? What was the process
of fitting that? Okay. Figure four. All right. Figure four is the sequences of the ground truth
observations. First row. So that's the video data coming in on the top. That's like, just looks like
regular video data. Reconstructed observations. Second row. That's the generative model of visual
input. And that's kind of like thinking about this in terms of like a core screening, but this brings the
visual input into the robot's terms corresponding to latent space samples. Third row. So this is like
potentially an internal representation, like a layer of a neural network. And so it's just showing that
these perhaps very similar or different scenes can be differentiated via their position in like a higher
dimensional latent space, or it's lower dimensional in the video, but it's higher dimensional than just
like the X and the Y. The robot is turning towards the left in the sequence, as can be seen from both the
sequence of observation, as well as the shift towards higher theta values in the pose cube.
And that's the pose cube activation on the bottom row. So this is what it looks like at that lower model
to go from video data to hidden state estimation, the kind of core screening generative model of the video
to this latent state internal representation to the pose estimation that's going to come into play
at the higher level of the model. They're kind of overlaying time steps as columns during this
execution of a turn and showing how different layers of that lower model are updating.
Yeah. And I think this is a time series like you described. Left to right indicates like 10 seconds,
for example, 10 seconds of a turn of a robot. And that was an interesting comment on the higher level
dimension for a robot is lower level fidelity for us with those pixels. So, so yeah, the way we
represent things and the way it's represented in a robot can have very different terminologies.
Yeah. And higher, lower, inner, outer, more or less, it's always in relationship. And so those can
sometimes get swept under the rug. It's a high dimensional representation that we did of this,
you know, what's, what do you, what do you have to ask in 42.0? How high?
Pixels. It's just a few pixels.
In figure five, they show the generated experience map left and a comparison map extracted from
localization with R tab map. So I show the citation here, but I would love to hear your interpretation
of what do they mean by the experience map is topological while the R tab map is metric. What
are being shown differently here, here?
Yeah. So, so yeah, they are comparing the figure that they obtained on the left with the data
obtained from a similar technique. So the way these robotics experiments work is they use different
localization techniques and they are using R tab map, which is another technique on the right. And yeah,
the second point is very interesting. And I think that is Stephen's question as well, which is how is the
information geography represented? So the experience map, which is on the left, it briefly describes how
how, like the environment is topologically, yeah, closed. And the R tab map is accurate to like physical
world metric units, which is measurements. So, so topology just means like how everything is oriented.
It doesn't need to be physically precise as a real world. It's like wisdom versus
knowledge. So topology is more, more of an idea that, that if you follow this kind of a map, you will
find your way and you won't get lost. Whereas metric is like precise mapping of the physical environment and
mapping it to scale, like one is to 20 or one is to 100 or whatever that scale may be.
I really liked that knowledge and wisdom. And then here's why there's always the minimum of two and why we
respect both because the topological maps may be totally non-comparable in their geometry or two
different entities mapping the same space. And so if we are both trying to get the geometry of the
geography, that's where it's possible to have the most objective agreements on the knowledge side,
allegorically here. And then the topological side can be so much simpler and so much more personalized
and local and can actually help in those wayfinding and the changing situations. And maybe there's
analogy or there's resonance or there's small isomorphisms with different wisdoms, but one has gone down that
path and has basically given up making the image on the right that other people will just see and
recognize as well. Yeah, that totally lines up with what I see. So that's quite a nice point.
Yeah. Okay. Figure six is some more outputs of the model. So they, right. Imaginary policies,
uh, imaginary policies. Oh, so there's several images of different things happening. There's the
current state, which is the video input at that time step. And then there's imagined short-term goals.
I want it to look like this. I want the frame differencing at that time step to be super small.
I want to be really unsurprised about looking like this at that short time step in this turn. You can kind of
see that, um, piece on the left that's getting brought more into view as I turn my head left.
I don't want to be surprised. I want it to feel normal. And then in the long-term goal, there's a
lot more like blurriness because it's not super important whether the handle is here or here because
it's just, uh, an uncertain future. And so these are imagined policies that can be considered at past,
present and future time steps. And that's kind of what the partial observability of the hidden Markov
model structure or motif brings into this picture. This is why it's good to have a generative model
rather than just a recognition or an input, a signal processing model. That's like where the
whole generative Bayesian concept and predictive processing from the biological side come into play.
And also in the future, it trails off. These are the same time series and further and further in the
future, it gets blurry and blurrier until it's like, I just want to be in a horizontal plane
in the future, basically. Standing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Figure D is like, um, very interesting in this
particular picture where they have three different policies and you see very different results, um,
as a result of those policies. So this is, uh, like robotics 101 behavior where you program the robot to
always go left, always go right, or always go straight. And you, uh, start with these particular
policies and then, um, understand that these simple changes in behavior have like such vast differences
in the results. So yeah, the sentence you just highlighted is. Yeah. So, so here, the three
policies are basically, um, uh, the, the two different turns are going straight. And so they
say when calculating G low and evaluating the distribution on policies, this results in a
probability close to one to take the policy, go left. Like look at how on the bottom row,
that's the go left policy. It stays sharp in the future, but then this, the policies that diverge
increasingly from the goals at different timescales with respect to those goals, it becomes really
unclear. So it's like, I want a hundred dollars. So I'm saving $1 per day. Then at day 71, I expect
$71. Wow. It's exactly $71. That's like this bottom time one. And this is like, I'm losing money
every day. I'm getting less and less clear on how it's going to end up at a hundred at this future
timestep. So maybe that's not a good policy, not because my expected value is dropping, but because
it's just, it's unclear how I'm going to get to a hundred. And that's something that can be neutrally
said without even taking a judgment on the amount at any given timestep.
Yeah. Yeah. I think that analogy really drives the point home that you need to choose your policies
according to the goals. And I think all those goals were part of their formulation of the expected
free energy. So I think it's important to ask this to the authors, like how were these goals as well as
policies chosen? And can this be generalized for different kinds of environments?
Awesome. So figure seven, they write different goals for the long-term path of figure five.
So just here's the figure five again, with the topological closure of the higher model,
the lower level dynamics model will take the corresponding states as preferred state goals
sequentially. So this is where we see the connections between the models becoming enacted.
So let's just say that one is coming around this edge and there's two options. They can continue
straight or they can go right, or they can go in reverse, but we're considering forward motion only.
So there's two alternate policy. It's not the infinite space decision-making that humans are sometimes
confronted with, but here it's a robotics motion decision about continuing straight, ostensibly to
explore this final right-most shelf sequence or taking the right turn now. So go straight or turn
right. Now, what would sensible behavior be? If one had recently or repeatedly visited the closer shelf,
then to be more exploratory, it would make sense to like go straight so that this last shelf could be
explored. So that's the kind of decision that we would want that robot to be able to incorporate when
it's able to be making that decision. And so that could be thought of as having a long-term goal to
be expecting oneself to be on the far right shelf here, the bottom one. And then in the moment,
which one of these actions turn right or go straight is going to be preferred with respect to how one
acts now. And so then that's what it means to say the lower level dynamics model will take the
corresponding states from the higher long-term path as the preferred state goals. So then one could be
like, well, I'd prefer to see myself just right here. Already one has chosen a branch, but that is
helping you reduce your uncertainty about being found here later. So that, although I really look forward to
also hearing everyone else is like unpacking of like, what is the robot doing or thinking in that pivot
moment? Um, that's like kind of how I read the way that the long-term planning goals become imposed upon
the lower level action selections. Yeah. Okay. Um, what did you see or want to talk about with the
contrast with other SLAM approaches? Let me see. So yeah, this paragraph, um, like describes different
SLAM approaches and, um, you see the same, um, like group of authors mentioned from probabilistic robotics
where Sebastian Trun and the coauthors are mentioned. And those were engineered approaches, which also used
different kinds of Bayesian, um, like, um, like statistics. And then there were more bio-inspired
approaches such as the RAT SLAM group, which is, uh, the 2013, um, paper. And then, um, yeah, they rely on
PoseCAN and this experience map, which they compare it with. And recently, like deep learning has obviously
been used on visual SLAM, like you see in this, uh, like the bottom, um, like bottom of this paragraph
and yeah. Um, the underlined, um, section is important. Do you want to cover that? The active
inference allow for a holistic treatment? I think that's where they bring it home, which is they
say, well, yes, people have used this recognition variational autoencoder model. And yes, there's been
this topological approach to RAT SLAM navigation closer and et cetera, but then those are often
again, composed in, in an ad hoc way. Uh, and so active inference is providing a possible way to,
uh, approach it in a more principled and more integrative first principles way.
Okay. Um, conclusion let's, uh, hear it from the authors. People can draw
their own conclusions, but I'll just highlight the last sentence that we think this research
direction might offer new insights, both on how navigation works in the mammal brain,
as well as how to scale active inference to real world applications. So it's like,
those were the three vectors we brought in with a biological mathematical and the robotics.
And then from that nexus, it's kind of like, it feeds back out because now from the brain,
they might be learning about the math and the robotics. And then the others, uh,
in a similar fashion. Yeah. Yeah. And as the authors conclude the paper, they also bring up some open
questions such as, can these techniques we use for lifelong learning, which is a relatively new field
of machine learning in which states change all the time and you do not need to retrain your model, but
you, you do not, you need, just need to, um, like retrain specific parts of your model to continuously
learn throughout the lifetime of that application. So, um, so they, uh, suggest something like a sleep
cycle, but that means that whenever the robot is charging, that is when it can update its model of the
entire environment and share that and, um, do that, um, active inference approach to achieve lifelong learning.
So I'll be very interested in knowing this from the authors, like what are the weaknesses in this
approach and how can this be solved to scale for real world applications? Awesome. And how about just
describe what this last video is showing? Yeah. So this video is just for people who are coming from
the active inference lab, but want to see like a robot actually move. We have been talking about robots
moving. So if we play the video, it's just an introduction to turtle bot and how people use it in
an experimental setting. So, so yeah, the first few seconds of the video will describe all there is.
Awesome. Um, well, we leave a blank slide for the discussion sections. This was, um, an awesome and
memorable discussion, and it's just the opening of the 42 when we'll continue on in a participatory group
setting in the coming two weeks and hopefully have, uh, any of the authors join or anyone else who would
like to join in, uh, I'll let you give a penultimate thought, but just really appreciate the care that
you brought to these slides into the stream. Yeah. And thanks to Stephen and everyone else who asked
questions. Yeah. Okay. So if you have, do you have anything else you want to add? Otherwise we can just,
uh, thank the listeners and head out. Yeah. I mean, this was my first active inference,
appearance, uh, in, uh, in the sequence of, uh, hopefully a lot of appearances in the future. And
this clarified a lot of concepts for me as well, and connected it to one of the fields that I was very
intimately connected with, uh, almost a decade back. So, so yeah, happy to see connections being
reforged and yeah. Looking forward to meet with the authors. Okay. Thanks a lot, Sid. Thanks everybody.
And, uh, see you next week. Bye. Thank you.
Bye.

## UUQIVqcI-yw

some questions that we had from the dot zero, but also new questions arising.
So we'll just start with an introduction and saying hello, and then it'll be awesome
to hear the author's initial contextualization. So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California,
and as explored a little bit in the dot zero with CID, there's a few places that we were
super curious about ranging from how does one go from a phenomena that they want to model,
like navigation to the analytical equations, and how is that related to active inference
and the free energy principle? And then how do we go from that analytical formulation to the actual
gigabyte of video data and the real time sensing and action? So a lot of exciting topics. And I'll pass
to Blue. Hi, I'm Blue. I'm a researcher in New Mexico. And this paper was kind of way over my head
for a lot of reasons. It's just so far out of what I normally do. But I have some questions related
to the hierarchical modeling and how that is kind of used and how that can be related or cannot be
related to maybe biological systems that model in a hierarchical way similarly. And I'll pass it off
to Adam, I guess, if you want to start or introduce yourself and you guys can take it away.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Hi, I'm Adam. I'm a systems neuroscientist who's currently a research fellow at the Johns Hopkins Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I've been collaborating with Tim and Ozen and others on trying to understand the natures of navigation and the nature and the ways in which the hippocampal and enter
rhinal system might be relevant and the ways in which this could be used as a means of understanding thought more generally. And it's been awesome and slightly intimidating, except
Tim is awesome. So that's made it less intimidating.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So that brings it to me. So I'm Tim. I'm a computer scientist, robotist at Ghent University. And we haven't subscribed to the active
inference formalism to try to make our robots slightly more intelligent. And this paper was, I think, one of our major accomplishments last year. It was a collaboration with Adam, where we basically look at the problem of navigation from different angles ranging from active inference modeling to an actual implementation on
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: On a real robots. And at the same time, looking at how could this work in an actual brain or what other relations and the solutions there. So it's really exciting to have this paper out. But also, this was just as getting started, I'd say that it was basically our first
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Artifacts that we published, we have another one together with Adam in the works. And yeah, I'm pretty sure that we will continue this endeavor for quite some time around. So we're all just only just getting started. So that being said, probably a lot of the questions are also still questions for us.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So we'll see to what extent we can give an answer as of today already.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Awesome. Well, we can start with this sort of triad that is highlighted in the paper. And Adam, you said it as understanding the basis of navigation. And we have these three legs to the stool, kind of three threads that intertwine in the paper with it analytical formulation of navigation, which is what Blue mentioned with a higher
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: hierarchical generative model and the implementation in robotic and in biological systems. So maybe a first question is, how has this intersection of modeling navigation with robotics and biology been conceptualized? And what brought you to apply active inference in this way? And what does it add?
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Okay.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Who should go first?
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So maybe my perspective here is that
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: We basically got started from
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: from a robotics perspective, like looking at the navigation problem and looking at the ways that it's being solved right now
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: and implemented right now.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And at the same time, we already had quite some experience with active inference, but more like
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Oh yeah.
Tim Pfeiffer problems, let's say, or first
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: or first experiments were more on these kind of mountain car environment or a car racer.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But it was always our goal to kind of try to scale it up to
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: yeah, to real world robots.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: We got started by drawing and seeing parallels between
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: current implementations out there
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: that seem to match with
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: how we would look at it from an active inference perspective.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And kind of work our way from both ways, so the one went try to get some implementation running and on the other hand, seeing how we could formalize it and actually make the mouth work in the active inference framework.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: What we found out was that actually the the best matching.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: implementation from a robotics perspective was actually one that was quite bio inspired, so it was basically the the red flag model from milford at all where they had these.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: heavy inspiration from grid cells, play cells and these things and yeah of course.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It was not really a surprise, given the the fact how active inference is also grounded in neuroscience and so that's where we reached out to to add them.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: To basically show off like okay this is our trajectory this is our plan, this is our current implementation and how we think the math could work.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then add them with this infinite knowledge on how the the the the the the the it could work in the rain he gave like all kind of phone just like okay, but this is interesting because what you implemented here is actually.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: looking a lot of a lot of like this kind of system and what you're doing here is actually very much like these kind of things and then we just said okay let's let's begin this further and and and and we basically.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: started on covering out.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: thing coming like okay if this is how it's done in the brain and maybe we can make something more similar in in the mouth or in the implementation vice versa.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And the paper is basically a first step where we had like.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: The three bits kind of in place, but we know where the open issues are.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But it actually has something working on on and sensible on all three levels, I'd say, and that's that's that's where we we we are we are at this moment.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: awesome Thank you, Adam anything you add to that.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I guess what I would add is and increasingly.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: compelled by the idea that.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: robotics as a touchstone and basis for understanding different aspects of mind is like it might be the most powerful kind of.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: grounded empiricism we can do and I think it's both because it's like the like a lot of times like that Feynman quote of like what I cannot build I cannot understand is like mentioned.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But this is actually building systems that this is.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: That have to work and and but these problems like in going through them and looking at the different solutions like the kind of understanding you get, I think, is really unique.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But also, I think it's particularly apps because of what our minds other than control cybernetic control systems for bodies that have to move through the world.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so this idea that like the way roboticists are approaching it like it's.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And that is the exact problem that nature had to solve, but natural selection has itself another question was it the same.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It might be in some cases because you'd expect you know within you know bonds not nature to be a fairly clever blind designer.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: In terms of what it might discover and so just this going back and forth between the the robotics perspective.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And the how it might work in biology and then this abstract ways that they're the the the abstract algorithmic implementations of them for the robots and seeing how those can mutually inform each other it's for me it's a.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: This is how I basically want like all my thinking about the mind to be from now on like I feel like this is just like this is how it does this is the most powerful way of thinking on it that back and forth.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Let's enter in the biological door or blue do you have a question.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Okay, so Adam what.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Even though of course it's a deep area and there's writing in the paper and citations and so on, what is so interesting about the structuring of the grid cells through space and time and what can we learn from that about effective ways of navigating.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: In latent slam.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: We have these pose cells and actually I think.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Probably better for Tim to talk about that, like the exact ways in which these cells function within the robotic system.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I think that actually brings more clarity than the more mysterious like so there's lots of ideas been going around in like computational neuroscience of like what the grid cells might do.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But I actually think the greatest clarity comes from like well how would the analogs work in the robotic system so I'm gonna kick that to Tim what do you think Tim.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: yeah so I think that in.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: You know current implementation, the.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: The parallel with grid cells is kind of.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Part wired in the limitations kind of this by design, you have something that looks.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: If you screen your eyes a lot.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It looks a bit like grid cell.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I think that's in.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: You know current implementation, the.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: The parallel with grid cells is kind of.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Part wired in the limitations kind of this by design, you have something that looks.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: If you screen your eyes a lot.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It looks a bit like grid cell I wouldn't say that we actually have.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Grit cells in here.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Because to me the grid cell is basically.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It should be an abstract.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It should be.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Given you a way of.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Of.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Modeling movement in an abstract space basically.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And in the case of navigation.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: The space by accident maps to.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: The real world.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And the grid cell activation is just the.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: The computer way of.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And coding.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Where you are in space.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Without.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Without just giving you the x y coordinates basically.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: With a more kind of.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Higher dimensional.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: More robust representation of.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Where are you on in this on this grid and how do you if if I now move.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: How does how does your.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Location in in in this reference frame or the.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Gifts change.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so in our in our implementation we basically just said okay, we know that we are in a roughly flat surface world, so the main coordinates that we need to track and integrate over are the x x y position and.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: The head direction, these are basically the main things and I mean we use this thing called the continuous attractor network to kind of represent.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: These three coordinates and.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: We basically.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: We inject the knowledge that if you move forward, then.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: You will also move forward to within this.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: The tractor network location and.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Roughly, this this corresponds to doing kind of ball integration and i'm pretty sure that grid cells are.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Giving you similar functionality.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: In the brain, that I would not say that our current implementation actually has grid cells, I think the parallel is more with play cells.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Because there we do have kind of we do learn representations from visual sensory inputs that kind of give you an estimate of this is a particular location.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And if you see a similar pattern, then.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It is likely that you are visiting the same location again.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And it.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: At the same time, you happen to have a very similar X, Y and head direction as in your.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: As in your previous time, you you kind of saw something still like that.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Then you have pretty good evidence that you are actually in the same spot and then this is what you then call loop closure and then you kind of reorient yourself as if you were at the same location.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So that's kind of how I would.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Think of the grid cells and play cells in our current in our current group.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Thank you blue do you have any questions, yes, please go for it.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So i'm curious as to the role, if any, or how the system may change if you included proprio reception, which is like the sense of where your body is in space.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so like this is partially modeled through the visual system at play cells, grid cells, etc. But it's it's not always right.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So it includes other senses like balance and you know where's my hand and these kinds of things and i'm just curious if your model includes that in any way or only or not or how it may change if it did give it give it kind of like a more embodied.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: yeah so so basically in our case the proprioception is limited to.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Basically, the the the velocity commands that you that you issued to the to the robot, it also observes these again, so it assumes that it knows which command sending and it then these are also kind of.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: That back to the model as kind of a sensor, so if you say drive forward or turn left or turn right with these kind of angular velocities this information is also sent.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: into the model and this is then what we call the action so everywhere where in the especially in the low level model you see the action pop up this is basically you can you can see this is kind of a proprioception.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: thing.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so everything.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: kind of predicts what will happen given.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Given what I I sense that I was doing basically.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And and we do it both for the for the visual sensor like what would I see if I if I'm turning left or right to go for but also for.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: tracking the the pose and doing the pattern integration like if I move forward and my heading was zero angle, then I will probably just move forward in the x direction of the of the.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: of the.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: of the.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: of the.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: of the.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: of the.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: of the.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And that introduction of counterfactuals and anticipation, what would happen if I did this is very interesting area.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And also it it speaks to the composability and the flexibility of the active inference model like said highlighted that only the visual data were being used here with RGB values of video, but there are other kinds of sensors.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: that could be used as another sense state and that would kind of increase the dimensionality of the model.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Maybe it is a value add maybe it's not, but it doesn't require.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: rewriting it's like more like plugging in a different hard drive than it is like having a different computer.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So you mentioned a higher dimensional robust representation of location.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And that's definitely one of the advantages and and aspects of the model that will be important to explore more like in the dot zero we explored this paper.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Are we ready for service robots that showed how sometimes even trivial changes to environments can result in the robot getting lost because it has referenced to something like a chair that's no longer at the same location.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So how does this model.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Provide a higher dimensional robust representation of location.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And how did you go from thinking about that to the actual way that the generative model is framed.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: That's the first question, and then the second part is going to be about how do you go from the framing to the actual computational implementation.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But just the first stage of this pipeline, how do we go from wishing upon a star that we could have biologically inspired resilient navigation to writing down the formalisms as you had them.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: To get back at your at your first at the problems that you that you mentioned on the on the service robot like so basically the major problem in in in robotic slam.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Is that indeed if your environment changes slightly a bit, then then the same location doesn't look the same anymore in whatever sense for what you're using.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And that can be problematic, especially if you if you want to model the environment as like a metric system where you basically define this is my origin.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So this is zero zero in the coordinate system and now I will.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: For every obstacle or thing that I approach I will love my estimation of the X Y coordinates and and then suddenly when your chair moves, of course, yeah.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Everything breaks but here and in this system, we actually get rid of being grounded in in in in a metric space. The only thing that matters is that.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: This location looks very similar to something I visited before, it also seems likely given the the pet integrated.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: trajectory, I assume I was following. So this might be the same spot. And if you think that or if the chair moves.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: In the place.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: That's fine, then you just say okay, maybe it's a different spot. It doesn't matter.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: At some point, you will have a kind of a queue that is stable, right? So and that's actually what we also do as humans that you want to navigate, you just look for the the the queues that you are that you know that are pretty stable.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: If you visit the new town, you will look for the church tower because you know it will not move.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: You will not orient yourself based on the color of the cars that are parked somewhere. So I think by by using the active inference principle as as like starting point, you can you can get rid of all a lot of these these problems because your agent will automatically.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Look for the stable use and if suddenly the environment changes, but just accept this and just model it as like, okay, I think I mean I'm revisiting this same trajectory, but now it looks different. So maybe I just have to model it as such as this is kind of a trajectory that can change often.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And maybe this implied that if you plan the next time you draw a prefer a different trajectory where you know that everything is stable, right? So this is the same as as reducing your ambiguity.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So I think that getting rid of everything's to be structured in this x y location in the metric space and else I don't know what's going on just by getting rid of that and and just assume anything can happen anything can change and if it does not change.
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I prefer I prefer I like it better. This helps a lot to circumvent a lot of the traditional problems that say
Tim Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Cool. Adam anything to add on that.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I mean, so one of the things that we've been working on is so like in this paper, it's like trying to say like, okay, so to what degree are the principles of the
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Are the principles of what we understand about like the natures of like the hippocampal and entorhinal system being reflected in this simultaneous localization and mapping problem and latent slam.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And some of the other work we're doing is also going reverse direction of
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: What you know what can these principles of the slam principles use for autonomous navigation.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: What can they tell us about the brain functioning as a cybernetic system. And so what one idea in general is that each of these operations, in addition to having this fundamental significance of the basics of being able to move through the world, this, you know.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Task that any active inferential system that's
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: going to survive and do what it needs to do has to handle but
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: To what extent.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Were these same principles repurposed for sophisticated inference more generally and they're actually and to what degree is sophisticated inference structured according to slam principles.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So if you're talking about like these like loop closure events like this finding this highly familiar state and where you think you know where you are by this.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: convergence of like your trajectory information and your pose.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Well, this question would be like this is a model potentially for the feeling of insight or discovering of like causal accounts.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Is this.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And is this actually a intern intra individual source of inter individual differences, which would be fairly fundamental like how familiar do you think things are or not.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: How much do you update on accounting or encountering these highly familiar situations and so like.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So me personally i've been wondering is okay so to what extent like of all the details.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So towards degree so re representing the biological details in terms of the kinds of descriptions that TIM is giving here and also though thinking of cognition more generally as navigation.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so thinking of like each of these things, what are the analogs at the level of thought.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: As a kind of navigation through generalized space.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Awesome.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Matt there's been a navigation group.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: A lot of interesting work on exploration exploitation in mind and space hills at all 2015.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And on thinking about planning and the evolution of planning as being related to spatial as well as cognitive foraging blue.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So it's interesting to think about cognition as navigation like I think about the feeling that I have when I'm like searching for a thought a word a name of a person like it literally feels like a.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Like you're scrolling through a filing cabinet like physically looking for this like piece of information in your brain and I know that like.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Different neurons like store different pieces of information like the Jennifer Aniston neuron and and these kinds of things.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So I wonder what um.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Can you just elaborate maybe a little bit more on that Adam about like cognition as navigation is it like literally navigating to find the right like neuron that goes ding ding ding ding ding like that's the one I wanted.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So like.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: To some degree, it could be in that like.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It's like two ways I might think of it as one of like you were talking or.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Before you really bring up like memory palaces.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And I think that'd be like one example of thought is navigate navigation, which is like with this like art of memory in terms of like it can be like part of the way we.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Access and organize.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: The information we work with when we're thinking is through a kind of spatialization often and actually like to the extent that we show like really great for true awesome memory it's through an explicit process of spatializing and navigating through domain.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And that gives us like the best purchase we have on.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: You know, remembering these building constructing and accessing these complex structures.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But in terms of what you're describing of like something kind of like Jennifer Anderson or like neurons are like kind of finding.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: The thing that's coming to mind there is like foraging theory and so what you might be foraging for like when you're like looking for like something that fits.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It is a certain amount of like familiarity or like some amount of like, you know, it could take different forms like you know some sort of.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Maybe maybe it's a interoceptive code and it's like like a visceral feeling of like compelling this or maybe it's like a more of like a proprioceptive code and it's like tension in the body.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I don't know what it might be, but this like you're there's some sort of greed you're having on are you finding what you're looking for.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so then the idea would be like you're foraging for it and so you might spend a little bit of time in some area of conceptual space and you're kind of moving around in there like trying out different permutations.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then you're like, no, I'm not finding it and then you might do like a different tack and then move to another area of semantic or conceptual space and you're searching around there and so like in forging theory, these would be called I believe levy flights.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so there's like something called the marginal value theorem, which is like if you're trying to be an optimal forager.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: You're trying to like balance expiration exploitation and so you don't want to spend too long in a given like patch.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: If it's not having what you want, but you you don't want to leave a patch prematurely if it's a good patch to be exploited.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so the idea is like if you're looking for like searching for a name or something that fits it might take the form of this kind of like general.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Foraging but instead of you like locomoting through spaces you're actually spending different amounts of time and semantic spaces and then shifting based on whether you think you're actually it's like a juicy patch.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so like with the marginal value team it says like if your current rate of foraging drops below the historical return then you should.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Then you should then you should go.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so this like there might be different like inductive biases in the brain that would represent this like the campus system.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: This might look like, for instance, like the way by plan is like you might get like this.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Pretty pretty pretty pretty pretty pretty drops below a certain amount or goes past a certain amount.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then the hippocampal system like ramps up with a lot of her current activity is called like a ripple and then it resets itself and like retiles space and like stimulates cortex like a new like set of operative policies and spatializations.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Might occur and so like this would be like an example like a mechanism like hippocampal system might have like a built in mechanism for like these like attentional shift and shifts in these imaginative shifts when you're doing foraging.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It might be reflected also in like other ways like like dopamine.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So there's like some thoughts on my thinking like Nathaniel Dahl will talk about like one way of interpreting opponents between like phasic and tonic dopamine would be like the tonic would tell you like what's your average return basically.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And there seems to be like a kind of functional I don't know if it's not quite antagonism, but like the more your tonic is high, the more your the less impactful any phasic event is.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so it would be kind of like if you're foraging like what would occasion a shift or not, you might actually see this like playing out like in the way neuromodulators work.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so I don't know if I like helps you know, but the idea is like this is the sort of like thinking in terms of forging or navigation through generalized spaces as basically being.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So the reason like, you know, so I guess there's like a kind of like a priori reason like you would expect it to be.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Generally good, which is doesn't everything like most of the things we encounter do indeed exist in spaces and then most things the way we understand them is by like spatializing them.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Let's like we graph them we we do like multi dimensional scale and we do different things to try to like it's just like a way we understand things.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But it also seems like this was probably both evolutionarily and developmentally like this was the original challenge that had to be solved where the systems were paying their weight and that this would then involve like a repurposing and a redeploying for more abstract domains.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So like there's some other like I think it's Burgess has done some good work, right, finding like, for instance, like we might create like a morpho space and we're like looking like.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Like they'll create like these generative like birds with like different like neck lengths and you're trying to do like categories over like what the different kinds of birds are and there's like there's evidence that the way we do the categorization as well create a spatialization of this task structure.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And there's some other stuff that the capital system is we're navigating through that in dealing with these categories.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I know so that's that was a lot of rambling but like I don't know if that got it with any of that land or.
Danielle Pletka, Ph.D.: Yeah, lots of it landed is very cool.
Thank you.

Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: One note that will I'm sure be exploring going forward optimal foraging theory is often put in the context of utility, which is a.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Which is just the pragmatic component in active inference in terms of policy selection.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So optimal active inference foraging is like when the epistemic and the pragmatic gain are being considered.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So that's quite interesting.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then also there's as you brought up individual and collective navigation.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So one case is sort of the sovereign robot, no Wi-Fi onboard computation alone in the warehouse.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But then in the case of, for example, an ant colony where there's stigmergy and modification of the environment,
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: that might be possible or even facilitated by different onboard cognition and different outsourced or offloaded,
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: which brings us to extended cognitive discussions.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But let's return to this question about going from this resiliency of navigation that a biologist knows exists, a roboticist might want to see.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: How did you then go to that third space and actually have a hierarchical model?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So here in figure two or wherever else you suggest, what is happening here and how did this graphical structure come to be,
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: as opposed to potentially like other graphical structures that could have been used?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Okay, so basically, let me first maybe explain what all the variables mean in this figure.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So going from the bottom to up, at the bottom we have the O's, OTs, which are basically observations.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So these are like the visual inputs, what the robot T's basically.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then we have two latent variables, S and P, where S is basically an estimation of all the latent factors that give rise to the observation.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So this is, it's kind of a latent space that confines all possible visual observations.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And P, on the other hand, is the latent variable that has a representation of your pose, which is then basically,
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: in this case, your x, y position and head direction.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then we go, we have one more, which is the A, the action.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so that's what I hinted at previously.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: This is basically your proprioception.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: You know, you know what you have been doing.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So there, therefore, up until the past, the 80s are also shaded.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So it means that you basically have access to what you have been doing.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Like the low level action, like move forward to this velocity or turn left or turn right.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But then for the future, this becomes an unobserved thing and you basically want to infer potential actions you should be doing in the future.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then for the future, a number of actions can be just summarized as pi, which is then the policy.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So the policy is no more than a sequence of future actions that you that you that you want to do or that you intend to do.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then we move up a level in hierarchy.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And there we have two more variables. One is the location L, and this is then basically kind of a more coarse grained.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Yeah, look representation of location where am I, but it's not really it's not necessarily tight to a metric space.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It's just like identify this is a location and then we have also an action space at this level, but this is the more.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: We call this moves or M and the move is basically kind of moving from one location to another.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So locations can just be more coarse grains like what you what you define as like a separate location in in in your environment.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Whereas at the lower level, the the the states, if you move from one states to the other, it's basically just saying, Okay, what would be the next frame of my camera sensor be like.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so it's also crucial to know that these two levels operate on different kind of time scales.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So the the lowest level time scale is basically a very fine fine grained action perception loop by I send the motor commands to the robots and I read out my camera and this can go to.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I think we implemented it at like 10 hertz, so 10 times per second to get a new camera frames and updated the motor command.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Whereas locations just like and moving from a location to another can can take you maybe 10 or more time steps at the lower level.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then, of course, one of the crucial bits is then when when do you how do you then how do you identify a location.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so basically how how it comes to be is that if you you you you you basically observe your your your space to the camera images, we infer this abstract state space s and then we look at what what is the surprise of being in the states versus what I predicted and if this surpasses like a certain threshold.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So yeah, yeah, so this is pretty complex to explain, but I'll do my best so so every time every time step you get basically a new camera image and you can calculate like what is what is the KL divergence between what I was thinking about the state previously and how does it how did the shift.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: With my new observation is then basically your kind of the patient surprise that you have from seeing this observation and every time step we accumulate like this number.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And once we suppose certain threshold, which is kind of a hyper parameter, we just fix it that something that seems to work.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So if you suppose this threshold to basically say okay, this is now distinct enough from and thanks to before.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So it must be something new, it must be a new kind of location in my net and then you add this thing as a distinct distinct location in your map and you add like a link from the previous location to this one.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And you start and then you continue further on building the map and this is how you then kind of create this more course great.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Map of your environment and.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And you can then reason like how should I move from this location to another and you then can you can basically use your.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Your previously visit locations and moves to kind of have a model of how can I move in this space, but at the more course great level moving from one location to another and it also means that.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: By by using this surprise on the third lane space that that we infer from from visual input.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It means that it it's not not every edge has the same distance in real space necessarily so if you're if you're the robot is traversing.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: A white hallway where the walls are perfectly white and everything that everything is the same.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Then it will take a long time for this special to be be reached and it will only.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: At larger distances, make a new note because everything looks the same anyway, so there's no extra information that I need to put in the map, but if you then suddenly.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: See a door, for example, then you suddenly reach your threshold and you add a new.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: location in your map and so it's basically the locations in the map are basically defined off on what is the information I got by looking at this thing, rather than.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: How much meters that I traverse in this in this time and that makes it a really interesting way of representing maps because it's more like how much information.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Is there in this particular location rather than which XY look position is here.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Does it make sense.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Yeah, and it feels to map onto the distinction between like chronos and kairos like in this analogy here.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Chronos is the chronometer.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It's the watch time.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It's the geometry.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It's the XY grid.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It's one meter.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then kairos is like the timeliness of action and the time it takes to complete an action.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then something being like boring.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: That's going through a low information hallway in the cognitive foraging.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It's like, are we there yet driving through this featureless landscape where the salience is low because my predictions are basically being met almost too well.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And there's a lot of other ways to go with it.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Adam, anything to add?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And also, again, I'm just kind of curious, like, what is the space of the possible graphical structures?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Do you think that this is the only or the sort of grandfather graphical model for hierarchical navigation?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Like, how do we go from imagining this tactics and strategy multi-level model to a graphical model that we believe will be consistent with active inference and amenable to message passing?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And maybe so to add on this last question.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I think Kristen has a paper on deep temporal hierarchical models where he basically lays out more generic.
So like if you're looking at the ultimate generic hierarchical model, you'll find it there where it's basically just an aggregation of states that give rise to observations.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: That go from one state to another given an action, and then you can add the level on top and level on top and you can keep on adding levels.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And that's kind of the prototypical hierarchical model, I would say.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And what you see here is kind of particular instantiation where we took some domain knowledge like okay for navigation, what would be sensible levels to think about?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And what would these latent states then what should they represent?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then, of course, you easily end up like okay at the lowest level, I need to have some state that represents my camera images and at the higher level.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I want to have some locations in the map.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And how do they then relate?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Okay, I probably also want this this this fault integration, so maybe I I need to have a special special first class citizens here in the form of my force.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And that's how you basically build up the model from first looking at this prototypical hierarchical model then looking at yeah but in my case, what do I think is sensible?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: What could these things mean and then try to figure out like okay.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: At this at this stage, we kind of converge on the one hand from top down like does the math work out to bottom up does this math match with my implementation?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then at some point, we converge to do this basically.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So the high road and the low road, they do lead to Rome after all.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Exactly.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Adam, what would you add in there?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Well, first I didn't.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: I love that metaphor just now.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Another thing I would add is.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So like, you know, on my end, like, I'm trying to use this as a way.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Abstractions for understanding, you know, aspects of like brain functioning.
So let's say we're talking about these.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: You know, this top level.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: This is one way of interpreting like the hippocampal place cells.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And these, whether you create a new note or not, based on what threshold
of familiarity or surprise.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: This would potentially be like an example, I think, of an extremely
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: powerful source of individual differences.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Like, maybe you could think of this in terms of like Piagetian like assimilation
or accommodation.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But you could see like if your thresholds are too low or too high, you
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: could end up representing a domain in ways with, you know, that are either like,
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: you can get things that are like excessively granular or insufficiently granular to
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: represent the domain and you can get different types of errors associated with it.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so this, for instance, could define even things like more like some people will
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: talk about like autism to schizophrenia spectrums and to accept there could be like kind of
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: underlying predispositions for this.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And it might actually be, I think that's an oversimplification, but you could think of these thresholds as
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: some cognitive spectrums might just fall out of them as you get different types of minds.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: If you have like a more granular, like an overly inclusive or an underly inclusive category structure.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But some other things like just trying on this would be like if we're talking about this, you know, lower level.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And if we're thinking of like these entorhino grid cells as well, not quite being well, the posts here aren't quite grid cells, but this idea of like this.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: mapping of your.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: What your body position is and where you're oriented and then having this conjoined with what's in your visual field and then using these sources of information.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: To mutually constrain each other and using where you are in space.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And these all being necessary, like, for instance, this seems to be, you know, fundamentally what was needed to get the robots to work and we have not so dissimilar sensors and effectors.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And so while one thought is.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: You know, I think it's.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Giamme Duba has just messed up his name.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: He has this interesting paper and like default mode system as it's called a dark control and thinking of it is doing like tree search.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But to loop it around this pose information, it's possible that some of the posterior nodes of the DMN are actually helping to encode this information.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Like if you go like to the bridal portions that actually might be where is my body where it's reflected and then if you're going like to these midline portions of it.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: You know what's in my visual field or what am I imagining.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then, if you want to go for like this future part that might be like the anterior portions so like the DMN or the.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Dorsal medial prefrontal cortex, maybe coupling with the hippocampus, the anterior hippocampus, but basically it would seem that like the stream.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: These core aspects of the model might be ways of functionally understanding the core aspects of an agent architecture.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Used for mental simulation.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: That there seems to be a striking amount of conversions between the things that people like Tim are identifying as just like what's necessary.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: How do we solve the problem and the features of neuronal organization?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: That wouldn't be these.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Defaults or canonical processes that you're seeing it as a.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: As really just fundamentally, you know, we call it the default focuses active all the time.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: What's it doing?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Maybe part of what it's doing is it's allowing us to do this kind of navigation through space and time.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Yeah, those are some thoughts.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Navigation through space and time in the sort of territory sense would be clock time and metric space.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: What is your X, Y, Z, T and then navigation through mental space and time might have some resonances or analogies, but it's not a piece of grid paper.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So what is it and how does it become realized through ecology, evolution and development?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: So awesome points.
Thank you.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Real quickly in terms of the time issue, it seems like there's these multiple ways that time comes in.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: It's like one sense of like the sense of time is you might be doing like accumulation based on like the the frequency with which you're having like meaningful informational events.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Like, but Craig calls it these like global emotional moments.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But and and Neil and others have some I think that Murray Shanahan have some interesting models like the sense of time in terms of like the amount of like information flux through your sensors.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: But then there's like another kind of time that might actually involve like overt spatialization of a trajectory.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And you might be using something like path integration in terms of like how you're doing some types of duration estimation, not necessarily just like accumulating like like a sense of accumulation, but some of it might be like, where am I in navigating through a timeline?
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And I think you'll see this reflected in like the way people talk and we could like dismiss this and say, I go, that's just mere metaphor.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: No, I think that that metaphor is how we're actually constructing some sense of time, which actually gives us like forms of control that we would not have otherwise, were we not able to actually extend our minds metaphorically in that way.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: And then be able to basically navigate through spatialized time to keep track of some longer time sequences if we want to plan with respect to them.
Adam Pfeiffer, Ph.D.: Awesome. Thank you, Stephen.
Stephen B.: Hello, great to see you all.
Stephen B.: Yeah, I was curious in terms of time. Well, one of the things is, do you think time is or this process is distributed around different parts of the sensor and processing because different sensor and have different speeds or different rates or different abilities.
Stephen B.: And then the other thing coming back to time as well as people can be going through time.
Stephen B.: They can be like or they can be time can come towards them or time can be sort of developing around them, which often happens in Asian cultures. It's a time is seen more as a something that's around them. So I'm curious, like how these these ideas of temporality might might link to the ways that we imagine ourselves with ourselves.
Stephen B.: We are sensor.
Stephen B.: I mean, this is indeed the case that some forms of the spatialization of it, if it is the case of spatializing time, you know, the spatialization of the spatialization of the spatialization time.
Stephen B.: Um, is happening both. Um, in some cases through some some fairly abstract metaphorical linguistic instructions, then this would imply that you should be able to get meaningful cultural information.
Stephen B.: ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
constraints and affordances of our language are constraints and affordances on the way we think.
There's like stronger and weaker versions of that hypothesis.
Thank you. Blue?
So it's interesting because as we've been talking about like spatial maps and spatial context,
like spatial representation, navigating through space, I have been thinking a lot about
semantic navigation also, like when we're looking for a thought, when we're looking for
navigating foraging for information or in these context-rich domains.
And I just wonder, is the semantic navigation related to, linked to, is there overlap in the
brain and the way that we process semantic orientation and representation and space also?
So I was just curious.
Hashtag maps of meaning.
Yeah, maybe I can respond on this from my perspective.
And then I'll probably have to leave you guys.
But so I think one of the most important things, at least to me, of how this whole endeavor of
constructing this and doing this together with Adam is that we basically, we start off with
robot navigation, which is from a roboticist perspective, it's really like about X and Y
position and about X and seconds.
But what we do here is we, by creating this model, we basically get rid of this close tie of being
grounded in seconds and meters, basically.
And I think this is one of the most crucial aspects of our model, because it shows that,
well, on the one hand, I think we all agree that we don't get born measuring time in seconds
and measuring space in meters.
So that we actually get at least a framework that also gets rid of these metrics and just
learns to navigate in this more abstract space.
And if we can get it to work for navigation, per se, moving through actual physical space,
then I'm pretty sure that we can also extend the model further to navigate any abstract space.
Because in the end, once we get the level above our sensory inputs, then everything is, in our case,
just a learned latent thing, basically.
So if we can make this work for physical navigation, I think we are already a big step closer to making
it work for any navigation, then indeed we come to the realm of like, okay, I have lots of memories,
these are tied together somehow, because how these memories just came to be, can I now navigate this space
towards the memory that I'm looking for?
Or if you are solving a math problem, how do you navigate the space of math equations to get a solution for this thing?
I think, once we get rid of the time and space that are so tight for your sensorium, and move towards a more abstract space,
and be able to navigate that, this is the crucial bit here, I would say.
And so with that, I'd like to thank you for the discussion till now, I'll try to be there next week as well.
And I enjoyed the discussion further.
Thank you, Tim.
See you.
Cool.
Very interesting.
And also speaking to that cultural basis, there was the inch, foot, pound paradigm.
And that has, in certain places, also co-existed or been complementary or contradictory with the centimeters, grams, second, based upon something different.
And what would happen if a larva was born and the little one, the second, was like what we call three seconds?
Is that just a more chill larva?
Because every one of its moments is taking a few more heartbeats.
It can actually take a breath per little one.
So there's a lot that we probably don't even know how much we don't know until we're in feedback with these models
that both fully realize, not just in the equations, but in the actual robotics, grounding us in those actual observations of red, green, blue, pixel intensities,
which is like what Adam was saying, that robotics are an empirical platform to be studying the nature of cognition and brain and mind.
And then here is where we move into a different space and time.
And so that is an excellent point by Tim.
Stephen?
Yeah, so following on from what you're saying, Daniel, is I know Tim just mentioned about, you know, have the abstracted ideas.
But there's also maybe the grounded, you mentioned grounded ways of knowing.
So it might be that the future we abstract out what we think it might be.
And then there may be ways where we feel what's right, what feels.
So you hit a door and you feel there's an information affordance and it can ground.
So I was wondering how much that can.
That supports not needing to have the metrics, like you say, and maybe the metrics that we've created, like the second,
are partly because they're at that kind of sweet spot or somehow close to a sweet spot of what sort of makes sense.
You know, someone had to decide on a foot or a hand, you know.
So was it the small person's hand or was it the big person's hand?
And they sort of said, well, what about John?
And maybe it was the king, I don't know, but it got decided somehow.
So I think this is a good question about grounding versus abstraction.
I don't know what the thoughts are on that.
Yes.
This higher level in a purely metric model, it could be like, well, on the bottom level,
we're dealing with centimeters and 100 milliseconds frames.
And the core screening is at the level of 100 times the spatial distance and 100 times the temporal distance.
What this model is doing is something different.
And I think that is, again, this biological inspiration,
which is that what is happening in the level that the action perception loop is nested within
is not just a bigger version.
Well, it both is and isn't because it has some resonance graphical structures
that support the composability and attractability of act-inf models.
Yet also it's doing something that's categorically different,
which is navigating in a more topological space rather than the more geometric space down the bottom.
What are you thinking about, Adam?
Adam Chapnick, M.D.: It seems like with the, well, I guess one is, I suspect it is no coincidence that seconds
are about the time extent that they are.
And that we have like the metric units we use, like a foot or a meter or a yard in terms of like,
in terms of grounding and in terms of connection to affordance.
So like a second for maybe, you know, a relation to a certain, maybe like heart rate or certain like
biophysical pattern generators or like the scope of working memory being an iconic memory,
being stable on different scales or like a yard or a meter, like the, basically the reach
that you'd have of your arm, like, like peripersonal space and like a field of affordances
around your body where it's particularly concentrated.
And so, you know, these are ways in which like, for instance, like the granularity of our modeling
would be influenced by language or their language would reflect it and maybe to different extents
influence it. But you would have like this other kind of granularity of space that might be different
for different species, but also within a species and with an individual.
Like for instance, like these like tilings of, so like, like the hippocampus system will like lay out
these like tilings of space for a task domain and they'll have like a kind of, they'll be refreshed,
like maybe it looks like every like three seconds or so. But if you're in like a big space,
but this tiling will actually affect of hexagonal arrays or hexagonal time,
it'll fill whatever space it's in and it'll have different levels of granularity.
And so if you're in like a big space, it's going to necessarily be less granular.
And if you're in a small space, it'll be probably be more granular, but there, and there's other
things that will influence the granularity also, like there's like brainstem locomotor nuclei,
they're like detecting how fast are you moving? And then this will influence the granularity of like your
kind of, you know, kind of the, you know, some of this, what is relevant, some of this, this,
our greening of a domain, some of it will be reflected by like these, basically innate, like by architectural,
inductive biases and some of them will be more like socio-culturally constructed.
One thing I just, we're moving on is I thought to say, I like how Tim, you know, as he left,
like that was, that was one hell of a mic drop because, you know, the thing is like basically,
you know, so he's already solved like in terms of kinds of grounding, like not only is this like
potentially a way of having an architecture capable of navigating conceptual domains and abstractions,
basically what Benji calls like system two AI, or what some would call like strong AI.
But it's also grounding in that it actually works as a control system for an embodied embedded agent.
And so now you might have a single system capable of both giving you symbol grounding by
allowing something to be in the world alongside other agents and have actual, actual semantics,
in terms of pointing to things in the world, like seeing, you can have like a semantic network,
just like symbols pointing at symbols, but ultimately these, such a system would allow you to ground
out your semantic network in things in the world and shared symbols. And so, I mean, ultimately this
is a path to, you know, who knows how far, you know, anyone working on it today gets, but this is
ultimately a path to AGI built that takes on an activist principles of what you would need to do so,
which is more than a little exciting, I think.
Oh, I'm starting to see why people are interested in this.
Excellent point about the symbolic semantics and logic and how that connects to the inactive
insight, the pragmatic turn, ecological psychology, biosemiosis, like all of these features that get
left on the cutting block if we take a computational linguistics approach only. And computational
linguistics plus the mouth movement, already one has incorporated that pragmatic turn and that embodiment
element. And that's quite a different model than just the substrate independent symbol manipulator.
Stephen?
Yeah, I think it's exciting indeed, because it can open up a lot of, I'm really interested in mental
space psychology and peripersonal space and working with space as an instrument. And well, I'm more than
interested in it. That's my main focus in many ways. And, but what's really been the challenge is
giving it a plausible bridge, right? Because they're working primarily, you're looking at what action
policies are and what has been enacted. And it's very hard to go back to observations because you're
coming from the other direction. So I think it'd be really interesting to see what this robot, whether
you could actually see, well, what kind of robot is this robot? What's it like? What kind of story
patterning gets triggered by this robot? And maybe if I, it grew up with a slightly heavier wheel on one
side or something, it has a slightly different character, you know? So I mean, I wonder if there's
a kind of an actual, a way that the action policies themselves start to encode a certain personality
based on the physicality and sensorium that get weighted.
I mean, that would be like, in terms of this like generalization of SLAM principles as like a way of
understanding cognition, where generally, I think that would be like a great test case. And that like,
those are the kinds of hypotheses you would look for. I think your, if your wheel is like weighted more
heavily on one side or the other, that could have all sorts of things. Like for instance, like,
like what Tim was describing, like this node creation, where it's not just a function of like a metrics,
but on information. And the, and so this creates like a distorted space, but an adaptively distorted
space, you would expect usually because multiple forms of value are influencing the granularity
of this sort of space, like not necessarily as like a map. It's like space is a graph, but, but a graph
being shaped by multiple kinds of value. And so you would expect things like, like that kind of real
asymmetry you're talking about to result in different kinds of graph spaces. And this could then potentially
have some transfer more generally across more than just physical spaces in theory. Also, you know,
coming back to like that granularity issue, like, let's say like the way you move through the world
is quicker or slower, that itself then might have transferred, not just to, well, how is it that I'm
representing the space I'm physically moving through, but that then can get reflected in cognitive styles,
in terms of like the way you, you relate to like semantic spaces, in terms of the way you,
you're going to forge through them, what you consider to be near or far connections. So like,
this is the kind of like, that would be like a whole research program, which would be, but using this
as like a source of bridging principles of like, so some connection between embodied experience and
then more abstract thinking, well, maybe this is a source of some of the ways in which concrete
and body experiences go on to shape, basically thought on the more abstract level as well.
Very, very interesting. And especially when we think about the mental action
papers that we've read, like live stream number 25 with Sanved Smith et al. about metacognition as
mental action. And so in this two level robotics case, we're talking about the sort of lower level
motion and then the higher level navigation of locations where we can say, I want to go to the
post office and then the grocery store, but then we have this more tactical taking a step
timescale. That's a lot faster. If this bottom layer is based upon cognition and perception,
also this higher level is not just navigation in the warehouse. That's actually like, where do I want
to be in my regime of attention? Or what would I like to be considering from a metacognitive perspective?
How do I navigate to a place where I prefer what's healthy for me? So there's all kinds of other
questions about navigation in parameter spaces that are not just like topologically, the cousin of the
warehouse space, but truly in the mental space fully. Blue, and then Steven.
So since we brought up hierarchical, here in the paper, it looks like, and I mean, I can hold this
for Tim, Adam, too, if you don't feel like comfortable talking about it, but maybe you're good.
In the hierarchical space, it seems that it's just a core screening, like in this paper, right? So like,
you know, the higher level is just like a coarse grained version of what happens at the lower level.
And it's easy to see how that takes place or take shape in like a topographical way. It doesn't leave
a lot of room for emergence. And I wonder, like, if we jump to thinking about a semantic space,
you know, we have words and we've got the relationships with words to each other, proximity,
you know, how close do you expect to find, you know, there to was or whatever. So how linked are
the words together in a semantic space? But I wonder if, you know, you can go into topic modeling,
and that gives you like a kind of a coarse graining. But like, is there more room for emergence in that
kind of space, maybe? Or like, what other like, how do you I don't know, how would you just allow
for emergent things to come through in this kind of hierarchical modeling or mapping?
I think when Tim comes back, it could be worth it for him to go into more detail on the parameters
that go into node creation or not. Because I feel like, to the extent that you're getting
some flexibility in ways of understanding like emergence, that would be your models of emergence.
And where that would be like where you would basically create this coarse grained ontology of
different levels of granularity. What, what constitutes like an occasion for coarse graining of what kinds?
It seems like the node creation would be where your assumptions about that, of what kinds of
emergence you might be dealing with. That's where we'd come into this kind of model.
Is it rich enough to account for like all of, I wouldn't quite say that, in terms of like, you know,
all the different forms of emergence you can get. So some of it, you know, but that is for, but for,
by enough, I mean, you know, enough to be, you know, a full on general intelligence. But,
but, but, but I do think there is room for some, some flexibility there at that parameterization of,
of, of Tim's model. But you, he would explain it better than I would.
Tim Cynova
Tim Cynova
I'll, I'll make a comment and then ask a question in the chat and then also see you, Steven. So,
it was mentioned that there is the embodiment of certain prior information in the continuous
attractor network. Like if my position is this and I move forward, then that is putting me into this
different position in the can. And blue asked about topic modeling and semantic spaces. So that territory is
different. So the maps should be appropriately different. And so we could say, for example, like
California is nested within the United States that is not violating any geographical priors. But what
about a paper that's interdisciplinary that might be at the intersection of two different topics, or
depending on how those topic models are generated, one could think of every paper as existing across
100 different topics to different quantitative amounts. And so it actually does bring us to this
question, which Sid has asked, which is we're hearing a lot in, in the paper, in the natural speech,
and so on different complementarities, lower and higher. So here where the lower model is the finer
scale and the red, I'm, I'm trying not to mix metaphors, but lower and higher is sometimes used with
inner and outer or finer and coarser, coarse graining, more specific, more general. So
what is that restaurant where those are the dishes?
How could it something be above or below and you get it, but it could also be more like a kernel and
more like the fruit and you get it. And it could be more like sand or more like gravel and you would get
it. What does that mean or say? We'll think and then allow Adam to speak first.
Adam Smith
I think that's a deep and complex question. And there's a couple levels or a couple of entry points
there. But one thing is like you mentioned, like inner and outer is another way of describing it,
suppose higher and lower. And there's a, I think connection between this arc, this latent
slam architecture and like, and meta learning where you're having like a more fine grained process
for like, that's more task specific and for like adaptive fine grain couplings, but then you nest that
further, you create like an outer loop, which is like a slower aggregation process that's coarser,
but then allows for sharing of information across episodes.
Adam Smith
So it's a kind of like, so this is basically a kind of meta learning system and giving you this divide
and conquer approach of like levels of granularity. I don't think anyone quite knows yet what the
significance of this is. But one interesting thing about the grid cells is they seem to have
a multi scale hierarchy in their organization in terms of there's this axis, I believe as you go,
within entorhinal cortex, as you go more, like more dorsal to ventral or more superior to inferior,
it you'll get these like discrete cutoffs of potentially implying some kind of
harmonic nesting of scales, maybe even coupling with like multi scale, like synchronous dynamics and cortex
unclear. But there does seem to be these like multiple scales reflected in the grid scales and internal crystals
having different levels of granularity of their spatial representations.
Adam Smith
And the thing that's interesting, I'm curious about is like, what are the one thing I'm curious about is like,
to what degree, for instance, do different like neuromodulator systems like some of the ways in which
like, they could be understood in terms of like them having their functions, is maybe like influencing which
granularity is most present, like moving into like, now in a situation of like attending to like the fine
granules, and or this is a situation where we're going to really go coarse and just ignore those details.
And that some neuromodulatory systems there, and their effects on like neural dynamics
might actually be best explained, might be well explained in terms of this like adaptive changing of the
adaptive changing of the granularity.
Adam Smith
Very cool. And we see that in teamwork, where sometimes it's time to control paste, and just fill
out the spreadsheet. Other times it's time to add a column to the spreadsheet. Other times there are this
open endedness to the task and including the local objectives, and also even broader mission and one's
own relationship to the team and the project. So perhaps if there's a similar biological substrate,
then it would stand to reason that there could be multiple representations that are emitted from some
kind of common generative model. Stephen?
Stephen







Stephen



I think that's the same thing that we're going to do with the central complex. And I feel like that's
like, an area like I'm looking to look into next is like, to really understand these things, not just
looking at the mammal case, but I want to look at the insect case with the central complex and see the
similarities and differences, you know, what, what special adaptations were there? What, to what extent are
the functions realized by similar means or different means, but this, in terms of like a way of
understanding things like, like that neuromodulator hypothesis of like influencing the granularity of
spatial modeling, it's possible, although I wouldn't, you know, necessarily, um, that on it, based on
conversations with you, David, but like, um, it's possible that you're getting like extensive homology
and common significances for things like flexible, influencing the granularity of the forging parameters,
it's possible those are like remarkably conserved, and that you might actually see them.
That being said, like you also were alluding to though, the SLAM instance is different in insects,
that this is a, this is a multi-SLAM. Um, in general, there's a lot of multi-SLAM happening,
you know, invertebrates also, but I think not to the same degree and that, so you might expect some
potentially substantial differences there as a result of the SLAM problem being, having that
additional weights, additional set of challenges and, um, sources of information it can leverage.
David Plylari I can't wait for solitary WASP SLAM and
eusocial colony SLAM. Stephen?
Stephen From what I'm hearing, you could, you could correlate these multi-SLAMs to regimes of
attention in many ways because that, that could dictate the nature of these granularities and where
they are in the space, in the place, in the body. So, um, because we often assume, I think when Blue
was saying there about there's, there's inner outer and the, some of those are also false assumptions that,
that rolls out over everything that we assume. So in the sense that inner, um, is purer and higher is purer,
but often, um, that might depend on the multi-SLAM that's being dunked at the time.
Stephen Yeah. Like, um, one note then Blue, like coarser and finer, slower and faster. So one interpretation would be that the slower time scale is the coarser graining,
uh, in the sense that it's like seconds, not milliseconds. And the finer is the faster.
But there's also maybe an interpretation where actually the, uh, if you're clicking up mile by mile,
instead of foot by foot, that is actually moving faster and it's coarser. And if you're counting grains of
sand at a time, it's finer and slower. So I think even sometimes the direction that one interprets
is not there, but it doesn't remove the dialectical nature or the intermodal nature, but the, the way that, um, is it going to be like, um,
a sugar with all the OHs pointing down or all the OHs pointing up or some blend has to go one way or the other, but maybe it doesn't have to be any one specific way. Blue.
Blue. So I am wondering, and this is also interesting in terms of the insect case,
if there's some kind of, um, maybe like a generic, free installed, like readily adaptable coarse grained
version of a place cell, like that's just kind of there as like a generic representation. So like a
perfect example. I mean, when you're thinking about coarse graining, like a map at a location,
like, you know, where everything is in your house, like, you know, where your bathroom is and you know
where all the things are, but you know, when you travel, you have an expectation, even if you've
never been to the hotel before, you have the expectation of what the elevator is going to sound
like, how the carpet all looks the same with that funky, weird pattern and the hallways twist and turn.
And like, when you get into the hotel room, there's going to be a bathroom and there's going to be a
window and there's going to be a bed and a TV and a remote. So you have this like pre generic
supposition of how the hotel is going to look. Does that live in a place cell somewhere that just like
morphs into, oh, the bathroom's here and the lights here so that you're not stumbling around in the
middle of the night. Like, and similarly, like there's all kinds of, when you go hiking, you know,
you expect there to be trees and rocks and stuff outside. And so do you just like mash your map
onto like some preexisting generic place holder, a place cell placeholder. It's interesting to think
about.
It's like a prior for the abstract space. So prior distribution over hotel rooms, which is totally
in cultured and totally based upon experience. And then either one is surprised or not, just as with
when any other prior meets sense. Adam, what do you think of that, Steve?
I mean, these are details that are definitely like, after beyond the edge of anything, I or maybe anyone
knows, but the I guess just like these, how many different, so one way that these place fields are
sometimes modeled is in terms of like these like chain detractors. And so like within the hippocampus
system, like you can get like this highly recurrent activity, especially in some of the subfields.
And you can set up like this set of these densities of recurrent activity. And then you can have like
information kind of moving between them as a like predictive map, not just of like, not just like,
here's the things, but, you know, people debate how the best things like Gershman talks about
successor representations, but that there's a transition structure of which attractor will
activate, which of the places will activate first in the sequence. And so I guess the question,
the question I'm wondering is like, so like, you know, you're encountering like a new scene and
you're like laying down like a set of landmarks or a tiling of space, like, to what degree
is this information encoded in, in what circumstances, and to what degree is it encoded in like the local
connectivity within the hippocampus system and whether you're getting like this set of schemas
that you're going to like draw up like the most similar one based on some degree of similarity will
cause like one attractor network to get pulled up over another. And now this is the timeline you're working
within and this is like the policies, the policy set you're like would be pulling from, and this is
your framing of the domain. Or to what degree is it relying more heavily on like the moment to moment,
like cortical dynamics and like the mental simulation that might be happening. And like to which extent,
like is it constrained by the history of plasticity within the hippocampus, what schemas are going to be
operative? And to what degree is it more of a negotiation, where it's going to be more ad hoc,
more determined by the moment to moment contingencies and this funneling through the whole like cortical
virtual reality machinery or whatever you want to think of it. And to what degree is this, there's not
one answer, this varies both across and within individuals, that this is actually like a core aspect
of cybernetic functioning is actually leaning more heavily on the priors or the current of established
over more, more learning ethics or leaning more on like the situationally specific factors.
Like how much do you shoehorn what's going on into your existing schemas? How much do you simulate?
How much do you accommodate? And that this being potentially like a flexible parameter,
like a flexible parameter, like a flexible parameter, like a flexible parameter, like a flexible parameter.
And maybe some of that flexibility is like baked into the logic of neuromodulators, like actually
flexibly influencing this. I'm clear, but like, yeah, so I know, very edge of anything I know,
but it's very much like part of the excitement for me is like wondering like, is this like,
does this provide like a functional and algorithmic significance for like this, like otherwise,
like just mess of like biological details? Like do some of them have like elegant cybernetic
understandings by virtue of like thinking of these kinds of questions?
Can I just respond really quick? Awesome. Yes, please, Lou.
Um, so that made me think a whole bunch about like, maybe we don't need a map, a place cell for each
individual hotel room, but it's like a node when we were discussing nodes earlier, like a coarse grained,
just an attractor space, like dump all of the hotel room maps into this little nodule so that when you
get to a hotel room, it's all the same thing. Like it's okay. I've been here before, even if you've
never been to that kind of place. And that would kind of explain things like deja vu. Like when you
get to a place like I've been here before, when did I come here? Like when you're driving down the
street, didn't I just drive down the street? You, it just is lumped over there into that little
attractor mesh node that that's not necessarily a specific place, but just like a squishy ball of
similar places. And also I really love how we spoke about some of these things, Adam and your
collaboration with Colin de Young, cybernetic big five in live stream number 13, I think at the
beginning of 2021, and now we're revisiting same, but different more things change, the more they stay
the same. And this idea of like modulatory features of cybernetic systems as being important for
variation within and among individuals is just such an essential point. And it's so true that a lot of
the details are yet to be resolved. Steven? Yeah, you could go a bit further still, because what if you don't
have maps put to one side, but there's action policies, actually I'm interested in how much this
is feasible, but action policies that recapitulate something like a map. So like by an embodiment,
by an inactive chain of or initiation of some actions at different scales, it basically recapitulates
some sort of nascent starting point. So you don't have to have any representations there. And like when the
door is engaged, the set of actions that that does that creates could open up an effectively a map.
So I don't know how much between I mean, I know in this model, it does start to create a network of
attractors, but I'm wondering whether how much things could be sparked off from
engage in a particular affordance, a particular meaningfulness in something.
Steven Moffitts Yeah, I mean, there's actually like, like a live debate about like, the extent to
which it's like, Tolman initially was talking about the hippocampal cognitive map. And part of the reason
people like to talk about maps is because of the flexibility they give you in terms of if you
like the map serves as a generative model, and that it like it gives you like a I can flexibly access it
to generate trajectories. But you can do that with a well structured graph also, but there's like a
spectrum of interpretations of people thinking that you're dealing with more things that are more map-like
specific and things that are more context specific and graph-like and flexible and more dynamically
constructed. And it seems like you know, like, it's kind of a cop up in general, like, I always like
take every debate, I'm like, you're probably both right. And so it's like, you want like, for the sake of,
I guess, maybe stability, or for the sake of potential greater transfer of understandings and
inferential power across episodes, you might want something more map-like. But if you go to map-like,
you're losing like, the ability to deal like the nuances of like specific contexts. And so, you know,
so this, again, is like, you like different perspectives on the same thing that that tend to converge with
trade-offs. Like, you could have more context sensitive, or more situationally invariant
representations. And these could reflect cognitive styles, and maybe like fundamental axes of variation
for cognition and sense making. Yeah, the one thing that's in terms of like cybernetics,
like, Daniel, I pointed out like, earlier, like, you know, like, Jordan Peterson, like part of like,
it's actually interesting that maps of meeting, Peterson's book was actually heavily informed by
Yacht-Pangsept's affective neuroscience, and ecological models more generally, like, based on things like
animal foraging. So I actually think that's where Jordan Peterson got that rhetoric about maps,
is actually from doing a kind of affective neuroscience perspective grounded,
and this ecological perspective of foraging animals. And so, yeah, I think that's where actually where
that came from. Yes, very nice. And I think I agree, we may have even explored as such. In one paper,
Reimagining Maps, that I wrote with RJ and a colleague, Mikkel, we learned about this historical
distinction between archival maps and itinerary maps. And today, we just think about maps as being like
one more lumpy category. But there's many differences between the map that actually is like a multi-map,
or mega map, and holds a lot of information, potentially in a metric way, versus the itinerary
map, head straight until you see the two big trees, then you're going to want to take a left,
that type of more conversational or casual or navigable map that is highly contextual.
And with current map systems, that's one of the challenges. Because we have that mega map,
it's downloadable, but it's not going to fit on your phone. So what is the projection that's
contextual and situational that's actually going to enable effective action that is also going to be
perceived as map-like by the user? Yes, Blue?
So this is like a personal attacking question. So anybody who spent any kind of time with Daniel
knows that he's constantly drawing or writing, or writing things down, like all the time taking
notes, taking notes, taking notes. And I wonder, can you take your notes as a mental map of where you
were at that time that you were making that drawing? Like, does it like, recapitulate your
conversations that you're having, the ideas that were running through your head? Like,
can you use these drawings that you're always doing as like a kind of conversational, like mental space map?
If anything, it's the opposite. I just leave the thought behind. And if we look at this, I think,
okay, something happened by which we wrote this down. It would be awesome if there was many people
with a regime of attention on taking live notes. I know that's not an approach for everybody,
but then we could all look at that shared pheromone distribution and then make it new again.
And maybe we remember our exact previous thought, though that's impossible or unlikely, but instead
we can make the relationship with the material and with those notes like new again. Steven?
Yes, maybe a little harder to categorize with language, but in a way, it's the traces of
your action policies, even if it was capturing the interpretation. So one thing I'm very interested in
is how we realign things to action, because we've kind of been enculturated to think it's all about
thoughts and feelings, right? And because action, active inference puts it in this other domain. Well,
what does that mean? And how do we talk about active inference when we're enculturated to think through
other natural ways of using English? I'm finding that a big challenge myself. But I think,
as you're laying down those traces, are you showing your action policies of how to record something
rather than your thoughts, if that makes sense? And is your thoughts always slightly hidden?
Yeah, great question. Just like we were thinking about earlier with a sort of
substrate, implicit, agnostic, ignored, linguistic, symbolic models, like a Turing tape. It has infinite
space and it can just make infinite grammar. And so that's sort of purely symbolic approach to language.
And then its relationship to thought and experience is one question. But when we think about finite,
actual sequences of language use and deployment as action, either keyboard typing or assisted typing
technology, or speaking as also a motor action, it totally changes the game. Because we're not just in
this forest of infinite plausible grammars, but rather one realized and preferred action sequence. And
then of course, thoughts are unobserved, but the actions are not. And that's the whole quantum
reference frame and shared generative model and rhetorical nature and narrative nature of cognition.
And so indeed the action insight, I think is going to be something that we'll keep returning to.
We'll have a final closing the plane or whatever. And I'll also just give a little preview,
which is that next week we're going to be having a guest stream with Adam. So if it relates at all,
Adam, how does it relate? What is the guest stream going to be about? And then perhaps in your absence,
what would be exciting to discuss in 42.2?
Oh, you're right. There is a guest stream. Now, a quick thought though. So like Blue, you were suggesting
like Daniel's notes could serve almost like a kind of memory palace and accessible map. And then,
Daniel, you're saying it's more like a stigma, just stick mechanism for coordination, like the pointing
and cueing. And that's interesting. I wonder if like when people are reading books, like the ability to
like use the book is like as a map slash palace, like gives you better retention than something like a
kindle. Like the book is like a physical object. So, um, oh yeah, uh, free will. And so, okay. So for next
week, uh, I would say that basically, so, so my like over hypothesis is that like all of the details or
other that many of the details that Tim is using for these systems will end up being, um, relevant
as abstract interpretations of the core, um, parameters of us as active inferential cybernetic
systems, both with respect to basically the basics of a, let's us be in the world in a embodied way as,
uh, as, uh, living, living robots, but, um, also in terms of their extension to, um, high level cognition,
scaling active inference to more complex domains. And so like in general, like, um, you know, I'm,
I'm trying to understand, you know, with limited success, as many details as I can of Tim's work,
because I think it's just some of the most promising sources of like constraints we have on
inference interpretations and sources of hypotheses. So basically whatever details Tim is willing to get
into, uh, I think it would be, uh, well, well worthwhile to try to grok those. And, uh, that's
what I'm, that's what I'm doing. Um, in terms of, uh, next week, uh, so some of this is relevant in that,
the basic idea would be that, um, these, uh, LeBay phenomenon, these studies in which people are seeing
these slowly building potentials leading up to action that have predictive information, but where they peak,
um, in advance of people claiming that they have decided to take actions and where these studies
are interpreted as evidence that people don't have free will, and we can get into, you know, all sorts
of, uh, conversations about, you know, how we, what makes, how it makes sense to think of free will in
different ways, whatever makes sense to talk about it all, but that these studies are usually interpreted
as saying that your, um, consciously experienced mental states cannot enter causal streams leading to
action. And so what I'm suggesting is that is not the case and that there's multiple ways in which
your subjective states are meaningfully causal. If we think of what's leading up to something like
deciding to move your hand and like a LeBay experiment, if that is reflecting a buildup of model evidence
over your proprioceptive pose or of you deciding to take that action, um, this kind of evidence
accumulation, if it's occurring via sophisticated affective inference, um, that this would be a way
of understanding it. And that, um, part of what would influence how much buildup or not you get
would be the specifics of this basically deep tree search from sophisticated, that we would, might
understand a sophisticated affective inference as being orchestrated by the hippocampal and
enteral rhino system as iterative mental simulation, where you're sampling out these different
possibilities of, Hmm, what would it be like if I move my arm or not? And then you're then evaluating
that and you're plant, you're spinning, peeling off these different counterfactuals. And that if across
these, um, you get enough, um, affective charge associated with going down some of these forks,
eventually this results in threshold cross. But the idea would be that this would be relevant to some of the
hippocampal, uh, slam work. And that you can think of this, uh, imaginative planning stage leading up to
even seemingly spontaneous actions. You can think of this like imaginative phase as being largely
orchestrated by the hippocampal system, which might be best understood as a general system for,
or a system for generalized foraging and mapping. I don't know if that made sense, but that's like some of the
connections. Wow. If you still want to come for the guest stream, you're welcome to do so. Um, no,
that thanks for the awesome summary. And I know that we'll be able to unpack it a lot more next week.
Um, blue or Steven, what are some like last thoughts? What was exciting or interesting to you in where we've
been and where shall we forage next? So I can go, I, I was really interested in taking this into like
semantic space and I wonder what other kinds of spaces that we can maybe think about mapping out, um,
how we build, how we construct maps, cognitive space and so forth. And I'm excited to, um, talk to
Tim about where, where emergence fits into the hierarchical model. Awesome. Thank you, blue Steven.
Yeah, I think keeping the, the idea of keeping things clean, keeping things nascent and deflatory,
even in this case here is, is really something I think to continue looking at. And I, I, I'm really
curious about what happens when we see that door and that door says, you can go down that corridor.
Am I going to go down into a different regime of attention? I'm going to stay where I am. So I'm,
I, I think, um, that, that ability to take these principles and say, okay, what is it that happens
when I encounter something and it triggers something, how much is that significant in terms of making things
happen? And I'm curious then how that can marry with a lot of the mental space work that I do,
building out metaphor landscapes or actually letting someone explore spatially. And one last thing,
actually, that came up and someone said to me that the other day is, that he's really curious why when
he picks up his plastic pencil, it doesn't mean as much to him as when he holds a shell. So there's
something about like, when that door has got some prior, there's something that you know about being
in the woodland versus being somewhere which is dead. And even that itself could explain a lot about
how navigating those places, the eco psychology of going into a wooded space, a living place,
actually can be important for people in, just in a, in a wellness, what might seem a very woo woo
type of stuff actually could be somehow linked to what we're talking about here. So yeah, brilliant. Thanks.
Awesome. Yeah. Very exciting and fun discussion.
Awesome. I really liked that last piece, which is what I know I'm going to carry forward and hopefully
reflect on next week. How will we build that colony? Is it a memory palace blueprint? Is it stigmatic
coordination, but how? And so somewhere between the mental palace cathedral and the sort of picking up
pebbles and having no bigger picture is where we are in our cognitive and social maps. And so
that's quite an area and out of the central complex modeling, I can't wait. So thank you all for joining.
Thanks Tim also. So Adam, Steven and blue and Sid and Dean in the chat. So thanks everybody and see you next time.
Missou,




































Thank you.

## IXJn-BMsKVw

All right.
Hello and welcome everyone. It's April 27th, 2022 and we're in ActInfLab livestream number 42.2.
Welcome to the ActInfLab. We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning,
and practicing applied active inference. You can find us at the links on this slide.
This is recorded in an archived livestream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow good video etiquette for livestreams.
Check out activeinference.org to learn more about what's happening in the lab.
All right. Well, here we are in 42.2. We're in our third discussion around the paper
Robot Navigation as Hierarchical Active Inference by the authors listed here.
And this is a discussion where we're going to pick up on a few different threads
that were arising in the .1 and have a lot of time to explore some of the formalisms and the robotics
aspects of the project and take any questions that people are bringing up and just randomly
posting in the live chat. So we'll just start with introductions and saying hello and then we'll
jump to where we were leaving for last time or leaving for this time from last time and then
just see where we go. So I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in California and I'll pass to Blue.
I'm Blue. I'm a researcher in New Mexico and I will pass it to Tim.
Hi, I'm Tim. I'm a researcher in Gaines, Belgium and I will be co-authors of the paper so feel free to ask me anything.
Wow. Three researchers walk into a .2. Do you have that kind of joke over there, Tim?
Like...
Okay.
Okay.
We'll see that with the .2.

Okay. We had a few different notes down. So anyone who wants to pick one of these threads up or we can
return to some of the formalisms and questions about the robotics, but we're just going to pick
up a thread and start with whoever wants to go first. So we mentioned difference, uh, different detail
and implementation and just like fun stories or things that happened in the implementation.
The idea of different types of maps and where does emergence fit into this?
Maybe, uh, one thing I could, uh, I could elaborate on is basically from the last stream, I think Blue
brought up the idea of, um, when you enter a hotel room, everything kind of looks familiar rather you
might have never entered that particular hotel room, right? And the question was, how could this arise from,
from this kind of model? Uh, because here it's still kind of very tightly coupled to whatever you're
observing in that particular environment and it doesn't really seem to scale to some something else,
which is, uh, which is correct. Um, and so for, for this kind of, uh, understanding, I think you
you'll need to build a system that goes even higher in hierarchy and, and higher in abstraction levels.
And I've been thinking about this kind of, um, emergence slash kind of models that could give this
kind of, um, behavior. And I think at some point, um, you'll need to, um, have a model that is complete
reasoning in abstract concepts rather than, um, observations that, that you can observe in your
sensory, uh, streams. So I could imagine that you, um, that you build a layer on top of, uh, this model.
So here you basically, uh, go from camera inputs to, um, um, um, graph based representation of your environment.
I could imagine that you repeat this for many different kinds of environments, which results,
which, which yields you a number of graphs that map to that particular environment.
And that at that point, you start kind of looking for patterns in this repertoire of graphs that you,
um, that you visited in the past. And you, you start figuring out structure in these graphs, like, um,
bedrooms all have like a bed and maybe a closet, whereas kitchens, water, have a fridge and, uh,
uh, uh, sink. And that you, you kind of see these kind of repeating, uh, things in certain graphs. And that,
at this level, you kind of, uh, make a model that classifies kind of each type of environment into such
a category, which will then inform you or kind of, uh, give you a prior on what kind of graph to expect in,
in, in, in a hotel room, for example. Um, so I, I realized that I'm talking in very vague and abstract,
uh, ideas here and because yeah, you don't have it yet, but yeah, I, I think that's kind of, um,
a way how to, um, how it could be done. And I look very much forward to, to, uh, to actually
head into this research direction as well in particular. Uh, so if, if we would think about how
would, would I implement it, then I would start with, um, first applying the current system on a bunch
of environments that have like, uh, like two different categories, for example. Um, so, uh,
and then kind of learn a model on these graph structures. And in particular, these, these current
evolutions in, in graph neural nets might, might be, uh, uh, an interesting, uh, route to take to see,
can you learn representations of graphs or parts of the graphs and, and like build the latent codes that,
that generates similar style graphs basically. And then you can kind of navigate to real environments,
then learn a model that, that builds similar graphs, and then use that model to kind of imagine
potentially similar looking environments. Um, but still this will be, so if, if we would implement
it purely on, on this level, I imagine it will still be very much tied to, um, to the observation
level. Like you could generate potential camera, um, frames that kind of look like it's, it's like
creating a generative model on this, um, uh, the LSTUN bedrooms dataset. So you can kind of generate
novel kind of bedrooms, but it's still very much tied to, uh, the pixel level. Whereas I think to go to
more semantic and human level, um, reasoning like we do, then at some point you'll have to start have
more understanding carving up the observation space into different kinds of objects and have, um,
these kinds of representations, which are, uh, totally not in, in the current model. Um, and,
uh, yeah, you'll have, you'll, you'll need to have some understanding at that level before, before you can
have reasoning like, okay, I go to a hotel room and I, and I expect there to find the TV and remote
control for TV basically. But yeah.
Yes, Blue.
Thanks. That's, uh, super interesting and kind of a good, um, maybe tie-in to like, I was also thinking
about different kinds of maps more than just over some kind of spatial scenario. And, and the, the one
obvious, uh, idea that comes to mind is like a semantic map over language, uh, in natural language
processing and using this kind of hotel room scenario as a topic, like in the topic of politics, you
expect to find right wing, left wing, conservative, liberal, like you expect to find all of these words
in the topic of politics if you're trying to model a topic. And I just wonder what other, if either of you guys
have ever thought about other kinds of spaces that can be mapped over like this, like physical space,
semantic space, where else can we build maps where we can kind of implement this type of navigation?
Yeah. I mean, that's, that's a very interesting question. And actually I think one of the core
hypotheses that, that Adam and I are investigating is basically that any, anything that is related to,
to our cognition is, it basically stems from building a kind of map and then navigating it. Um,
and how this could, um, be more concrete sized for different kinds of maps. Of course, this is a huge,
huge effort and you'll need to have like, um, experts on a certain domain in order to kind of
think about, is this possible? How could it be? Um, and for some topics, it's pretty obvious,
like, like navigation, for instance. Um, and, um, the, the, the semantic modeling that you mentioned,
I think it's also, um, intuitively you can relate to how, how you can build a map from this and, and,
and relate it. There's also the, the, the work from, um, from James Whittington on the Dolman Eichenbaum
machine that, that goes in a similar direction where he basically, uh, builds a system that's also
true navigating a structure tries to, um, infer certain relationships. And he also applies the same
model on different kinds of, uh, tasks. So for example, one task is, uh, also navigation, but like
navigation in the, in the grid world, like you can, you go north, east, west, south, and then you expect
to be in the same location again. But you can also, he also applies it like on family trees, like, um,
um, uh, John is the father of, um, Daniel and then Daniel is brother of blue. Then you could infer, uh,
who is the sister of Daniel, for example. Uh, and, and he also maps this in like, navigating a space
and, and learning how, how relationships, which, which are then like, actually taking actions in the
map. It's like, um, following the, the, the, the broader arrow, it's like, it's taken an action,
uh, in, in, in the physical map, let's say, and then you have basically have to traverse through the
family tree only once, but then you basically know all the relationships and you can start navigating and
make these kind of inference. So this is actually pretty, pretty cool work. And there was another,
I think there was another task, uh, we also applied it on. So there are some tasks where it's really
obvious how to do it. There are plenty of others where it's not so obvious, but yeah, some, somewhere,
uh, Adam and I basically think, yeah, this is kind of, anything should be mapped to the system. And,
and this could then be like a, a universal way of, of how, how did humans come to
thinking in, in these kinds of abstract levels? Well, basically because they evolved from a very good
mapping and navigation system. And that's kind of the, the main idea. So if we can solve
how to build a map and then navigate it, uh, first on the navigation level, and then on a more abstract
level, then we might be on our way to, to, uh, to kind of a general, um, system for, for, for reason.
Yes, thank you. Uh, thanks. That was super helpful. So I really, um, yeah, that, that opened up a lot of
doors. So in relationship to another project that Daniel and I are working on, it seems like, um, from the
family tree, then it would be easy to map over like a genetic space, a genomic space, or even like a
phylogenetic space from one species to the next, or even like mapping over recipes, um, like when you're
cooking or even like different types of art. Uh, so just kind of anywhere where there's the adjacent
possible, it seems like that that's where you can construct these kinds of maps. That's really neat.
Yeah. I think the, the, the main, the main thing is how, how do you transfer the action concept to,
to the, the space that you're looking at, like in a family tree, the action is like moving from one
person to the other and the, the, the action type basically defines the relationship between
two persons. Um, I think that's kind of the, the difficult part always like, which is the action
space that you need to traverse the world. And then the second thing is like, what are the, what are
the locations in the world? And once you can map these two, then I think you're pretty, pretty much done.
Right. It's like, it's, it's finding a way of moving from one location to another via these actions.
And if you have the actions or relations between entities, you can basically draw an inference on
what is now the relation between a and b given this structure. Awesome. A few points. So Tim, thanks for
beginning with this nice description about how we could add in this conceptual or in cultural layer
and about generalizing across different environments. And that reminded me of the work on pattern
languages and it's kind of a bottom up discovery. And then it was a great point. Like, yes, there's the
algorithms that generate a house scene, but there might be something that does that, that at a pixel
level makes sense, like putting a toothbrush under a cabinet, but then semantically or culturally,
a person will look at that. It's like, but that doesn't make sense. And so then that would be like,
let's just say it explored a bunch of different warehouses. And the commonality was like, it was
always rectilinear shelving. There's a genre of warehouse that's like always that way. And then
whether it was like three shelves by 10 shelves or the other way around, there would be like another
space that those graphs would map to. So that was a very nice piece. And then Chris Fields and Michael
Levin just a few days ago wrote this paper, competency in navigating arbitrary space intelligence as an
invariant for analyzing cognition in diverse embodiments. So perhaps something relevant for us to explore going
forward. What do you think, Blue? I think these guys write papers like faster than I can read papers,
which is amazing. I know it was, um, yeah, April 24th. So three days ago, I have not fully read it,
but, but a lot of the figures look very interesting. And, um, so, um, and then, but I want to continue on
this last point about the actions and maps, because that kind of mapping and multi-scale mapping and
transmuting and translating across different types of maps is kind of the, what the multi-level slam
is. It's what a single level slam is, but then the composability of this discussion is what enables
like there to be a slam where it goes from a geometric space to a topological space. And then from that
into like a cultural or narrative space or something. So how does action relate to maps?
And I thought about that family tree. You mentioned how there was one representation where the actions were like,
just like, well, you know, if you were in a room shaped like a bifurcating tree, then the actions would be you
walking around that room. So that's one action. Then there's the cognitive action as that entity is
building its knowledge representation of the tree. And that, that is related to its planning and its
preferences or all of this, that isn't it inferring the tree, but it's like figuring out how it's going
to infer the tree. And then there's like, there's other actions though. There's the action that we won't
talk about it of how families arise. There's all kinds of actions and the tree is just a representation of some
other process. So how do we think about all these ways that action relates to maps and what kind of maps are
actionable? What about ones that are about action, but not actionable or all this other possibilities?
Yeah, I, I'm not entirely sure whether I'm all the way with you, with your, with your last explanation.
So I think that the second bullet, like the action of updating the genetic model, I would not necessarily
consider that an action. I think that the updating of the genetic model just arises from,
from, from experience and trying to minimize your free energy. Anyhow, the, the action from, uh,
from the, uh, the other actions I think is like, what is the action concept on different levels?
For example, in, to be more concrete in the, um, in, in the genetic model, we had the low level action,
which is basically, um, a velocity command for the robots, like move forward, or, or, or turn around
with this kind of, uh, velocity. But then the higher level action, that would be, we called it the move,
which is like traversing the space from one location to another, which is kind of, uh, in this case,
of course, graining of the low level action. But I think for every level in your abstraction hierarchy,
there will be an action concept that moves from one thing to another.
And what that concept has to be will be tied to whatever level of abstraction you're modeling at
at the stage, I guess. But I don't see any other actions besides that, per se.
Thank you, Tim.
Blue?
So I think about like at different levels of actions, if, if you, for example, think about foraging,
right? And so you can have like camps of human foragers and the task of each individual forager
is to go out and find food. So you go out, you find food and you come back and you go out and you
find food and you come back. And then like, if it takes too long to find the food, then collectively
as a unit, the camp decides to move, right? So, so you pick up and you make camp somewhere else.
So that's like a, an example of like every day you have the individual unit does something,
some task, and then the collective makes the decision based on the, on the input of the individual
foragers or like the time it takes them to find food. So that's kind of a way that like,
I can think about the nesting of, um, of action.
Yeah. And so, so, so, so, so, so that I think we're on the same page, but, uh, on that account,
because you, you, you will have at some point, a very high level joint model that,
that encodes in the state, like, um, do we have enough foods? If not, we, uh, we collect,
if we don't find foods, we go to another state. So it could be like a very high level,
abstract map with a few states and nodes, and you could drop, imagine you can draw out like, um,
um, a graph with nodes where every node is kind of specific states, and then doing an action brings
you from one node to the other. It could be a node like, not enough food, enough foods, um, um,
move to another location. And then you go from, uh, not enough foods to foraging, which brings you either
to, which either brings you in the same state or brings you to the state, I have enough food, which
is fine. And if you keep on, uh, residing in the not enough food state, then you decide to move and you
might, uh, so you could kind of imagine, um, an abstract map where you have this kind of dynamics
and the actions make sense. And then at some, some point you will have the, the task or the action
in this level that says search for food, which at some level down the road will, will be, uh, driving
actions for start walking or, um, for navigating or search for places where, where that, that, that,
that are promising for finding food. So lots of levels of, of a, of a conceptual hierarchy, you will
have different kinds of actions that bring you from one node to the other, where the nodes might be
like a general state of the community, which is like the very top level that you just described.
And then you will also have like nodes that are like physical locations in your environment.
And then you also have like very low level nodes that might just describe like, uh, your current
pose in the world basically. And, and the lowest level action will just be the, the torques that you
do or the, the muscle, the muscle movement that you do with your legs and your hands, it will be the
very low level. So I think, um, you can, you can draw this concept all the way up and down with a very,
very low level layer with, with, with many layers of the hierarchy and at each layer going from one
state to another, this is basically the action at that layer, but the meaning will be different depending
on, on which level you are. And the more, the difficult part I think is how, how could you, how can you
have these concepts emerge from, from, from bottom up? And I'm not sure that whether it's possible,
but we are, we are trying to get us as, as high up as we can, uh, basically.
Very interesting. Yes. Thank you. Blue. Um, so it's super interesting and, and definitely, um,
it's why I, I link next to semantic space because when you're trying to like communicate with someone,
like the purpose of communicating can be, you know, have many faces, but, but in, in communication,
it's like reaching a shared understanding and then like, okay, we have enough understanding of that
topic. Like, let's move on to another topic in a, in a conversation. And so, um, that's why that's like
very easily, um, it's very easy for me to see like how the semantic mapping and the spatial mapping,
um, can, can link together, but I can't think of like, why, um, I mean, like why, why would people like,
well, maybe in genetic or genomic maps, um, that also makes sense, right? Like to, um,
like, like what would be the action like to evolve, I guess, is the action in, in kind of a genomic map
space, but like think, I guess, um, maybe novelty and, and that's kind of where active inference comes in.
Like why would you traverse a, a map of recipes or a map of different types of art? Um, and I guess like
the idea is in, um, in, in exploration, like, and, and trying like, well, what happens if I combine
these ingredients in this other way or add this other ingredient or, or like, where is the adjacent
possible? Like, that's where I kind of think that the exploration, the, the room for exploration comes in.
And so when you, when you traverse the map, um, sometimes the action is just to, to see what's next
or just to, to explore or, or reduce uncertainty about, about your possibilities or affordances.
Yeah. So I think once you, once you've nailed down, um, the different nesting of states and what are
the different actions you can take that bring you from one state to another on a certain level,
then basically the, the, what you will do can emerge just from, from minimizing expected energy,
right. And that, that would be the, the, the, the powerful ingredients or the powerful, um,
tool that active inference gives you is that once you, you, I, I, I would see building a map and,
or like a more that kind of graph structure where you connect notes and, and the transition between
notes or then the actions, that's kind of a way to build a generative model that is a bit more complex than,
well, actually it's not that more complex, but then, than the traditional A and B matrices.
Um, and, and in that way you, you, you can apply the same principles, right?
Let me write this one very important point down, Tim, because you said,
and maybe you could just unpack this in active inference, being able to provide a structure
of the model provides us a way to optimize it using variational Bayesian methods, message passing,
software toolkits like for any lab, active block for instance, py MDP, MATLAB SPM.
And I think that's something that's subtle, but interesting and different from a lot of other
models where the mere data structure doesn't lend itself to like an implementable algorithm.
What do you think about that?
Yeah, I think that's very true. And I think one of the, um, one of the important things also in, in the,
in the whole, um, SLAM system here is that we basically move from, uh, more or less high dimensional
continuous observation and action space. I mean, you could, you could do any, uh, continuous, um,
you, you can command any, any number of velocity, uh, that is sensible to the robot. And the, the,
the amount of, uh, pixel information that, uh, that you can get is also, uh, very big, if not close to
infinity. So we basically move from this high dimensional continuous spaces to something that is
more like a discrete set of nodes that you can traverse, which is much more like, uh, um, an A and
a B and a C matrix, like, like we are used to in PyMDP. So just by enforcing the model to learn this
more discrete state space that's, that we can manage is already a big step that's, that would allow for,
um, an active or active inference to, to, to, to be applied basically, because one of the biggest
issue is always like, okay, um, you could use active inference for planning, but if you're,
your state space is so large, then yeah, just, you, you cannot just iterate over all potential,
uh, policies and, and calculate the expected free energy and, and pick the best one because your
space just blows up. But if you are able to at some level, um, discretize it to a limited set of
states that are applicable to your current context, then maybe you can start, um, iterating through all the
potential relevant behaviors. It's like, um, going back to the, uh, to the foraging example. If
you just have to choose between moving versus foraging, the problem becomes much more easy than
when you have to decide for any possible muscle movement that you can do the next few hours, right? So
I think moving to a more, um, discrete set of states is, is crucial to, to, to scale these methods to,
to realistic settings.
Okay. Awesome. So returning to this maps of actions question, and that's a little bit in contrast with
like the maps of meaning. And I think it points again to active inference as always having inference
and action as like two approaches to minimize free energy, two ways to think about the same process. Um,
and I want to return to this question about like what the actions and the moves are. So I'm imagining,
uh, blue on the foraging trip and there's what was the, um, the semantics of the slam presented in this
paper was it was a, uh, location based approach, whether in a geometric space or in a, um, in a
topological and a relational space, but am I in the right position? Like is a question about location
satisficing. And then it can also be thought of as like that entity is existing at a location in
cognitive parameter space, because this question about estimate about space is a cognitive parameter.
It's one about the territory. It's a map of the territory, but these are cognitive parameters
that can include like,
am I paying it? Am I where I want to be with respect to how I'm paying attention about things?
And so to actually explore that, I wanted to juxtapose, um,
two different generative models that we've seen.
And keeping in mind also that that capacity of active inference where being able to form these
generative models, it also is helping us get towards applying them.
So on the right is the structure of the model from your paper. On the left is a three-level model,
but there's also a two-level one that I can pull up. And it's from the Sanved Smith et al paper
on computational phenomenology and mental action. And so the actions in this case
are happening at the level of what am I perceiving? What is the action at this sort of like motor level?
And whereas in, in your multi-level slam, this level was about space still again, from the geometric,
smaller scale, tactical scale of space to the topological, bigger scale, strategic level of space,
space, but it's still about the territory. And in here, a somewhat analogous multi-scale nesting,
the partially observable Markov decision process, is used to represent not a spatial
layer or coarse graining, but actually an attentional layer. So what do you think this,
what does this make you think of, or what does nesting POMDPs mean? And what could it mean?
Well, in essence, what it, what it basically does, it puts the higher level,
puts like a prior on your lower level, right? On the, on the, the next. So in, in, in my figure,
like the one, if you have, um, if you have a belief over your states in the red box,
then basically this gives you a prior on what you expect to observe in, in, in a single blue box.
And in this case, in my case, it's indeed very tight to the, to the spatial domain,
but in essence, it can give you a prior on, on, on, on, on, on any aspect of, of the level below, right?
And I think that's what they do, uh, on the, on the, in the, in the left model then.
Where also, if you have like an inference on, um, um, if you have a belief on the, the orange states
in the left model, it basically gives you a prior on what, what states you expect to observe,
uh, or to, to believe in the, in the, in the blue one there.
Here's going to be, I think this is figure 12 instead of figure five.
So this is the generalized deep model of action. And here the emissions of the hidden state at the
higher internal mental level, cognitive domain, the emission mediated by the a matrix, just like it
would be in a retina, but the emission of a is the hidden state at the lower level S one, but also
the uncertainty parameters, like the variance estimates on every other core, um, kernel parameter. So, yeah.
So in the slam, what other, which are these other generalized connections do you think have
relevance for the robotic slam context?
Well, I think, I think it makes a lot of sense to also have like, um, um, something modulating your,
your, uh, your precision parameters. It's like, it's like, um,
it's like having a, a certain trust on your observations for certain environments. For example,
you could, you could, you could, you couldn't, for example, if you go, if you go to your cellar,
you might know that the lighting conditions will not be optimal and you'll have different precision than
when, when you're in your kitchen, for example, just thinking out loud. So I think it makes sense to,
to have this hierarchical structure on any, on, on anything that, that you have beliefs over,
or that anything that can have importance on, on, on your, on, on, on making better predictions, basically.
So you can have a less, you can, you can have better predictions if you have a good prior on how
precise you would expect your observations to be here. So that's why it makes sense to have a model evolved
that, that, that takes this into account, I guess.
It just is very interesting. Like if the nesting can represent staying within the same domain
and a core screening of like, okay, you know, district, state, continent, like a sort of within
the same genre, but different core screenings, or it can seemingly, at least in the case of mental action
and, um, hyper prior optimization, modeling in general, like investigation and research in general,
those cases, this is not a core screening. It's, it's something totally different.
So if the interface can mean two totally different things, couldn't it, couldn't there be a third
implication to, or do these exhaust the implications of nesting? Can nesting only refer to like a like
kind nesting, for example, nested times scales, nested spatial scales, or the cognitive action
of basically removing something from the sensory territorial domain, and then like entering it once
into the cognitive domain. But then once it's been entered into so-called hidden internal states,
which are not even being proposed to actually exist in space or time, then you're kind of in,
in like the matrix slash simulation slash structure learning on cognitive models.
And then it's not like that's going to be nested. I don't know.
Right, I think it's just in the end, it's, it's just finding the finding the most simpler model
that explains it, but not simpler, right? And you could imagine a model that, that operates on the
lowest level always. And that's indeed just has, in case of a robot has pixel inputs, and has torque or
velocity output, and builds a model that can predict for hours in the future accurately.
But then you also realize that this should be a very, very, very complex model. It, it, it, it must
always, it's almost the environment, right? And this is unmanageable. I mean, the only way to kind of
do it then is to, to start adding structure to the model and start factorizing out different variables.
And in essence, nesting is nothing else, but factorizing out a certain variable.
So, so I think in the end, it's just a matter of finding the model that most accurately predicts
what's going to happen with the least complexity and building an hierarchical nested model is one way to,
to, to make this happen.
The way that Blue spoke about the genetic nesting in this sort of Aristotelian sense, giving rise to
in the genetic sense and in the sort of cellular, and then how you framed it as the simplest model,
but not any simpler, which is often, at least in the Bayesian area framed as being like the AIC or BIC
Pareto optimal model, like some kind of a trade-off of accuracy and complexity, so on.
And it's like, there's a process of structure learning because we want to know, okay,
categorically, should we be fitting a one level, two level model? What kind of structure within the
three level nesting? Which one of these edges are going to be making the machine learning model in
real life run a hundred times slower and not even converge? Which one of these edges are we going to
be just totally in the dark without? Bayesian model selection on structures, including cognitive
structures. And those structures, we're not picking the final best. This structure learning is not picking
the final best parameterization. And this is kind of like how Carl is always speaking about developmental
robots and how out of the factory or whatever, it's going to be in a learning mode.
So the structure learning is on learning structures and the learning structures are about perception,
including the actions that one is observing himself to be doing. Because if we couldn't observe the
consequences or at least even our own action states in some way, there'd be a total disconnect and we
could never get our action policies. It would just be like the motor babbling and the sort of
uncoordinated movement. And I'm sure a lot of robotics and evolutionary simulators, that's why they have
that wobbly leg phase. Because I think a lot of those models, they don't know they're wobbling. They're
just implementing in this super high dimensional space of motor policies. They're just
not getting the feedback. So it is like a nesting.
Cool. Very interesting direction here. And I think there's a lot more to explore
about what kinds of nestings, because maybe it's actually that attentional layer that you described in
your opening thoughts about the higher level of abstraction that was taking in a graphical,
a graph. I mean, you know, maybe that is the layer that just comes on top right here. And the current,
the can gets input into some other thing.
Let's look at some of the formalisms and figures. Or if blue, or if anyone in the live chat has any
questions they can totally ask.
I have a question on this, or if there's another equation or formalism that it's clearer to address
this question. This p on the left side, you can describe it in your own words, but it's a joint
distribution of multiple variables. How does one go from knowing what variables they want to include
in the joint distribution? Like what arguments they want that function to take? And then a specific
partitioning factorization? Like, is this the only factorization? Or how do we make this factorization
based upon what we kind of know what we want to model maybe even very early?
Yeah, so, so basically, going from the left hand side to the right hand side, you can basically
one on one derive it from the figure, basically. So if you look at the figure, you see that the
the that pi has no incoming errors. So there will be no conditioning on on pi. And then if you look at the action
notes, then you see that these all get an input error from pi. So then you know that
pi is actually influencing the action that you do. So this will be a probability of
actions given pi. And so that's basically how you could, you can write down the equation, just by looking
at the figure basically. So typically, how we if we if we start off with a new with a new type of model,
we start off indeed with just listing all the variables that we want to model. And then we start
with drawing out a potential diagram like we have on the right, and
the equation just falls out basically. And it's always a matter of thinking like,
which variable has influence on which other ones. And for instance, you can also make make make your own
assumptions. They're like one the assumptions that we often make is like, okay, the hidden state should be
kind of should be Markovian. So once we know the state at time t, we don't need any information on the past
anymore. And to generate the current observation, for example, so these kind of assumptions
go also in, and they will then decide on
on which things you need to condition. Because you could also if in general, you have
the joint distribution, you can also just restrict yourself to basically base rule to come up with a
factorization. So if you just use base rule, you can also come up with a factorization that will be perfectly valid.
But that might not be easy to implement. So you basically search a bit for what is
possible. And you add some assumptions in order to make it work intuitively, as well as practically,
if that makes sense.
Thanks a lot. So you mentioned the first two terms here, it would just be great to hear for the green,
blue and the purple term, just how do you describe the way that you look at the graph and then
translated it here. And then I'll have another question. But first that. Yeah, so green, blue,
purple. Yeah, so for the green one, you look at the initial nodes of the blue part. So this is like
your initial, your initial state at the start of sequence, and you can know and this one is
the, this one has now Oh, yeah, oh, no, this will be the sorry, this will be the the ultimate original
state. I don't think that I don't think that the the equation on the left corresponds to the to the
figure because there is no locations and moves in there.
Right. Okay, yes, this is a lower level model that we're looking at. Yeah. Yes. Okay,
the initial condition is conditionally independent of other edges. Yeah.
Yeah. And then and that so the the green and the blue is basically your initial start state. So you
you you have to bootstrap somewhere. So you have some prior on your starting state. And then from then
on, the next states will all depend on the actions you take. So then it's in the in the purple,
the first term is basically saying, Okay, my next state will depend on my previous state and the
action I took. And then the the second one in the purple is saying, Okay, the action that I take will
depend on my policy. And the last term then just says, Okay, my current observation, it only depends
on my current state, because I assume that all information of the time step is basically
the
is represented in the in the in the state of the thing.
This is really powerful. And I think that the fact that all future states are part of a combinatoric
relationship with action, it really shows how deeply action is embedded within active inference,
like there simply is not a consideration of future observations or latent states.
Except for conditioning action on policy, and conditioning states on action. So policy is above
actions that are selected that are actually taken and enacted. But all inference is conditioned on action
selection, which is conditioned on policy. And there aren't two separate models, like an expectation
module, and then like an action selection, state value mapping, state policy mapping policy state,
all those kinds of constructs that are meant to bridge the gap between inference and action being two sides of the
the same coin to minimize free energy, literally also for those machine learning models. It's just really
interesting how that is all concisely simplified and integrated in active inference. And so I want to ask a
question on this purple term, which is is anything known about the computational complexity of changing H
metrics is this is kind of a skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill skill
age doesn't really matter. It could go to infinite without loss of generalization. So it's like your agent gets born and then it operates like this until the end of its life and it could be age. So from just modeling the system, it doesn't really matter. It just says, okay, this is the time horizon that I consider the system.
And this is then how I assume it acts, basically. It's a different story if we look at an actual implementation where you suddenly have to choose an age. If I implement this model, how long do I want this thing to be able to predict? Because of course, if you build a model that is predicting and then you have to check
whether your prediction was correct and you use the kind of models that we use that basically want to backpropagate all the way back to have a gradient update step,
then of course the age becomes determined by practical considerations like how much memory does my machine have to keep all these intermediate states and memory and I can still backpropagate through
through this model. So, so then it basically an implementation, implementation driven choice on how far in the future, do you want to model this thing?
Or can you model this thing? Because it might also be that if you try to predict too far ahead, that there's so much noise that it doesn't even make sense to try to predict it so far in the future.
So it can be driven either by what makes sense for this environment versus how much compute and memory do I have to make this happen, basically.
Awesome. Blue, do you want to? Yes, go for it.
So I have a question over this figure and then also over the, it's formalism six. I don't know if you have that anywhere in the slides, Daniel, if you want to grab it.
Yep. Okay. So in formalism six, like the same observations are there at both levels, at the lower level and the higher level.
And this makes a lot of sense for something like forging, right? Like the, the lower level, the group is going to, the individual is going to go out, move forage.
And then at the higher level, it's going to, the group is going to move, right? So in a hierarchical sense, that makes sense.
And then in figure two, in the, in the legend of the figure, it says that the higher level operates on a coarser timescale.
So where like the, the lower level decisions are made at, you know, 15 minute timescales or one hour timescales, the higher level is like a day or something, some similar relationship.
And that also would make sense for something like, like forging. This is kind of relates back to the question of emergence.
And I just wonder if you can allow for, so like not all systems operate this way. And, you know, here's the big, big question, right?
Like, like every like organ in my body does something different, right? Like, so, and then like, you know, all my cells are getting dehydrated.
And then suddenly, like I say, I'm thirsty and I drink, right? It's not like my cells cannot like move to go like take a drink of water.
So like in a hierarchical sense where, where the higher level is doing a different action than the lower level, have you thought at all about how to try to navigate something like this?
Like where at the higher level, the action is totally different. Well, the timescale might be coarser, but, but here the variables change.
And this is something I think about a lot. And so I'm always collecting input and I just wonder what you think, Tim.
Yeah. So, so basically the, the, I guess the, the core question is how, if you take a decision at the higher level, which is like a move in this case,
how does it ripple down to a lower level action that might not even be related to, to the move you want to make at the, at the higher level, something like that.
Right.
So basically what, how, how, how, how this happens is that if you, if you look at a single level, um, so like a vanilla active inference formulation,
then at some point you, you, you tie in the preferences from, from a prior.
Where it's like, these are my preferences. So that's what I want to obtain, um, in, in, in this one level.
And in the hierarchical model, how, how, how we do it is that basically the, the, the action on the higher level.
So in this case, making a move to another location, it basically sets, uh, so, so if we, if we, if do you have a bigger version of the, of the, of the image, maybe, uh, Daniel.
So suppose that we go from, um, so we are now at L big T and we want to make a move to, um, L big T plus one.
So this basically, so at some point, this is the decision we took. We want to go to the, uh, to the other one.
Then basically we can use then the, um, the A matrix or the, uh, the likelihood model that then says, okay, if I'm at L big T plus one,
then this is the kind of state and pose that I expect.
So this is then being fed back downwards as like, this is now the preference for the lower level model to obtain this kind of, um, state.
And then at the low, at the lower level, you again have your expected free energy to work out the low level policy and actions that actually bring you closer to that kind of, uh, preference.
But at the same time, so at each actual fine grain time step, you get low level observations that then give you new beliefs over the state and the pose you're in,
which might give you more, which might give you more information on the location that you're in.
And then either at some point you will reach the preferred location and then, okay, great success.
Or it might be that something went terribly wrong and you'll end up in a different location, but then it basically also goes up again.
And at the higher level, you then say, okay, I'm now not at the location I want to be, but apparently some different one that I was.
So then you start planning again at that level to, to correct and search for a new step to take that will then ripple down.
That's like a preference for the lower level.
And that's how everything kind of, um, continues on going.
So the, you, you have your, your, the, you use the likelihood model that maps the states for higher level model to a belief on lower level states.
And these, this likelihood model becomes kind of your preference for the lower level, which then has your inference process there to do, to infer the actions.
And that's how you can kind of decouple them from semantic meaning as well.
This is awesome.
It reminds me of the kind of question that people often ask, where do you want to travel?
Where would you like to travel?
Where would you prefer to travel?
It's often interpreted in a very life scale of analysis.
Like I would really like to go to this other area.
So then that's like, let's think about that as the biggest level.
So where would you like to travel?
I'd like to go to California.
How will you get there?
I'll take a plane.
Where will you go to take a plane?
I'll drive to the airport.
How will you drive to the airport?
I'll get in my car.
How will you get in your car?
I'll leave my room.
How will you leave your room?
I'll get out of my chair.
Like that's very much the nesting between the top level, having more of like this topological where I want to be, which then is imposed and propagated.
And sets the constraints and opportunity for this lower level, like how I will get there.
Because it's a totally, where would you like to go?
Somebody could think in their head, I want to go to California in my life.
And then the answer to the where do you want to travel would be like to the next room.
But it'd be like, that wasn't really the scale of the context of the question.
But this really shows how the multi-scale nesting of location lends itself to heuristics and algorithms that help us like chunk complex navigation tasks.
Like navigating to somewhere in California in the next few years.
But you can't do the rollout for all of the actions taken at the chair level for that.
Because it's going to be too many explosions of comatorics.
Tim?
Tim?
Tim?

And just to add into the storyline, at some level in the hierarchy, you are like, okay, I want to go to my car.
But then you could say, okay, but I need my car keys and I don't know where they are.
Where are my car keys?
So then suddenly from having this really goal-directed nesting, at some point you say, okay, I need some more information at this level to actually reach my goal.
And so at that level, it might switch to more epistemic foraging, which will then ripple down to the level below.
Like, okay, let's take a look in my kitchen or at the kitchen table.
Maybe they are there.
And so that's how at every level of the hierarchy you have this exploitation-exploration trade-off.
And the outcome of that inference process will then ripple down to the level below.
Like, this is the preference for this level to obtain.
And this is how everything then starts flowing.
This is awesome.
Blue?
Blue?
So I'm going to now ask another really hard question.
So this is really awesome.
And it reminds me of, like, how the higher level constrains the actions at the individual level.
It reminds me of, and I know, like, you were intending to take this out of semantic space, but it puts it back into semantic space for me.
I was having a conversation over the weekend at Complexity Weekend, and one of the participants brought up a kind of political and controversial topic.
And I was, you know, they said, so what do you think?
And I said, I think I shouldn't talk about that.
And then they said, okay, well, so what do you want to talk about?
Which is, like, kind of like an odd question to have in a conversation.
But it constrains, like, when you assign a topic or, like, here, I mean, we're obviously assigning a topic also.
You know, we're here to talk about this paper and related things that might come up.
But in, like, a spontaneous conversation, when you assign a topic, it very much constrains the conversation to, it limits the topic or at least starts a seed.
And I wonder, like, why do we have to talk about anything?
Like, can't we just sit?
Or, like, can't we just, like, you know, talk about the first thing that comes to mind?
Or can't we just, like, be and be quiet?
But for a lot of people, that space is kind of awkward.
And where, then, does emergence fit into the model?
Which this is the hard question.
Or can it fit into the model?
Like, when, you know, one component of the lower level says, well, maybe we'll move to the right.
And then everybody says, okay, and they start to pull to the right.
And then, okay, well, maybe we'll pull to the left.
Like, so is there room for emergence?
Or it's always constrained by the assignment of the top level.
Yeah, you spoke about the top level propagating and rippling down.
So what's the other direction there?
Yeah, I think, I think ultimately, you need some preferences at the highest or at any of the levels, right?
And if there's no such preference, then indeed, we end up in the situation like, yeah, what happens now?
And there is no real constraint and anything can happen.
But I think typically in life, we're in the, at some level, we'll always have a preference.
And that, that defines our, our behavior.
I guess.
I was, I was actually talking to a colleague on, on, on similar things.
Like, as a human, we always have, like, we make plans or we have, there's always something on our mind to do.
And we were like, yeah, but if you look at the monkey in the zoo, he just, he can just sit there and do nothing.
So what goes, what goes on in, in, in, in the animal's mind is like, okay, all my preferences are met.
I don't, I'm not hungry.
I have a safe place.
So I just do nothing.
So, yeah, it's an interesting question.
Like, what, what happens if we don't have, if we don't have any urgent preferences that need to be met?
I don't know.
Well, in the zoo example, that behavior of, for example, low levels of activity might also be associated with, like, learned helplessness or trauma or, like, a freeze reaction or the, the affordances are not presenting themselves in a, in a certain way.
So then that speaks to, like, the ambiguity of cognition with respect to behavior.
And, like, the robot could be bumping into the wall for a lot of cognitive reasons.
It could prefer to bump into the wall.
It could prefer to do something else.
And so there's, like, there's a many to one mapping with cognitive systems and behavior.
Like, someone could be thinking, have different reasons or preferences for why they emit a given sentence.
So that's part of the complexity, but also, like, the opportunity of the cognitive.
And then also the classic Lewis Carroll quote, probably also misquoted slash alt quoted many other places.
But it's like a great, you know, folk active question.
If you don't know where you want to go, then it doesn't matter which way you go.
If you don't have high precision-ish on your preferences at location, then it's a wash.
It doesn't matter which policy selection you're taking.
Because why would it?
The only way that you could justify, well, I like this way.
Okay, because you have a preference for simplicity or you want to head off in this direction.
Those are all valid.
It's not to say that if you do know where you want to go, you're right, or you're doing the right thing, or it's going to be easy or possible.
It's just, like, if you don't have preference, then it's not possible to make any kind of decision worth evaluating.
And that also speaks to the integration of preference in active inference as a means of guiding epistemic and pragmatic value rather than reward learning, reinforcement learning, which only centers on pragmatic value.
And the implicit preference is more reward would be better.
And then there has to be all these ad hoc ways of introducing epistemic and balancing the paperclip maximizing into these models.
So, great example, Daniel.
Daniel, and I think back to the monkey in the zoo, and if the preferences of the monkey might just be constrained by the zookeeper.
Like, the monkey just does whatever the zookeeper wants it to do.
And then that made me really think about parents and children in the United States.
So, is there always some kind of downward causation, right?
So, like, if you have a child, and in many families, and not only in the United States, but it's different culturally, right?
So, even the school system in Europe is very different than that in the United States.
So, the kids just kind of go to some generic school.
The parents may or may not have some preference for what they want the child to be.
I want you to be a doctor.
I want you to be a lawyer.
I want you to take over the family business or whatever.
And the child grows in these constraints with this predetermined idea.
So, there's some kind of top-down causation happening from parents to children.
But in many Americans, like, we're just floundering over here.
So, what drives, then, the preferences of the child when there's no downward causation?
And this is kind of where exploration comes into play, right?
Like, so, you might try this major, or you might try that major, or you might do this, or you might do that.
And, you know, you have this incredible amount of freedom.
And so, you really kind of don't go anywhere.
Or, like, maybe you take one path in 25 different directions and then just end up right where you started.
So, like, you just start a whole bunch of things and then don't really get down, make any progress on any one path.
In contrast to Europe, where I think you have to choose in eighth grade, like, STEM or not STEM or something like this.
So, it's interesting.
So, I think this lack of downward causation, so the emergence may, this is what I'm picking up from our conversations,
the emergence may come from just an exploratory structure.
And, like, in this exploration, you just kind of find some direction through exploration.
Thank you, Luke.
Tim?
Maybe two notes.
So, one thing is if we don't have preferences, then we still have our information gain term, right?
So, this might drive you to at least some form of exploration or some drive to kind of, at one point, infer as good as you can where you are.
Or, on the other hand, maybe some actions will yield you more new information to update your model, like the information gain on your model parameters.
So, this might still drive some exploratory behavior.
And then how preferences come to be shaped.
I guess, one relevant piece of related work is done by Noor Sajid on her pepper system, where it's actually all about, can you learn preferences from behavior?
Where the idea is kind of like, the things you usually do when you're happy with, basically grow to be your preferences as well.
And you're kind of attracted to revisit these states.
And this also ties in, like, parenting.
Like, just seeing your parents or having your parents taking you to some states.
Just make it happen that these become your preferred states also, culturally.
So, the things that you just get to do, because that's what people around you and you do, just become your preferences.
Because you see it being done and you're doing it all the time.
So, by doing it, it becomes kind of your prior on things that happen and that you have to do or that you are expected to do.
And I think it's kind of related as well to the work of Noor.
Like, how maybe the things that you just ought to be doing and that somebody takes you to do becomes kind of your preferences.
Great points.
So, when you said that even without preferences, there's still info gain.
So, that does hide a little preference, which is a preference to resolve uncertainty.
But if you remove that, like, preference or assumption, then it's kind of like, okay, there's a million ways to make your Gaussian distribution worse.
You can just inflate the variance and your error will get infinitely high.
So, putting those types of inferences away, then there's the info gain approach.
And then the things that reminded me of was the idea of novelty search.
And so, this is within the field of evolutionary algorithms and evolutionary computation, where there's often this very exacting fitness test.
The top 5% fastest runners are going to survive or they're going to be evaluated on the task every single time.
And then people realized and thought about how, well, maybe it's not like super harsh selection.
Maybe there's sort of oscillating selection pressures on the task.
Or maybe multiple tasks are being selected.
And then sort of like the ad absurdum, but not to say ineffective, version of this argument is forget the task and the performance and the fitness on that task.
And either entirely or partially use novelty search.
And simply select for novelty of different kinds.
And so, it does need to make its way back to task performance, like homeostasis maintenance.
But this is like an interesting thread that was sort of like balancing out the overly pragmatic value view.
And the second thing that it reminded me of is the figure in the active inference on discrete states basis synthesis by DaCosta et al. 2020.
And so, here, in the case of no priors on the left.
Bayesian surprise, optimal Bayesian design, intrinsic motivation, curiosity, and the InfoMax principle.
And so, it's like interesting to see how under different special cases that are shown here, no priors.
Which might be no prior preference, but let's think about that.
No ambiguity.
Like no space between the observation and the hidden state.
Total observability.
That's the mall where we were speaking about the robotics last time.
Like where you can just have perfect resolution of your spatial location.
Then there's no ambiguity or risk.
A deterministic action environment where you know exactly how well each stock is going to perform.
Then you can make expected value decisions purely based around utility.
And then no ambiguity or priors on the right side here with maximum entropy principle and janes and max ent.
So, it's like this action perception loop has so many degrees of freedom that it's just wild.
And the special cases help us zoom in on like the information gathering aspect of a given level, the epistemic gain.
The utility oriented components of a given level.
That's the pragmatic policy and the utilitarian component.
And then there's this balancing of the pragmatic and the epistemic.
And the ability to flex and to adapt between those.
Which is why some are excited about active inference as speaking to this explore-exploit dialectic.
In a way that hasn't been approached by like, we'll learn a parameter that switches between them.
This is like a very different way to integrate all those things by finding an action perception loop.
That's a generalization of some of these cases.
And it's really interesting that this is a discrete state space synthesis.
So, all but implying that there hasn't been a synthesis on continuous and hybrid state spaces.
So, how do discrete and continuous variables come into play in just like this paper or robotics more generally?
Like, how does that field think about discrete and continuous actions?
Yeah, so, in this paper, it's rather all continue.
I'm sorry, it's rather all discrete, right?
So, we use discrete time steps.
We, and we personally, we didn't do a lot of research on actually the continuous time formalism.
I know that, for example, Pablo Lamios has done a lot of work and Martin Wisse in Delft,
where they actually do the more continuous time torque control, low-level control of robotic arms and so on.
And there's, it's an entirely different formalism.
And I'm personally not too, I'm not an expert on that kind of systems.
But I guess that similar ideas are there as well on the information gain versus reference resolving kind of planning.
But yeah, I cannot really say a lot about it.
What is it like in this warehouse?
Like, do people work in there?
Or is it just a test area?
Or what is it on the shelves?
Yeah, it's just a test area.
So, basically, when we enter that particular building,
this room was allocated as, we have a data center in the building.
So, it's the ground floor of our building.
And this room is actually
allocated as a part of the data center.
But at the moment, we don't have enough racks to fill it.
But it was like to be future-proof.
And so, it was just an empty space.
And then people started using it as storage space for all of the things that are just lying around.
And nobody really has, like, a place for them to be.
So, they had some racks over there with all kind of random stuff that needs to be stored somewhere.
Like, you also have, like, a lot of old server cases from all the machines over there that are just sitting there in case we need a spare part or something.
So, it's like generic storage space.
And then we figured, yeah, if we have the space anyway, we can start doing experiments in this.
And so, we have an area now where we have some robot manipulators.
And then, at the same time, we have this more kind of warehouse setup that kind of reflects how in actual industrial warehouses things might be.
And so, we share the space with researchers working on wireless localization that then put some beacons on and see how the wireless signal propagates with all these metal shells around and these kind of things.
So, it's just now a generic space that we can use for experimentation on navigation but also localization or signal propagation through different kinds of material.
All these kind of experiments all happen there now.
Cool.
The part you mentioned about the electromagnetic radiation and how it propagates, it, like, makes me think about how you have this current bot using only the visual light.
Like, we kind of talked about that previously.
It could have all kinds of different sensors but it only has the visual light.
And it doesn't use any kind of Wi-Fi updating.
Like, what if every minute, you know, it gets an update of its actual location.
So, that could be in the model.
And then, different kinds of situations could be enacted, simulated, and then enacted.
Like, what happens when the lights go off?
What if the Wi-Fi goes down?
And then, that is where the generative model being on board is really going to reveal, like, the robustness of the approach.
Because if it does have this internal spatial sense, the lights going off may, or going very dim, which changes the pixel values of every pixel and the ratio of the colors and, like, everything.
But maybe just the very light, you know, the exit sign.
That light alone is enough for the camera to still do, to relearn and just have enough input from the observation layer.
So, it's, like, very cool that you can control the space.
Like, you have policy over this space.
Whereas, in an operating environment that you don't control, it's, like, you are subject to the generative process emitting actions to you.
Which might have regularity or favorability, but, like, you don't control them.
And then, that's what the lab is.
It's, like, a space where there are Nestmates or robots or learners.
But then, the lab can also set policy with feedback from the bottom up.
But also, it is a place where the policy can be controlled.
And that can help the robot, like, learn and develop.
So, that's kind of cool.
And, again, it speaks to what Carl is saying about, like, the learning robots.
Like, there is a timescale at which the community or the collaborators are in feedback with this niche.
Like, without this paper, there wouldn't be the discussion.
But then, without this being enacted, there wouldn't be the paper.
So, there's a lot of interesting dynamics there.
Yeah, maybe to add on the scenarios that you were describing on turning off the lights and so on.
And then, using other sensor modalities.
So, we actually do have experiments with, for example, also modeling the...
So, on this robot, in particular, at the front, you see a planar lidar scanner.
So, it just scans with a light ray and it measures the distances.
And then, the red thing on there is actually a radar.
So, that's one chirps and at 79 gigahertz chirps.
And then, it listens for the reflecting signal.
And that's also a way to kind of estimate where are obstacles around you and at which distance are they and at which velocity are they approaching or are going further from you.
And we actually also create models on these kind of modalities.
And we could actually show that it could kind of imagine lidar scans inside the ale or how radar would evolve if the robot was moving.
And some other things that we did, which was...
These things are...
Especially Ozan Katal, who is the first author of this paper as well, did a lot of work on this.
So, one of the things he did was, if we now put like a cable gutter in one of these ales, then when the robot would drive over it, you would see a whole different type of dynamics.
Because it would bump up and go down.
And if you monitor the Bayesian surprise, so basically the KL divergence between your dynamics model and then your posterior, you could see like a huge spike in kind of surprise signal.
On this kind of dynamics.
Like this is something weird that's happening.
And you could kind of use this to see is everything going normal or is this something weird going on suddenly in my space.
And we also did tests where we had the robot driving around, but also people passing by, just walking by.
And if that was in the data set in the trains on that model, it would actually not be surprised if it sees people passing by.
And if you would let it like imagine, how would it be if you drive forward?
And sometimes you could see, of course, very blurry because it's like a reconstruction.
We could, you could see kind of schimmy signatures passing by as if a people was, as if a person was walking past a robot.
Like, yeah, this is a scenario that can happen.
You just learned it.
Which is pretty fun.
So maybe this covers the fun fact there.
That is a fun fact.
Yeah, this is the total do do robots dream of electric sheep?
Like that whole question.
It's like if their generative model is generative.
Sure.
Depends on what you mean by dream.
If it's only a recognition model, probably not.
That's very funny.
Let's take just one last look since we talked a lot about the factorization of the one level, which was, I think, a great discussion.
Let's just look at the factorization of this multi-scale setting and just any other things that people want to ask or any other thoughts you have.
But what is happening with the factorization here?
And similar to how you kind of like gave a natural language representation of the factorization that we looked at here.
This is the single level just within the blue level.
And so what is happening with the multi-scale factorization?
Yeah.
So if you here look at the at the bottom, you basically see again the same kind of factorization as you had before.
All right.
So it's like, OK, my current state depends on my previous state and action.
And my action depends on the policy.
And my observation depends on my current state.
And the only thing that is added here is this term on piece, which are the poses.
So it's the second term on the, yeah, that one.
Lower GSP is pose.
Yeah, exactly.
And so what we basically what we did here is like since we are working on this navigation setting and we already had some inspiration from existing slam approaches,
we decided like, yeah, it actually makes a lot of sense to treat poses as kind of a first class sentence in the model.
And we really would like to have like, because you kind of know how poses evolve given the action, right?
Because it's pretty simple.
You can have a pretty simple transition model that says, OK, if you move forward, then your pose will increase in the direction that you're heading, basically.
So that's a very basic way of integrating your pose.
And your pose is, of course, also very relevant for knowing where you are.
So that's why we decided to kind of split off the, the abstract states and have an additional pose state that was dedicated for, for modeling where you are in the space.
Like in this, in this pose continuous attraction network.
And then if we go to the level above, then there you have a similar structure.
But now the action is the move.
And so we have a prior on moves.
And then you move from one location to the next, given the move that you're doing.
And then you have like the connection between the upper level and the lower level, which is, yeah, what's now the probability of having a certain lower level state, given that I am in this location?
And what would be my pose in, of the robot, if I'm in this location, basically?
And that then sums it up, I guess.
What is the purple term?
And why is there the big pie at the end of it?
Yeah.

Yeah.
So the, um, the purple term basically is your initial, uh, your initial state for a higher level.
So it's, I think it's like the, uh, if you look at the blue, uh, box, it's the, the gray, uh, notes.
Ah, so it's like you, you, you, you observe the initial, um, observation from the new blue block.
Basically that's your current time step.
Okay.
Cool.
And then, and then the, the big pie is then from then on, you basically, uh, go for a number of like sub level, lower level time steps, which is basically the, the counts that you make within the blue box.
Basically, so we have like this, this big T and small T, which basically, uh, or, or like to just denote a time step in within the, the fine grained level or time step within the, the orange level.
So, um, um, in, in actual timing, like the big T, uh, going from big T to big T plus one is just like a number of time steps on the actual real, real discretized time.
Let's say, so suppose if we say that our sensor operates at 10 Hertz, like every hundred milliseconds, you get a new observation.
That's like the, the lowest granularity, uh, timestamping.
And then the, the big T just is like, okay, I, I now I'm at, uh, current time step.
And now it could be one second later.
It could be two seconds later.
It could be five seconds later.
It's just like going from big T to big T plus one just says there.
So some time has elapsed from going to this, this, this three, this three thing that I call a location to this next thing that I call a location, but exactly how many actual seconds have passed.
Yeah.
That's, that's up to the model basically, because we have the system that, that looks at how much surprise or how much, um, uh, information did I, did, did I gain from, uh, from moving.
And this basically determines when you shift from one location to another.
So the, the concept of location is based on this threshold on when we add a new note to the map.
So we, we, we added this big T, uh, notation just to, uh, introduce kind of a, a, a time step on the higher level.
But this is totally abstracted from the actual timing, which you do have for the lower level.
So, so the lower level there, the small T is actually, um, the rate at which your observations come in basically.
So this could, this is, could be fixed to like a hundred milliseconds.
Every hundred milliseconds you, you shift time step.
But when the big T shifts, it all depends on when you infer to be in a new location, basically.
If that makes sense.
And you mentioned that there was a parameter, you kind of just empirically determined when it made sense to add the new node.
Um, but then the, the frequency of the discrete time steps at the bottom was a hundred Hertz, like a hundred, um, or 10 Hertz, a hundred milliseconds.
And that was just the sampling rate of all of these features.
Yeah.
Um, wow.
There's so much happening with nesting.
There's the movement from the geometric to the topological.
There's the movement from something that is at a smaller, finer scale to something that is enclosing it.
Really enclosing it or conceptually enclosing it in this kind of way that we were talking about the cognitive domain earlier.
There's this movement from the chronos to the kairos from the actual sensor defined speed that things are happening in the world to like the timeliness of when it's time to think that you're in a different location.
And then in the biological case, it was woven so clearly to this multi-scale navigational capacity of the, of the HE system.
Cause like, if you said, I'm in a different place in my room, that might be a foot, but if it, to be in a different place in the train might be the next train spot.
And so the way that language is vague yet does allow us to really drill into what model, what was valuable about that for you?
What were you curious about in that moment?
Like these kinds of ways that we interrogate ourself and that we can also engage in conversation.
So yeah, blue, why don't we sit silently maybe for, you know, performance art stream, number one, it could happen, but also there's uncertainty to resolve and a message passing to be done.
Otherwise it's implausible that we're going to coordinate in our like actions or in our thoughts.
If you have any other like ideas or thoughts or questions or places you want to jump to, we can totally do so.
Otherwise, this is a great thought too.
What are the next steps you've mentioned several things, but just what would be like a next outcome or deliverable or thing that you're hoping to see in the niche and maybe even enact yourself?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Some of the things that I was discussing today with one of the students just today actually is to basically work on, can you, because one of the biggest limitations now is that in order to navigate, you're basically limited to what it has seen before.
Right.
So we still need to hand control the robots through the lab, build the map, and then only when it has visited the whole space, it can start, it can even just then start navigating it basically.
Yeah.
So one direction is can we kind of have the robot self navigate.
And one idea there is to, again, linking to our story about preferences that different levels, maybe we could have like a preference on the lower level that just says, okay, I don't want to bump into things.
And if you don't have a map, the only thing you want is on the one hand, be curious and try to update your model as good as you can, but also not bump into things.
And then you have like this robot that just started driving around at the same time building a map.
And then at least you, you can, you can just put it anywhere.
Like it will start mapping.
And at some point you can say, okay, the robot now, now go to now search for this particular object.
And then you give it the goal and it starts exploring.
maybe it can imagine, oh, this is maybe the location where I last saw something very similar.
So this is probably the location I want to go to.
And then you can have it like more goal-directed behavior.
So this is one thing we were thinking about.
And then another limitation is also that the edges between the nodes are also only the edges that you actually traversed once.
So, for example, one stupid thing is that it does not know that if it went from one location to the other,
it can actually turn around 360 degrees and go back and it will be at the same location.
Because in this visual space, it might be a totally different thing.
And if you never thought it or actually controlled it to turn around 360 degrees, it will never make the link, okay, I can actually do this.
So one of the things that we were exploring is like, can we use our low-level generative model to kind of imagine potential links between nodes
and then kind of add these links to the map as if you kind of visited those before or maybe add some weight to these links.
So, you know, yeah, this might be a link and this is the likelihood of this link, but at least you can take them, these links into account and planning.
You say, okay, I'm feeling adventurous.
So maybe it's time to explore this link or for this particular goal.
If this link exists, I never tried it, but if it exists, it will be a huge shortcut to reach this goal.
So I'm willing to take this gamble in this situation and to have like these kind of behaviors by just kind of imagining which kind of locations can I visit that maybe I never tried this before,
but given the things I've learned from this environment, this might be the case.
So I'll just try it.
So maybe these kind of, these two points are basically the next things on our lists to start exploring.
Nice.
It is like knowing other streets you could take.
What if the road I always take is blocked?
And then there are, so it's just cool.
And what arises after you're, after you're implementing it.
And, and in the chat, Steven has been making some comments about the door.
And we discussed like being in the hallway and then there's the pixel contrast.
And then like, if there were a higher level concept of door probability of a door at that location.
So that, that pixel change abruptly could be associated with a door.
And then, then there's this location of door, not just the pixel level mapping, but then there's like, what does the door bridge to?
And what if it explores a closed room and now the door opens and then it can say, well, now I'm curious about what's out there.
Or like, what is that node, a bottleneck?
And that's like the door as Markov blanket.
You know, what's, what happens when you train it up on the warehouse, including with curiosity, and then you open the door, what's going to happen.
But these are awesome directions.
So thank you for sharing it.
Blue, do you have any final comments or questions?
Just thanks.
This was super interesting to think about and explore and try to map onto my map of my cognition in my mind.
Yeah, agreed.
It was really cool to see the, the analytical, formal and the biological and the robotic coming together.
And so much appreciated Tim for joining us and to Adam for joining previously and all the other authors.
So hope to see you around.
Yeah, it was also for my side, it was a nice discussion, opened up a lot of new perspectives also for me and new ideas.
So thank you for that.
Thank you, Tim.

See you later.
Thank you, Blue.
All right.