## 5DB77oxbABo

SPEAKER_00:
all right i think we're live hello everyone welcome to the active inference live stream my name is daniel friedman it is december 2nd 2020 and i'm looking forward to this discussion welcome to teamcom teamcom is an experiment in online team communication learning and practice related to active inference you can find out about us at our website activeinference.org

on twitter at our gmail account our youtube channel or our public keybase team and username this is a recorded and an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and as far as video etiquette for live streams goes remember to mute if there's noise in your background raise your hand so that we can hear from everybody and use respectful speech behavior

also just as far as schedules go for the rest of 2020 we're going to have four meetings they are going to be on december 8th and 15th discussing this paper that i'm going to talk about right now a variational approach to scripts and then on december 22nd and december 29th we will be in act imp stream 11.

and we will read a more mathematical paper called sophisticated effective inference simulating anticipatory effective dynamics of the imagining future so this is going to be the last four meetings of active stream for 2020 in december two on this paper two on the next paper we have a lot planned for 2021 so if you're interested in participating in 2021 in any way

definitely contact us if you want to.

And we also look forward to doing a few new kinds of events.

So if you have an idea for an event or for a collaboration that we could do with ActiveStream, that'd be pretty cool.

Today in ActiveStream number 10.0, finally getting up there in the double digits,

The goal will be to set the context for the next two weeks of discussion with everybody who wants to, which is going to be 10.1 and 10.2.

The paper we're going to be discussing is called A Variational Approach to Scripts by Alboracin et al.

on 6-29-2020 on SciArchive.

This video, as all the dot zeros are, is just an introduction or a context for some of these ideas.

It isn't a review or a meta-analysis or a final word.

And I'll really just be trying to contextualize some of the ideas and vocabulary of the paper.

So the goal would be, if you're in the free energy principle or active inference research community, this is going to be maybe a chance to learn something new about scripts.

Certainly it was for me.

and then maybe you're more familiar with script or social script theory at which point this hopefully would be an inter interesting introduction into thinking about active inference so it is always going to be bi-directional like that and the punchline of this paper if i could summarize it as such would be active inference can unify different conceptions of this script concept leading to new avenues and approaches for research in fields such as social behavior criminology and sexology

yep all of those are fields in section 9.0 first we're going to go through the keywords of the paper then go through the aims and claims abstract and roadmap of the paper which are going to tell us a lot about how the authors lay out their argument as well as structure what it is that they're trying to do in section c we will go to types and uses of scripts

and draw on some quotations from the authors and then just look at the two figures briefly to understand what they might be representing or doing in the paper and in 10.1 and 10.2 which are the up to up to coming weeks we will be discussing this paper so save and submit your questions get in touch if you want to participate and anyone is welcome to join

First, we're gonna talk about keywords.

The keywords of this paper are as follows.

First is active inference, which is great.

We always like to see that as a keyword, as well as the free energy principle.

So active inference is about the fusion of action and inference.

It brings together fields like cybernetics, ecological control theory, all these different things that we've been talking about, but maybe this is someone's first active stream.

Free energy principle is a broader physics-based or mathematics-based framework,

for understanding how multi-scale systems exist and what it is that they do.

Active inference is a process theory under the free energy principle.

We're not going to have slides for those in this talk.

What we are going to talk about to contextualize the paper philosophically and from a conceptual perspective is internalism and externalism, as well as the center topic of the paper, which is scripts, script theory, and specifically social scripts.

We'll hear about two different deployments or two different senses of the script.

One is an internal psychological schema.

So that's like something happening in your head.

Maybe that would be amenable to a psychological or a neuropsychiatric intervention.

And then another sense of scripts are in terms of constitutive behavioral categories.

So these are sort of classifications of people or of action sequences, and they are things that are enacted, but they may or may not hinge upon these internal psychological schema.

in fact we're going to go into a fair amount of detail how the authors lay out the differences amongst different uses of the script concept but that's just to prime it for now let's get to this first philosophy point but it's pretty broad it applies to a lot of areas and that's internalism and externalism

So in ACT-InfStream 5, that's 5.0, 5.1, and 5.2, we specifically talked about internalism and externalism.

We talked about the paper Multiscale Integration Beyond Internalism and Externalism.

so we talked a lot about how active inference specifically is able to reframe this debate or dichotomy between internalism and externalism or internalism versus externalism potentially can recast our understanding of how these systems work in a way that's going to be amenable to better understanding control design predict etc that's what we talked about in actin act in five so

But without going into too many details of active inference now, let's think about three big ways that we're going to use active inference to transcend this internalism and externalism debate slash debacle.

And the three that we're going to talk about right now are one, the fact that real evolutionary adaptive systems are multi-scale and nested.

So multi-scale nested systems as a way that we can escape internalism and externalism.

A second way that we can escape internalism and externalism is with local causal closure.

And a third route is with this relationship between action and inference.

So these are three different talking points that you can think about are countering the internalism versus externalism dialectic.

So the first thing is this idea that real systems, especially the ones that we care about, are multi-scale and nested.

They're hierarchically embedded or they're heterarchical.

There's a lot of ways to talk about them.

They're complex, adaptive systems.

and the paper that we drew on in act m5 and i'll return to here is this paper in 2012 by dennis noble called a theory of biological relativity no privileged level of causation so his focus is on first

clarifying the so-called upward causation pathway, which is sort of a default understanding for many people, which is that smaller things, quote, cause bigger things to happen in the sense that they compose them, ergo they must cause them.

And we can look at how genes are related to proteins and RNA through a somewhat special connection.

and then how physical entities, nesting-wise, compose each other into bigger and bigger organizations through organs, organisms, social organizations, and then ecosystems, technological, government schemes, et cetera.

And where Noble critiques this simple upward causative model, which lends itself to reductionism, because why wouldn't you study the most basal aspect of the system if that's where the most causal potential were relied upon?

he highlights this role of so-called top-down forces, which are structuring forces from slower timescales as well as broader scales of spatial analysis about how states of organisms can influence downward, in some sense, smaller things.

And there's the larger versus smaller continuum that we can still think about and to which extent we privilege or prioritize bottom-up or emergent phenomena versus top-down, which could also be considered emergent control.

So really emergence is on both sides of the coin.

But at a given level of analysis, the larger scale can be considered external.

So when the organism's epithelia is the boundary condition, then society is external and proteins and cellular features are internal.

And if you were to go into a cell, internal would be even smaller than the cell, almost by definition.

And so we can think about how

as there is no privileged level of causation in the sense that the interactions within and among levels of analysis are what results uniquely in the system's function and there's no way to tune one aspect without necessarily impinging upon another, we can say, well, yes, you could characterize things as being just

simply outside of another thing you could say here's inside the house and this is outside the house so you can still have internal and externalized terms but this idea of internalism and externalism that the relevant causal features are internal to an organism versus are external to an organism versus the interaction it kind of is reframed in this very fractal hierarchical framework that the uh uh

no privilege level of causation argument is taking us towards.

So that's a systems biology approach.

We're moving beyond internalism and externalism because real world systems are nested.

A second type of argument that evades the internalism, externalism discussion is the idea of local causal closure.

And this is figure four from the paper that we discussed in Active Stream 5, and it is showing an autocatalytic network.

And so here you have different types of reactions and products.

It's a metabolic network that involves an autocatalytic mechanism in the metabolic domain, but there's also autocatalytic closure that might be imagined semantically or culturally.

So what this is showing is that because the interactions of specific types and the integration of ecological resources, as well as multiple types of agents and processes internal to the process,

as many different features are perhaps necessary and not alone are sufficient to generate the outcome of the system which is auto catalysis you take away one of these inputs it's just not going to work it's like taking away a vitamin from a human so you take away a vitamin and they might die but does that mean that the vitamin is the one and only thing that makes them live of course not but it does make us move beyond this internalism and externalism dichotomy because we understand that all real systems are

at the interface between these two and that's related to phrasings like it is the nature of nurture to be natured or vice versa sort of just blurring the line between them because there's such causal dependence for example with our microbiome

The relevance for the scripts concept here is that whether something like a feature is internal or external to one perspective or another, it's part of an integrated causal story about the world as well as a perspective.

For example, telling a story from a third person's perspective versus second versus first.

And another area that we might return to is that the scripts require actors and communities of practice to enact them.

Otherwise, they're not real.

So it's kind of like a tree falling in a forest.

Does anyone hear it?

Well, if there's a script in a file drawer, is it ever enacted?

Maybe that's how it enacts what it is, but...

In the social sense, it is not implemented.

And this is going to bring us to some other drama-related dramaturgical concepts and this idea about set and setting and the context and the performer.

And then just the last way that we can move beyond internalism and externalism is this fundamental relationship between action and inference.

So yeah, it's playing out in nested systems like point one.

And yes, it's also related to causal closure in a sense,

uh point two but this one is actually unique in that it's saying no just fundamentally wherever the causal relations may be and whether this is a one level system or multi-level system it's actually the fact that action and perception are happening as an integrated coupling that we can debate about what is external or what is internal but we find that there's actually uh somewhat of a reframing of this issue of whether something that's actually happening is outside versus inside

Okay, so those are just a few internalism and externalism questions that are more general that are going to be returned to when we're talking about scripts and whether they are internal or external to an agent.

The main topic of today is this script theory.

So what is a script?

Broadly, a script is a pattern of action and or thought.

And it turns out there's a lot of ways that people have thought about that.

And there's also a lot of related topics, which is one of the reasons why a unifying effort is being made.

performed here because apparently there's a lot of disagreement about scripts and what they mean.

So terms that I thought could be relevant to call them besides for scripts because they include, for example, nonverbal behavior, something like an archetype or a situation or scenario, a storyline or a narrative, a creode to use Waddington's term from epigenetics.

So it's kind of like a pattern of action and or thought

in one way or another depending on the situation.

And the paper is going to go on to explore two specific axes of variation you can think about in the scripts concept.

Scripts are happening in various contexts.

So first with no citations, I'll just provide a quote from them and then a few examples of areas where it could be interesting.

So they write,

The Scripps construct has a long history spanning several disciplines.

Scripps have been applied fruitfully to study human behavior in different fields, from disciplines centered on individual human minds and their interactions such as psychology, neuroscience, and artificial intelligence, to the social sciences, where it has been used influentially in fields like sociology, criminology, anthropology, and sexology.

Different definitions of Scripps abound with different focuses.

The concept sometimes is used under different names such as action schemas.

idea that motivates the use of the script construct in these scientific approaches are is at its core dramaturgical that means it's related to performance according to its proponents what enables social agents to act in situationally appropriate ways is a shared set of instructions or normative prescriptions for situationally appropriate behavior that's why it's called a script just like the script guides an actor it's sort of a loose

version of a script that's going to not dictate exactly what we say for example i'm not reading from a script and most people aren't when they're on a video call but it's going to be a little bit broader than that but of course not so broad as to explain everything the implication of this view is that in order to act as a cohesive social group in which every agent knows and enacts their role agents must share a common body of knowledge i.e a script

that prescribe situationally appropriate modes of being.

This is metaphorically akin to actors sharing a dramaturgical script, hence the name of the construct.

Scripts are used in scientific theories to shed light on how internalized psychological models are integrated with externalized social models by drawing on a pool of common styles of performance and cognition through contextualized acts, such as speech acts, and their ensured actions driven by goals.

So it's like all the worlds this age, but then they made a research field about it.

we see it playing out on the actual stage because there's raised platforms where people perform and then there's non-raised platforms where people perform, but there's scripts for many of these situations, sometimes literally written out, other times more broadly,

These kinds of scripts happen on the sidewalk.

For example, it's interesting to think about how just the ways that people have viewed each other's bodies, their peripersonal space, and whether they step out of the way on the sidewalk, depending on what someone is or isn't wearing, these are all things that have changed over 2020, and so we're seeing the script update or change.

Scripts happen in the courtroom, whether it's the judge and the priority that this person has by virtue of their training and position in the room.

But these types of formal acts are places where scripts have been applied because in some senses, the script is defined like a religious service.

and ritual spaces in general are places where scripts can play out and so here one can literalize what is happening and talk about well the angle of this object is at this angle and the repetition of this happens this many times or there's an experiential element so scripts also reaches into this area of experience and what makes something important to somebody and all that behavioral work

One area that we'll talk about in just a few minutes is the crime scene.

So scripts have been applied to really break down crimes in some ways into their sub-components to understand the patterns and the flow charts by which certain crimes are happening or not.

And also another example might be computer scripts, which isn't really talked about much here specifically.

The entire framework is computationalist in that, like active inference, it holds us a high value to at least be able to state things in pseudocode or algorithmically or as a process rather than just an endpoint that's achieved, for example.

uh but we can also think about these scripts especially when they involve our extended niche our shared uh niche of attention and technology and platforms computer scripts are playing into human scripts it's almost like one of them is programming the other let's return to that crime scene version of a script this is going to be some figures from a book from 2018 chapter called crime script analysis

So this is first just a structural way of looking at how quantitative data are used in the academic psychology model.

So we see behavior on the right and the arrows are like the hypothesized or empirically tested correlations.

This is basically like a structural equation model, but it's just saying there's all these features that are related, for example, to the person's personality on the top, to things like their behavior, and that can have many levels of detail.

But this is just at the most broad level, the way that different features of the person and the context are statistically brought together.

people developed a little bit beyond this simple put all their features into a database and run a regression type model to this idea of a state transition diagram, which is drawing, interestingly, on concepts like Markov chains and Markov fields.

These are things that come back in Active Inference.

but they're used in this crime script community and this one i believe sows the behaviors leading up to drinking and driving which is a crime and so this bottom

here it says this is the drive's vehicle all these arrows all these routes by which they're led there so maybe they were at home and um then went out somewhere or they were somewhere else and they came home there's different funnels different flow charts and the question that we're going to ask here is could we simplify and integrate this with active inference so if we go with no

map and we just say let's survey 500 people and then let's do some expert analysis crowdsourcing some natural language processing let's just figure out all the attributes that led to these people uh doing this crime

then we might be able to pull out a bunch of these nodes maybe we could even make a flow chart like this but could we have a more broad theory other than just interviewing hundreds of people always knowing that there's going to be types of crimes being committed that are going to be outside of our scope and just maybe have a more integrated framework for talking about how certain norms are violated to take into account a lot more features and a lot more richness in the kinds of ways that agents actually interface with the world

So that would be the goal with script theory would be in all these different fields that we would be able to simplify from just this web of correlations on the left and this network of flow of all these probabilistic attributes probably averaged out over important subgroups

Could we just take a step back and ask about action in general and thinking about these specific actions that violate formal or informal rules or norms?

Could we use active inference in that situation?

Here was just a social script paper that I thought was pretty interesting.

So it's called Social Scripts and the Three Theoretical Approaches to Culture by Robert St.

Clair in Louisville.

It says, abstract, in attempting to investigate the cultural sciences, researchers have developed frameworks of which Ratner's three categories are most informative.

The three categories are symbolic, activity theory, and individualistic approaches.

Also, social script theory is a promising path in the integration of symbolic and activity theory models.

So that's pretty cool.

This is coming from a non-active inference community, and it's a synthesis of some of the major threads in cultural research.

And again, those three categories are the symbolic, the activity theory, and the individualistic approach.

This activity theory is kind of an interesting thing.

It's a strange idea to read about that people had to make a area of theory that was about action, but it actually does touch on things like action research today, activity theory, and there's a deep thread of this.

And sometimes highlighting this thread of activity theory is quite useful.

So here is what is written in the paper.

Okay, so first there's a discussion of the early activity theory and about how this activity theory was getting integrated with the neuroscientists, the philosophers, computer scientists, and cognitive scientists.

And then there's a quoting from the paper.

What is significant about the work of these early cognitive scientists is that they argued for a deeper understanding of language in artificial intelligence.

Schenck and Abelson, in 1977, for example, noted that scripts, protocols, and vocabularies were about language, so they naturally asked not only about how computers code human behavior, but also about how languages are used to negotiate social reality.

Minsky, in 1985, noted that in addition to using language to structure frames, scripts, metaphors, and the society of mind, one needs to look at the mind as a parallel processor,

one capable of handling several scripts simultaneously a situation comparable to how human languages function within social contexts understandably linguistics became one of the central disciplines within the cognitive sciences so that's about linguistics and computer science and cognitive science and artificial intelligence and then this is a closing quote from the paper

can the personal approach to culture even be considered a viable model for the cultural sciences so that's the individualistic model which is basically saying that the priority of culture is just operating individuals nest mates it appears that the personal approach to culture espoused by postmodernists is not a viable model of culture who would have supposed that

When this model is articulated by social philosophers such as Foucault, Baudrillard, and Debord, the theory still lacks explanatory power as it is not able to account for activity theory.

What constitutes activity in this model is a passive embodiment of the signs and symbols of mass media and mass culture.

The most promising path consists in this integration of symbolic models with activity theory models.

This is exactly what social script theory has done."

So very cool that in the social sphere,

the social script theory was perceived of as integrating the semiotics, the meaning and the communication of symbols with the action.

And so there's actually a action inference or an action communication, action information nexus

that was integrated in their vocabulary perhaps as social scripts because it has a computational bent you know run that script and you can even back 50 years ago people were talking about running multiple scripts and the ecological dependency so these are kind of classical ideas that potentially under active inference we could uh learn more about and then just the last point here

on this paper uh according to activity theory psychological phenomena are formed as people engaged in socially organized activity

Since these activities are socially formed, they provide a social and cultural influence on cognition.

It should be noted that this concept of praxis has a long intellectual tradition.

The focus on praxis in this essay is not about that long tradition of pragmatism in practice, but on activity theory which is connected with Vygotsky.

And so it goes back to marks and angles and some other interesting directions, but pretty cool to see that there's actually the pragmatism and then there's an action threat.

So activity research wasn't merely about getting it done or being most effective.

It was related to that bodily concept, body in motion, developmental component.

by Vygotsky and that led to ecological psychology and so many other areas.

So these are kind of cool threads that are combinations that are re-emerging within the context of active inference.

It's because what the free energy principle and active inference are searching for is something to say about the relationship between the world and agents.

so here we're kind of mutating this common slide yet again and we're thinking about agents who are interacting in a world and the world is a niche that is shared by the agents it's an ecological niche and that means that it's a niche of ecological resources as well as shared attention norms practice tools software video conferencing

This is where this script concept is going to come into play because we want something that's computable.

We want something that is ecologically responsive, adaptive, can take on all these interesting traits that we want.

And yep, the joint world niche is related to their shared affordances of agents in a niche, what they can do.

It's related to their umwelt, what they can perceive, as well as their culture, memes, norms, all these other things, attention especially.

And now we're going to bring this script topic in.

All right, so the paper that we're going to be discussing in 10.1 and 10.2 is called A Variational Approach to Scripts, and the authors are on the right side.

The aims and claims of the paper are as follows.

They write, the aim of this paper is to formalize the notion of script using the modeling resources of the active inference framework.

The hope, I like that, that it's not just a claim, there's a hope as well, is to shed light on the multifarious uses of the construct of script as it is used in the sciences that study human behavior.

Active inference is relevant here because it may provide the key to formulating an integrative script construct.

So that's in their own words how they wanted to frame what they did in the paper.

And then I would write in non-active inference terms, how can we apply active inference to unify the study of scripts in the social, neurobehavioral, cultural, and computational dimensions?

abstract is written here it is this paper proposes a formal reconstruction of the script construct by leveraging the active inference framework a behavioral modeling framework that casts action perception emotion and attention as processes of bayesian or variational inference

We propose a first principles account of the script construct that integrates its different uses in the behavioral and social sciences.

We begin by reviewing the recent literature that uses the script construct.

We then examine the main mathematical and computational features of active inference.

Finally, we leverage the resources of active inference to offer a formal model of scripts.

Our integrative model accounts for the dual nature of scripts as internal psychological schema used by agents to make sense of event types and as constitutive behavioral categories that make up social order, close parenthesis, and also for the stronger and weaker conceptions of the construct, which do and do not relate to explicit action sequences, respectively.

We're going to get back to that binary soon.

So the roadmap of the paper is as follows.

They begin with an introduction and talking about the background of script theory, which was something that was a new area relatively for me.

They talk then about internalist approaches.

So remember the broader discussion of internalism and externalism in multi-scale systems?

Well, here we're going to be focusing on script theory, social script theory.

So the internalists are those who are taking approaches like psychology and neuroscience, as well as other reductionist facing approaches like artificial intelligence.

Then there'll be a section on externalism, which talks about the social sciences, which by their nature are interested in studying these higher level forces, larger scales of analysis.

So fields like sociology, anthropology, criminology, and sexology often focus on the society looking in on the individual.

And so that is that pressure, kind of like a balloon, there's pressure out, pressure in.

It's actually like internalism and externalism, and there's a membrane.

Could it be a Markov blanket?

Who knows?

We'll then move to the other axis beyond internalism and externalism is a strong versus weak conception of scripts, which we'll go through.

They talk about the two extreme perspectives.

then they talk about variations on scripts which are kind of what you would expect the performance components that relate to spontaneity and ecology and mutational variations all these types of things that cause scripts to vary after introducing script theory they move to the abcs of active inference by providing first a introduction to active inference which is perhaps great for us all to check out

and then talk about how shared generative models can be thought of and how sociocultural dynamics can be thought about in the culture generating way as shared models.

Figure one then has a simple generative model for policy selection, which is a figure that we'll get to.

And then figure two is a heuristic description of the generative model of the niche and of the agent.

Section four is where they come together and talk about an active inference account of scripts.

So as usual, introduction, area A, then active inference, then we bring those two areas together in section four or five or so.

And in the active inference account of scripts, there's a discussion of scripts as shared conceptual niches about types of events.

as well as scripts as representations of typified sequences of events so blurring the idea of types and events in a way that we'll get to and then there's a discussion and a conclusion cool so that's the roadmap

I think that in this contextualizing video, what would be helpful is to characterize not just the breadth of where scripts can apply or have applied or were useful, weren't useful, but zoom in on these two dimensions of variabilities and the specific problems that they cause in that field, and then how what Active Inference does will end up alleviating perhaps some of these tensions.

This is about scripts and their discontents.

So here's what they write.

There are some issues that stand in the way of an integrated model of scripts across fields.

The first is that the concept gets implemented differently in different theories and disciplines, which throws doubt on our ability to provide a unique definition that can do justice to all the use cases of the term in the literature.

Similarly, different terms can be used to describe very similar phenomena across domains of study, like script or schema, prepended with terms like sociocultural or cognitive.

Some authors have attempted to unify the concept.

In our view, these attempts have had rather limited success, as the varied senses of the term suggest.

So what's the issue?

The issue is that scripts doesn't have a coherent implementation.

and it also doesn't have a coherent definition.

Now, whether there is one chicken and the egg or egg and the chicken, that's another question.

And remembering that what we wanna do is explain, predict, design, control scripts, just like any other system, we would want to have the best and the most flexible understanding of scripts that would capture all of the diverse situations where scripts are being deployed in, but also,

integrated with more general theories so maybe socio-physics maybe some other quantitative frameworks and they're going to focus on two primary dimensions of variation

I'll read the quote first.

In this paper, we focus on two orthogonal distinctions that we suggest structure discussion on scripts in the literature.

The first is a split between internalist and externalist readings of the construct of the script.

On the internalist conception, a script is defined as a cognitive structure that is typically internal to an agent, e.g.

encoded in their brain, and that harnesses information about typified behavioral patterns that are appropriate in specific social situations.

On the other, externalist conception, scripts are cast as the basic fabric from which social institutions are crafted.

On this conception, a script is a set of highly codified practices and rules

practices, norms, standards, beliefs, and linguistic practices and rules that make up an institution.

Some conceptions are not easy to split between internalist and externalist, but the way in which an agent interacts and reproduces a script does seem to bear elements of the duality nonetheless.

And so that's where we return to these two extreme cases that were presented earlier, which is the ultimate internalist versus externalist.

The internal psychological schema is the internalist perspective, and it ultimately is going to tend towards neural reductionist perspectives.

The constitutive behavioral categories perspective is the externalist perspective, bigger systems, society influencing the individual, and that tends towards holism.

These are the two tensions, the two poles of the script theory.

And just as we've seen before, we want to use active inference to reframe this variation along this axis from systems where it really does just plainly appear that it's a small thing that's bubbling up to cause a larger change,

or vice versa.

We want to take a new perspective on this question about the localization of scripts so that we can be better and act better in the world.

And the second dimension is a split between the weak and the strong readings of this term.

And the readings differ on how to explicitly think about the way that a script prescribes specific courses of action for the agents.

So in the strong concept of the script,

A script is a list of explicit instructions for situationally appropriate behavior, either neurally encoded under the internalist reading or implicit in conventions maintained by the institution in the externalist reading.

The strong reading of scripts dovetails with work in motor control that casts the process of motor control as the execution of a motor representation, which is cast as a list of explicit instructions for action.

So kind of like robotics.

The weak reading of the script construct relaxes the assumption that a script prescribes the precise order of events that it entails.

A weak script just encodes or harnesses information about the kinds of factors that an agent might encounter in a given situation type.

so let's graphically lay out these different variants of the script theory so on the x-axis is from weak to strong so weak is it's a tendency it's kind of related to information little quantitative amounts of reduction of uncertainty or preferences that are guiding bias implicit bias whatever it happens to be and then on the strong side

it has to do with the certainty which a certain action is carried out so maybe some events are over on that end of the spectrum like a dramatic performance and then the y-axis is this internalist to externalist debate or tension where internalist things are smaller more inside of the epithelium more reductionist perspective externalist tends to be outside of the epithelium bigger things more holist

So a strong externalist perspective would be like a marionette show or a puppet show, because the behavior of these individuals is going to be driven by external forces to them, and it's going to be very structured and deterministic in some way.

It could even be done by a machine holding the wires, for example.

whereas a weak externalist situation might be something like people who are in a meeting and the body language or the ways in which certain people fit into socially prescribed or different cultural perceptions on a certain presentation that someone provides all of these different soft features could end up playing into the behavior of individuals that would be a very externally uh

oriented thing but also there's the collective behavior in the ecology of the group so that's still externalist but it ends up being more probabilistic the strong internalist beliefs relate to highly computational ways of thinking about the brain and about the ways that certain action patterns are encoded based upon representation as was stated in the earlier quote

And then the weak internalist perspective might see the mind as a chaotic dynamical system or something that's never returning to steady states or has a strange loop feature.

All these different aspects that make, even though it is a focus on the psychology, so it could lean towards reductionism, there's also a broader understanding about the potentially emergent components of even internal features.

all these different ways that we can think about scripts, and then here's Fristin, the origin here, and going to integrate across these quadrants with the Active Inference Framework.

Let's just look at one of the quotes in the paper.

They write,

Our proposed formalization of the script construct via active inference allows for interesting avenues in social computing.

Specifically, we can begin to make predictions about how humans react to scripts.

By clearly identifying the formal role of internal and external script elements, as well as what weak scripts and strong scripts entail in a cognitive and ecological structure, we can begin to leverage the model to identify the moment-to-moment dynamics of interactions between social agents in a given context.

we can identify how narratives influence expected behavioral and contextual framing.

Cool.

With our formal model of scripts, we can map the direct interaction of an individual with social categories and events, as well as its con-committance in the shared niche.

Those dynamic... Those dynamics could not only

could allow not only to model how scripts come to be widespread by simulating sensitivity to deontic cues and social coordination with interlocutors, but also how scripts may come to change when an agent is faced with a script violation and its different ramifications.

These violations may be met with social punishment or be embraced when they tap into the previously invisible valuable social reality.

I'd love to hear more from the authors about that part.

This formalism may be scaled up to simulate agents as the niche and see how certain patterns of interaction and co-option may emerge.

Also a really cool idea.

Finally, the model and the predicted patterns may be measured against real empirical data and falsified or confirmed to test psychological hypotheses about adherence to scripts.

So all the areas that we care about, especially in the social areas, anywhere you can cast broadly a strong versus weak or an internalism versus externalism something, you're basically talking about the spatial and the temporal scales and the systems that humans care about.

So if you're here and you're from script theory and this is active inference, then maybe ask questions about what would make it useful for your communities or

the specific situations the script construct is something that also has to be enacted by a mental health worker or by a social worker by a government or by a startup so what tools exist um from the script community to help us structure those kinds of flows so let's try to think about just bridging between our different communities and about these different approaches to research and

learning from each other, because I know that the scripts community probably has so much to share about how these tools and models that they've used have worked, how it has not worked, how can we use Active Inference to confirm what they know, and then also have an understanding about why things that they thought would work but didn't work didn't work, or why things they didn't expect to work

did work can we frame it in a way that's based upon their surprise in the world as actors with deep generative models and then also zoom out and think about the social context as being something that responds perhaps non-linearly to interventions

So these would be kind of fun things to talk about.

We've had a lot of social sciences people on the Actim stream before.

So if that's something that anyone knows about script theory or any of these different areas of anthropology, then it'd be awesome to hear from them because

Like I said, a lot that we could learn as an active inference community about how these theories have taken hold in different areas and come to make impact in people's life.

So this is a real interesting bridge between people's lived experience and the mental health

uses of scripts the crime Dynamics and the way that governance is tied in with it so really interesting stuff um I hope that people can read the paper and attend one of the upcoming discussions or if they are seeing this video after we had the discussion then just leave your comments because you know the discussion just doesn't stop so just to go through the figures

This is Figure 1, and I added colors to clarify a few of the different things that are happening here.

So the figure's caption reads as follows.

It reads as, A simple generative model for policy selection.

This schematic depicts a generative model for policy selection.

It represents probabilistic beliefs about how observations are related to the states that cause them.

That's the likelihood matrix A.

There's also in this probabilistic model, there are beliefs about the manner in which states of the world evolve over time, which is the state transition matrix B,

And then there's beliefs about states prior to sampling the world, which are green and they're in D. And then preference over outcomes, C is not depicted here, but as written on the top, the calculation of G is related to the calculation of C, the outcome preference matrix, and also things like affordances, what the agent can do.

And then this G is what modifies policy selection.

Perhaps someone coming from the social sciences wouldn't have expected this kind of a technical diagram to be in a paper about scripts.

So let's just think about what everything is doing in this figure and what all the edges and nodes represent, because we've talked about this figure in more technical

active streams, for example, like number eight or like the upcoming number 11.

But here, let's think about what this does for script theory.

So each of these letters are like a kind of node.

So the two blue nodes are similar.

The kinds of red nodes are similar.

And the D is an initial condition node.

So everything that has a similar shape or coloration is like one type of thing.

And this figure reads from left to right from the initial conditions.

That's like time equals zero.

through different time steps.

And at each time step, there are several things that are happening.

One thing that's not shown here, many things are not shown here, this is a pretty reduced format of the formalism, but what's happening is that the agent is maintaining a state estimate through time.

And so that could be like,

uh what kind of relationship am i in or what kind of social situation am i in is this a friendly conversation or is this a fight that could be a zero or a one or the state estimate could be a lot more high dimensional a lot more nuanced and the state estimate is being carried out through time

well what else is tied to the state estimate at each moment one thing it's tied to is oh observations so that could be any kind of observation it could be the person's tone of voice or their facial expression or the content of their speech or it could be an observation in a text message that says hey this person is not honest or something like that so many kinds of observations again this is just a big broad sketch but at each time step

the state estimate which is am i in this type of conversation or that type of conversation again whatever it happens to be the state estimate is being mapped to the observation we're not going to worry about the mathematical details now but it turns out that what connects the state estimate to the observation is

a belief about how the observations are related to the states that cause them.

So there's some sort of internal mapping, let's just say, again, sidestepping this debate that we had a little bit earlier, that smiles mean the person is happy and frowns mean they don't.

But then you think a little deeper and you realize, well, if someone's trying to deceive you, then they might smile.

So that might trigger your subconscious receptors, your subconscious priors, but maybe you look beyond those types of physiological responses.

So again, there's layers and nuance that aren't going to be in this figure.

But just broadly, the state estimate is updating through time as a function mapped to the observations that you're expecting and estimating to get.

The blue B is the beliefs about the manner in which states of the world evolve over time.

So here's like the person's happy, they're smiling.

My policy, my action selection is that I, if I say something nice, then I estimate that they'll continue to be happy and then they'll continue to emit this like happy sound.

And then here, if I continue this policy, so this is at time zero, one, two, three.

So this is like the first three moves of chess.

So you get starting state and then observations.

First round, a movement guided by a policy.

This is also framed as a belief about how the world is expected to change.

So under certain estimates about how the world is.

how will my trades today in cryptocurrency manifest as future observations?

Or given everything I know about the person, all these norms and the social components, how will my policy on a certain type of conversation end up changing future observations I have?

and then it turns out that in the free energy principle active inference framework the policy that's the whole control theory cybernetics elements to the theory that is guided by g which is framed a few different ways and it's

kind of situational how exactly it's deployed, but there's a lot of mathematical work in other live streams and in other talks, other papers to go into this, what is G and what do all of its calculations mean?

But basically it's a heuristic that helps the organism select good policy.

And good policy is not absolute because there's scripts for social failure and there's scripts for success.

And so instead of getting into this realm of, well, what if the person consciously wants to succeed and all this sort of stuff, we're going to take a statistical approach and we're going to have this G formalism that turns out to map onto the way that policy is selected, even if it's in a distorted way or even a pathological way.

Okay, here is a quote from the authors.

They write, with this in place, it becomes possible to implement weak scripts in a generative model.

We submit that weak scripts can be implemented via the likelihood mappings, A, prior beliefs, D, and sensory preferences, C, of the agent.

Thus weak scripts harness beliefs about how the expected salient social categories for figures in specific situations, that's D,

and beliefs about how they generate sensory behavior a so when people are feeling this way socially then they respond this way from an observations way this is what you'll see you can imagine where that becomes pathological or whether there's challenges with intercultural or intergenerational communication in social situations the relevant social categories of role

And appropriate behavior can only be inferred, which requires the agent to mobilize the right kind of knowledge.

So it's not just enough to know.

You can't just know the thousand and one phrases.

There's also an element of optimal experimentation in the space and being an improvisational partner.

You can't just go off of a hard-coded script.

An agent must infer the proper categories, the proper associations, and the proper mapping onto observations in order to navigate a social context adequately and to maximize her returns by the niche, social capital.

This mapping changes in function of the context, changes as a function of the context.

Hence, the weak script also feeds one understanding of the context per se.

So that's many ideas we've talked about with the environment influencing the individual and the individual influencing the environment, often in a way that changes the probability of other things happening later, that stigmergy.

This also brings up this multi-scale idea

where within an agent, statistical changes can be happening and those can be resulting in changes in behavior, all these different things.

I just thought it might be interesting because these kinds of figures are not usually found in the scripts papers that I looked through.

One other figure that we'll just be kind of quickly go through not reading the caption is just to look at this agents in the world model and just how different types of things are categorized on here.

So on the bottom of the image, laser.

On the bottom of the image is the world, and then the top of the image, this box, is the person.

And so perhaps there's some type of blanket or some mediating interface happening here.

And there's several types of things.

There are strong and weak components.

using the previous dichotomy of some things that are sort of objectively a specific way and then other things are more probabilistic in nature so perhaps this is reflecting the observations coming in with a strong component here maybe that's just your visual reception

Could be debated whether that's a strong component or not.

And then it's getting passed off to these weaker components, maybe conditional ones or ones that are related to stochastic processes.

And then there's a mapping from action back onto the world and a causal process of the world, which might be a strong component or a weak component.

And the point is, it shouldn't even have to be a binary per se.

It should be about our inference of those latent links in the world.

Maybe for a certain thing, you have enough information, or you have the right side information, or you have the right prediction in a given scenario, or you can confirm it post hoc, where you can perform optimally as if you knew the actual strong causes of an event.

other times it might be possible to uh find a pareto front with respect to policy where even if there's a long tail distribution of uh randomly distributed events it could still be possible to have incredible performance in real world settings for example companies that are high reliability organizations errors do happen they just don't cascade in these organizations so

How could we construct a niche where different parts of this system and the actual unique interfaces that are numbered here and described a little bit more in the caption, how could we design, do systems engineering in this kind of an environment

and potentially do things like reduce error rates or increase the accessibility or onboarding onto research communities, you know, just the kinds of things that we might want to care about.

All the social scripts, all the reasons why people have been talking in pages and pages and pages of social sciences, talking about different categories, well,

here might be the opportunity to actually specify these categories we could debate whether specifying them is a good or a bad thing i would say if we all work together on it then it's a good thing to formalize it maybe there's people who disagree so for those who don't want to formalize script theory

not sure would be interesting to talk to them here but we're going to be talking about how active inference could lead to some type of integration here and then what that might allow so let's just think about a few general questions in closing here on the hour

First, what might a framework for scripts be?

So two axes of variations were laid out, but there's other axes of variation and it was acknowledged that even sometimes it was hard to differentiate a theory as being somewhere on the internalist, externalist spectrum.

And so what will a framework for scripts be?

How will we know it when we see it?

Will it look like an equation?

Will it look like four equations that can't be reduced?

Will it look like 11?

Will we believe that later on it will be reduced?

Or will we believe that later on it won't be reduced?

So what are we really going for here with this Scripps theory?

What might we be able to do?

with a good script framework?

For example, in online teams or in located situations, could we do design in a way that was transparent for online behaviors so that people knew that they were signing up for a service that was using such and such in its decision-making for its algorithm?

Would people want to be interfaced that way in API for a person, as one of my friends puts it?

it be possible for humans and computers to co-program how formal should the scripts concept be if it turns out to explain a tremendous amount of behavioral variation then it might be possible to design another level of control for people it's kind of like surveillance capitalism did a lot with just linear models and did a lot with machine learning and is the next level just the next level of that is that really what we're working towards i don't think so

One might wanna ask, what are the unique predictions and experiments?

So given that you think about scripts now from an active inference perspective, what are the ways in which we can look at the previous literature on scripts, reinterpret it, and then think,

Well, knowing what they knew and the way that they phrased it and building on it, and then knowing what we know from other areas, what would be the most informative experiment to run?

So what predictions would we have that haven't been analyzed yet, but already we can do it with the data we have?

like we could predict that there's more conformity in certain types of interactions than others and we could have an a priori way of pre-registering a hypothesis and then doing a deep dive into a social data set coming up with these answers that would be not predicted by someone else's scripts theory or impossible to predict with someone else's scripts theory and showing that it could predict well with active inference but also then there's the experimental design and so that's about what um

experiment is going to optimally reduce your uncertainty about something specific so it's always going to be experiments not just open-ended but about learning something specific and so i would be curious just in the active inference community or the social side what are people curious to reduce their uncertainty about what do we want to test this on do we want to have this tested um

in which field can it be done with data that already exists or could exist, which is related to the question, what are the next steps for active inference here?

So there's two figures and there's maybe an appendix in the paper and it lays out,

qualitatively mostly an agenda for formalizing and integrating the scripts concept and so i just wondered what are the next steps is it actually to pick a canonical type of interaction ordering food or something like that and uh

chatbot it or do something with robots or is this going to be something that we can infer from video data is it going to be on online teams or located is it going to be more mathematical how can we make active inference better account for not just sort of robot foraging behavior but human behavior we've talked about in the last couple of weeks people who are implementing things like

daydreaming access and memory and historiosity and risk averse optimization how can we start bringing some of these topics into play and then thinking about real social issues and how we might be using active inference to act in those situations and then lastly just as always we want to consider the goals of this research and uh

I'd be curious to hear what the author's goals or interests are.

I think it's kind of a cool area.

They're making interesting progress.

Sounds really cool to integrate across big areas of research.

And that's it.

Kind of an interesting paper to read.

So I hope everyone can check it out and join a discussion.

Thanks for participating.

There will be follow-up forms for the live participants.

And any feedback, suggestions, questions, always welcome.

Stay in communication with us.

But other than that, thanks for listening to 10.0.

You're always welcome to come on the live discussion or plan some other type of event and leave us a comment or let us know if you have any questions, anything we could address in another show.

So have a good day, everyone.

And I'll talk to you later.

## 3Sg1sAlgQaM

SPEAKER_00:
Hello everyone and welcome to the Active Inference live stream.

This is Active Inference live stream 10.1 and it is December 8th, 2020.

We are really excited to bring you a scripted or unscripted, not sure, maybe we'll figure it out, discussion on some exciting topics.

So let's get right into it.

I will share my screen for the participants.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are an experiment and an experience, I guess, in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us at our website, on Twitter, at our email address, our YouTube channel, or public Keybase team and username.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and just as far as video etiquette for live stream goes remember to mute if there's noise in your background raise your hand so that we can hear from everyone on the stack and use respectful speech behavior also just a logistical note

All the rest of the meetings for 2020 are gonna be at 7.30 to 9 a.m.

PST.

And today we are in 10.1, discussing a variational approach to scripts.

Next week at the same time, we're gonna be having a follow-up discussion, 10.2.

and then in the last two weeks of december we're going to be talking about the paper sophisticated effective inference and that will be on the december 22nd and 29th so contact us if you want to participate in these discussions or in 2021 or if you have an idea for something that we could do on an active stream

Today in ACT-ImpStream 10.1, we are going to go through introductions and warmups, and then we'll go to 10.1.

We're going to be discussing the paper, a variational approach to scripts.

And if you want some background context, you can check out ACT-ImpStream 10.0.

We're going to talk today about the aims and claims or the hopes as they were, and the abstract and the roadmap for the paper, thankfully with one of the authors on board.

And then we'll talk about some different kinds of scripts, talk about scripts and their uses, ask a few questions related to that, and then close with looking through the figures and just discussing what they might mean.

And next week in 10.2, we're going to be on this same paper.

So save and submit your questions.

Or if it's after 10.2, just write them in the comment section and get in touch if you want to participate.

For the introductions and warm-ups, let's introduce ourselves just by giving a short introduction or check-in, and then we'll pass it to somebody who hasn't spoken yet.

So I'll start.

I'm Daniel.

I'm excited for this conversation, and I will pass it to our first-time visitor, Mao.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi.

So yes, my name is Mao Albarracin.

I'm one of the authors on the paper, along with Axel Constant, Maxwell Ramstad, and Carl Friston.

I'm a first-year PhD student in Quebec, and I'm working in cognitive computing to try to establish how we can formalize epistemic communities through active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Then we'll pass to another first-time guest, RJ.


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

So my name is RJ Corday.

I'm in New York and I'm currently researching organizational dynamics, intelligence analysis and narrative warfare.

Keep it short.

How about Sasha?


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.

Hi, I'm Sasha.

I'm based out of California and I'm also a graduate student studying developmental neuroscience.

With that, I'll pass it on to Blue.


SPEAKER_07:
Blue, muted.

We can't hear you.

Awesome.

Thank you.

I'm Blue Knight.

I'm from New Mexico, and I am an independent research consultant, and I'm currently working on agent-based modeling and a bunch of other random things.

I'll pass it to Shannon.


SPEAKER_05:
Hey, I'm Shannon.

I'm typically based out of California.

I'm also a PhD student.

I'm interested in music neuroscience, or I work on music neuroscience.

And I'm interested in music and social interactions.

So I was really excited for that social side of this paper.

And I'll pass it to Ivan.


SPEAKER_02:
Hello, my name is Ivan.

I'm based in Moscow and I'm interested in

active inference as it goes with the systems engineering and I'm very excited about this paper.

I found it very interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Thanks everyone for coming out and for everybody who's watching it live in replay.

So for the warmup questions section, everybody is welcome to throw in a thought.

I'll put up the first two questions and just raise your hand so that we can hear from anyone.

The first question is what interests you or excites you about studying scripts?

So kind of what drew you to this paper, whether from the active inference side or from the social sciences side, and then what's something that you thought about after reading the paper.

So while people are raising their hand, I'll start.

I think what interested me in studying scripts was just addressing all of these different social contexts with one integrated framework.

That's kind of an appealing idea.

Mao.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, yeah, and I think it's also, it's sort of a roadmap that links internal and external manifestations of our general understanding of the world and systems dynamics that get brought together through these islands of negentropy that become these scripts, if that makes any sense.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

RJ?

After I read the paper, what I ended up thinking about is what do the conditions look like for threshold events for changing scripts?

That's really interesting to me.

And then what would the metadata be?

And this is something we had discussed before is like, what would the metadata be if we wanted to catalog the scripts that are operating in a system?


SPEAKER_00:
cool and that um bringing up that negentropic idea the sort of organizing principle of scripts that's pretty interesting too because uh and combining what both of you just said how do we change a script from one island of stability or organizational attractor to another organizational attractor if we go from one organizing principle maybe we don't like some aspects of it but if we just go from order to pure disorder

That's not doing the society a service.

So we want to move from order to order, ideally through order.

But how is that actually going to be tracked or designed?

And then just the last up, Shannon, go ahead.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, that's actually exactly the one question I had written on my paper.

What RJ and Daniel mentioned, like what?

Can active inference help us to identify like when a critical transition will happen or when we'll switch scripts?

It's really easy in, it's really easy I say, but in music we have scripts and it's either written on a piece of paper or it's the cultural transmission of how you perform in this genre of music alone or with others.

And as long as you know that that's the script that you're starting from, you know how the social interaction will transpire,

And then if you want to do an experiment, you know that's the constraints that you have, and you can pick out the interesting features that you want to empirically measure, whether it's body sway or the actual music that's being played.

But in the example that runs through the paper of flirting, you don't necessarily know the goal of the interaction if you're observing it or the goal of the interaction if you're in it, because it's not codified in this very

formal or traditional framework in the same way that like a musical interaction is.

So identifying the threshold or identifying how those transitions happen would be very different in those two types of interactions.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Luke?


SPEAKER_07:
So I was excited to really learn more about how scripts can interact in a hierarchical way.

Like just the paper kind of mentioned it, but didn't really unpack it thoroughly.

And I just would like to really kind of dive into that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and the music and the cultural side, it's maybe with a musical ensemble, they could agree to play a different song within the same style or agree to play a different style.

And then we could ask the same with culture, but it's a little bit more challenging to simply adopt a different cultural regime.

But maybe within a culture, there's a lot of latitude.

So there's this question of nesting and horizontal interactions and about style, controlled novelty.

So I think there's a lot of cool ideas we'll be bringing up.

Any other comments here on these warm-up questions?

Mao?

Oh, you're muted.


SPEAKER_04:
Sorry.

So yeah, that's the idea.

That's the goal.

Eventually measuring where the threshold happens.

We have another paper that's being written and that's trying to identify how scripts tend to become overlapping through interaction in society.

And when they become overlapping, they become analogical.

So the scripts of femininity and masculinity are not as segregated as they used to be.

For instance, I'm wearing no scarves.

sleeves in the 1800s, but would definitely have been acceptable for men.

Nowadays, it's not a problem anymore.

Both men and women can wear it.

So these scripts have tended to overlap.

And we're seeing that because the scripts overlap, they become a little bit meaningless because they're not allowing us to predict anything.

So there's going to be a point, which we're kind of sensing already, where the concept of gender as a strict binary is just breaking apart.

And we're seeing new concepts emerge, new possibilities.

So this is where the threshold can be measured, and I think we can definitely formalize that.

As far as codification, art in general is just a series of codes that once you have, you get to break.

It's become this sort of script in art where you have to break the script.

You have to use what we know in order to continually create novelty.

Think of all of the Hollywood movies that depict flirting.

It's pretty much the same.

There's a few scripts that are possible, but if you look at it abstractly, it's basically you don't flirt necessarily with someone you have zero intention of ever, ever becoming with in Hollywood movies.

Or you don't flirt with someone by hitting them on the head with a flounder.

There's some things that you know you're supposed to do and some things you know you're not supposed to do.

And the strictness depends on how wide one vision of a script becomes.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

RJ?


SPEAKER_03:
Something I picked up from what you were saying there on flirting in cinema.

I feel like a lot of the comedies I know of are actually about script breaking.

So even outside flirting, something like there's

common category, like in the UK, it's peep show in the US, it's always sunny, where it's most of the show is just about failing to adapt to cultural scripts.

So I just want to know, like, I feel like there's there's some element there where we actually like contrast like exactly what it is we're not supposed to do as well.


SPEAKER_00:
yep there's the exception that proves the rule and then there's the the chess master who within the structure of the rules makes an innovation that appears in the short term to be breaking the rules and then there's this element of the media which is showing us for example maybe flirting scenes with things that wouldn't work in real life

whether for anyone or for a subset of people, but often including very, for example, bold maneuvers.

They can't convey in the Hollywood reality, meeting somebody, getting to know them over years, not as exciting, not as clear foreshadowing.

So maybe there are sort of rule or script breaking things, but then when we see that representation and maybe even starting to introduce some of these act-inf ideas, we see them in our sensory states and therefore we perceive them as likely or plausible.

And then we come to embody these beliefs about what is likely or possible or preferable in the world.

And we see people imitating behavior that they see in the media.

So that can be used for good and for bad.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, this kind of loops back to the question that I had after reading the paper, which is how do individuals convey truth?

uh their true state or um their you know unique perspective on the script while conforming to the social script because um if we all acted like we were in a rom-com we would have different lives and relationships but clearly we all have very unique um and uh personalized um

versions of that.

And I don't think any of us live in a rom-com, but please correct me if I'm wrong.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's kind of the fun.

It's like asking, what's the genre?

What scripts will my scripts, or what genre will my scripts be drawn from?

Am I in a tragedy?

Am I in a war movie?

Am I in a rom-com?

So that's kind of fun.

It's like, what genre would your theme music be?

What kinds of conversants are you going to be interacting with?

Mao, did you have your hand raised?

Yeah, yeah.

Yeah, go ahead.


SPEAKER_04:
So first thing is, I think you mentioned the oppositeness.

And that's a really interesting idea.

That's also how new scripts emerge is that you have these bubbles of counter discourse that come and that's either embody portray something that is

real in society, but often invisibilized or something that, um, wants to push back on something that feels oppressive to a large swath of society.

So for instance, when great study that I saw, I'm sorry about, I don't have the name of it right now, but I'll, I'll send it to whoever wants it.

It was about the portrayal of abject in UK society.

And the point was, there's all these makeovers that show you first, all these women

how they are not supposed to be.

So they take a woman and they portray her as very ugly, often lower class.

Like they give her all the qualities you're not supposed to have.

And then they take her through this transition and they make over her life.

And suddenly at the end of the show, she's happy.

Her life is great.

Her children love her.

Her husband loves her again.

It's great.

And it's like this movement from the object that you're not supposed to embody to the ideal that you are supposed to embody.

And on the second note, what you said, I think Sasha is that's exactly right.

But the thing is, you are not the person in the rom-com.

You do not perfectly embody what she is, even if they try to make her relatable.

you are connected through these tendrils of semantics to a variety of things that make you take what is possible and adapt all of these possible scripts into this new version of adapted contextual anchored script, which is why there is variety as well.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

RJ?


SPEAKER_03:
I was going to say, Mal covered a lot of what I was going to say, actually.

So we're fairly saying, I was just going to say like that.

I actually like the reference to makeover shows.

I was going to talk about a very opposite end, but Greek art and stories where it's very often, and this is where I think Joseph Campbell brings up the hero's journey.

where it's from some state, which is objective, negative, not where we want to be, to some other state.

None of us actually live in the rom-com, but the ideal being presented isn't something we're supposed to mirror necessarily, but something that kind of acts as a strange attractor.

But yeah, but anyway, Mal covered most of what I was going to say there.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, RJ, I wrote down literally Hero's Journey because the makeover show, if it's weight loss or about norms for genders or house makeover or chefs, it's always this Hero's Journey and it's a scripted Hero's Journey, literally designed journey.

And then the interesting part is the policies that they undertake, thinking about Act-Inf,

those policies are not our affordances.

They have a team and they have a camera person and they have a coach.

So then it's like showing you the first point and the last point on the trajectory and saying, well, now you figure out what policy, but the only example that you've observed, the only example of what's a plausible affordance is something that is defined as being inaccessible to basically everyone.

So that's just like such a twisted way to play with how people actually improve themselves.

Yeah, Mao and then RJ.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

So that's exactly right.

You touched on a very important point is that take each script as though it was its own little like mark of blanket.

Like it's not right, but imagine there's some parts of the scripts that will interact with one another.

And then there's these like blankets that move a little slower and through the blankets, you can go to another part of the script and you can do this at all the levers.

So this was touching on the idea that someone else brought,

earlier that there's layers of scripts and that's absolutely true you can break down every script into smaller smaller scripts what defines a script is its edges so entering the script and leaving the script what happens in between can also be scripted but that's on a lower level right so

For me to speak here, I had to go through a series of things, but what really matters is that I'm here now and that this will be recorded.

But getting here, it doesn't really matter how, right?

Unless I'm coming from it as an academic.

So I had a series of steps that I did to get there as an academic.

The way that you bring these scripts together, your vectors from where you're coming from, define also what kinds of policies you'll have available to you inside a given script.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

RJ, and then we'll continue.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, also, real quick, I like that.

That's quotable.

What defines the script is its edges.

But I just wanted to add real quick that it's probably actually dangerous to optimize too much to, say, the rom-com or the ideal.

We don't actually want to copy it exactly.

I feel like maybe

there's something there where we're supposed to actually mutate the scripts we're being presented over time, and that if we actually optimize them exactly like a perfect mirror, then we actually get instability.


SPEAKER_00:
But anyway.

Cool.

Well, I hope if you're listening, whether from the Active Inference side, hearing about scripts for the first time, or on the script side, hearing about Active Inference, you're starting to see where we are all getting excited about at this intersection.

The paper that we read today is a variational approach to scripts and the aims, claims and hope of the paper were addressed in 10.0.

So feel free to pause this video and recursively watch the other one if you want.

But Mao, since you're with us, what would you say in your own words were the aims and claims or the intentions of the paper?


SPEAKER_04:
So the goal was to bring together

fields that had different strengths.

Active inference right now is trying to move towards the social dynamics.

It's doing a great job, but there's still some way to go.

And in order to do so, it doesn't have to reinvent the wheel.

On the other hand, social sciences have done a lot of theorizing, but it's difficult to assume causality.

It's difficult to see the true mechanism of things without

either doing a lot of qualitative work, which itself has some of the author's bias or specifically his own expertise into it, which takes a lot of time.

And the kinds of

epistemic value you can draw from a lot of these studies is slightly lower and considered lower by all of the formal fields.

So if we can bring together all of these fields, offer a wonderful tool to the social sciences, we can bring it all together and bridge gaps in the communication of interdisciplinarity.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Any comments on here?

But if anyone's raising their hand, good.

And that reminds me a lot of the sort of STEM, the science, tech, engineering, math, centrism or bias.

It's tied up with reductionism and a lot of other ideas.

But then we see...

Initiatives like STEAM, like throwing in the A for art or adding in crafts or maker, DIY, all of these different things that are at the edges, just like you brought up at the fringe of the STEM narrative or at the fringe of the accepted mainstream narrative.

And it's people who are making a value proposition for some of these areas that

haven't been included in the STEM conversation, so to speak.

And there's various ways that this can represent itself, complexity science or interdisciplinary work, project-based learning, interdisciplinary teams.

This is really also why it's so important to have different people's perspective on basically everything.

because this is the shape that we enclose as a group is everyone's perspective.

And that includes our training, all these different aspects.

So it's not just like a unilateral learning relationship where the humanities have so much to learn from machine learning scientists.

Yes, they do.

And it's also bi-directional.

So what does the bi-directional nexus look like?

And how are we gonna make that nexus really a clean and accessible location?

instead of just making it a slide, like from one part of a playground to another.

All right.

Also in the abstract, we read that in 10.0, but Mao, again, maybe what would you summarize this?

Or I'm also just curious, like when you present it to different contexts or audiences.

So when you're in front of audience A versus B, let's say, what are two different ways that you talk about what you're doing?


SPEAKER_04:
I tend to present it pretty straightforwardly to anyone because it's very simple.

It's essentially just saying that

we behave in ways that are predictable because our cognition about the world and our position in the world is also predictable through a Bayesian framework.

Most of our cognition is not perfect, but definitely Bayesian.

And so the beauty of active inference is that it gives us a way to model the different ways in which our cognition can be slightly biased or let's say not

classically logical but definitely following a gradient of optimization towards x and this x is like minimization of free energy so through the scripts that are both let's say simple and more formal so scripts that are

weaker, so semantic fields, and stronger, so behavioral links between some of the semantic elements, we can essentially predict the behavior and the thought process of anyone as long as we have information about their position in the world.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And if I could just build a little bit on that, it's kind of like the scripts are archetypes or patterns that play out on landscapes.

And that's kind of like water on a landscape.

And the landscape in this...

case is like a landscape of affordances a field of affordances that's things that we've talked about but it's also potentially quantitatively a uh landscape of free energy minimization or there are entities that we can model as if they're doing optimization in a variational bayesian framework on some landscape that we're also inferring about as investigators and then just like water on the landscape there might be a marsh

where there's a lot of ways to go and it's not quite clear, it's very flat.

There might be other parts that are like the Grand Canyon, where if you're in the canyon, you're totally in the canyon, and if you're not, you're totally not.

And so that would be like a very strong script in the Grand Canyon, and then a marsh or like a floodplain would be like a weak script.

So that's one dimension.

And then the other dimension, which we're going to come back to, is this internalist versus externalist.

So we'll get to that in a second, but that's another dimension about how Active Inference can integrate scripts.

In 10.0, we also talked about the roadmap and it has, again, the structure that we know and love where you introduce another field here, script theory in section two, and then activate active inference in section three, and then turn in the second part of the paper to an integrative discussion.

So if you have any comments now about the structuring of this paper, feel free.


SPEAKER_04:
Um, but this is a structuring that's very Maxwell Brownstead.

That's this thing.

Um, and I think it, I think it works really well because we're still at a point where a lot of people don't necessarily understand what we mean when we talk about active inference.

It's it, it doesn't feel that esoteric, but when you read some of the papers about it, some of the language is a bit complicated.

There's a lot of equations.

So people get like, okay, no, this is not for me.

Whereas the, the.

The main idea is really simple.

There's an attractor and phenotypes or people or entities tend to revolve as around the attractor in their states.

The attractor moves a little bit so that the states are not constantly at equilibrium.

That's really the extent of what you have to understand to go through active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yep.

There's so many aspects to what you just added there.

It's always important to provide a little mini on-ramp in the paper itself to Active Inference without perhaps going into all the details.

And also it's important for the community to be formalizing and developing the real frameworks that we can refer out to so that we can have a short version for some papers like this and then have a really rich version that people know they can always come back to.

let's talk about these two dimensions of script variability.

So here is just one slide, but this is people's life slash career slash decade long literature, fiascos, back and forths, it's great times.

And we're just gonna lay all those roughly out on this two by two grid.

And there's some images that kind of reflect a few of those dimensions or a few of those points in the phase space here.

But Mao, you know so much more about scripts than us.

Where are some examples of scripts that people might recognize?

Or where has this been an especially contentious debate?

Or is there a difference between field A and field B, like a disagreement that stems from one having an externalist perspective and one having an internalist perspective?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, it's not so much in disagreement.

It's just that depending on what your paradigm is, you'll tend to focus on externalism and another paradigm, you'll tend to focus on internalism.

For instance, behaviorism could never have gone to an internalist perspective because it literally tries to evacuate anything that happens inside cognition.

It's like,

What's the input and the output?

So this would be fundamentally externalist.

Social studies will tend to move through externalist perspectives because they don't necessarily also have access to what the perception from the individual is of a certain fact.

All you have is movements

of demographics and how these movies manifest in the world.

So, of course, it's never as simple as that.

There's always internalist elements and externalist conceptions and externalist elements and internalist conceptions, but it's where you tend to focus.

In our paper, we're showing that active inference allows us to bring both together because a generative model is a model of you and the world.

And the beauty of this is

through the work of Axel Constant and Samuel Véciard, we can see that the world also has a model of view.

So we have this dual connection that's possible through internalism and externalism.

A good example of an external script is institutions.

You have to go through certain passages in order to get something.

You have to have a passport to go to another country.

And an internalist script is, well,

How do I want to dress up for something tonight?

Do I know what to wear?

Am I going to wear something?

It's probable that I'll get in the club if I wear XYZ.

And there's some clubs that would stop me from going into the club if I don't wear the proper clothes.

This is both an internal script that I have as an expectation of what the club will allow me to do given XYZ.

The weak script is we have some clusters of categories.

I know that some colors go with some things I know that some words are appropriate in some places and some words are not appropriate in other places But I don't necessarily know the order of the words or I don't necessarily know the order of the colors or Like I can wear pink up here and yellow down here or yellow and pink There's no necessary order or structure to what I have to do so long as I stay within these clusters a strong script is

When you go to a wedding, there's a series of events that will happen.

Only one person wears white, et cetera, et cetera.

So it's way stricter as to where each element of the cemented clusters happen to fall both in time and in space.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Thanks for that, RJ.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you for that explanation, because when I first read the paper, I was thinking that it's not so much disagreement as much as it is the way that the priors that different fields are using when they're approaching the subject and the subjects that they're studying.

So when I thought about it, I was like,

Externalist weak maybe is like IO psychology, where it's a strong function of the organizational culture.

And then maybe externalist strong would be closer to maybe in the realm of geopolitics, where it's looking at procedures after regime changes.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And also the way I've thought about this, like internalist and externalist is that there's very little disagreement on what is.

For example, people can say, yes, there's a virus particle that consists of lipids and protein and their society and people are moving around.

But then somebody who writes a review paper from the perspective of a protein biologist, they're going to focus on the proteins.

and so it shouldn't be too surprising that because of their regime of attention and their knowledge affordances they're going to recommend some type of molecular binding agent whereas somebody who studies it from the sociological perspective knows that the proteins exists but then they're going to highlight different features and therefore going to make different recommendations it would just be off key if somebody wrote a sociological review paper and then went into a conclusion about a protein binding molecule so that's something that we need to really understand that we're all at the same table

but it's our different perspectives that can either divide or integrate us.

Mao?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, so what you're bringing is really important is the salience of causal links.

So the beauty vector inference is that it allows us to draw causal chains, right?

Or at least what we believe is the inference in regard to the causal chains.

Where you come from,

defines what is salient in order to get to a goal so that's why scripts are not just like a point here and you get there however you want right that's that would be a very very very weak version of the script and anyone who is in the mark of blanket of where anyone tries to get to this point that's that's a very weak script but a strong script is well in order to get to this point there's

x element that is salient um as you said earlier if if someone comes from a different field and tells you no no the important causal chain is through externalist things it doesn't matter what's inside your mind that's behaviorism right they would say it doesn't matter what you think what happens is if you don't do it you won't go through and internalists will be well it doesn't matter if you go through what matters is how you act into the world

But you're right in pointing out that if we're all at the same table, we have to realize that both of these things are kind of true.

What really matters is how they causally interact to get to a final product, a final point.


SPEAKER_00:
Great point.

And here's something to add on that is within active inference, we talk about causal inference, the latent causes in the world as our hypotheses about the system.

And so if one person hypothesizes that there's a causal link and somebody else says, I think it's not as important as you think it is, or I think something else is more important, then what we can say is instead of getting into an inference duel,

we can get into an active inference collaboration where we say, great, well, given your hypothesis about the causal network in mind, what's the optimal experiment that we can do?

And optimal experimentation entails an ethical structure.

Nobody says, well, my optimal experiment is that we're going to move a thousand people to Mars and we're going to test them with this device.

That's not, it's not tractable and it's not within our affordances and it's not ethical.

So then we can say that's actually not

in the distribution of experiments we're going to consider, kind of downweight that family of experiments.

And so we can come to the table and ask what is going to be the most informative experiment that we can collaborate on specifically to reduce our uncertainty about our shared world, our shared niche.

Interesting stuff.

Mao?


SPEAKER_04:
That's exactly right.

Like we can come up with new models of governance through this by understanding that it doesn't have to be a zero-sum game.

It can literally be a productive game where,

we're just optimizing through the world of possibles that overlap and that are meaningful for everyone involved.

So if you could model, I'm being a little optimistic here, but if you could model everyone's scripts and we could model a shared understanding of what would be a

a desired state of the world, which would be like our G. We have this G. Then we can find the policies that optimize for our sets of constraints.

That's just beautiful right there.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Shannon?


SPEAKER_05:
I have the sort of same question I brought up earlier about in music, you know what the goal is.

You know what this goal state is that you want to optimize towards.

In music,

social interactions, once you categorize them, you know kind of what the goal state should be.

But if you don't know the goal state, so you just have a couple different social interactions, maybe you filmed them, and you want to figure out, can active inference, if you do like an active inference model, help you figure out what kind of social interaction the people in this video recording are engaging in?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, Mao, go for that.


SPEAKER_04:
So, yeah, so

There's two things to this.

The first is because you're embedded in a culture that has a set of narratives, you actually know what the goal is of given social interactions.

Whether it's implicit or explicit, you enter into certain social interactions because you wish to enter in the goal or at least some polysemy of goals.

The second thing is, if you are not sure, you make inferences about what that goal might be, and then you test those inferences by trying to optimize for a goal you might want, or you check if your prediction was right, and then you update.

So it's this push and pull that allows you to get more information.

So disambiguating reality is something that is shown in active inference to be fundamentally valuable.

So

Me figuring out whether or not you're flirting with me right now can be a goal in and of itself.

Even if I don't care, like I don't want to flirt and I don't care that you're flirting, but I want to, I want to know though, I want to, are you flirting?

Is this an accurate model of the world that I have?

So that's one thing that active inference allows us to model in human behavior.

The second thing is because we, we have scripts that leads to certain pathways.

So certain policies, policies lead to goals.

We can figure out what kind of policy you would sort of be engaged in and infer a potential goal you're leading towards.

If we're wrong, eventually the model will update.

So we can see where are the attractors in certain behaviors, which kind of behaviors tend to cluster towards something.

And based on this, we could infer, if we didn't already know, what is the social goal of a specific action?


SPEAKER_01:
Shannon?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, awesome.

The second part of your answer, there's been a lot of, like, this flurry of papers recently about using the free energy principle in Markov blankets, this kind of thing, in a very instrumentalist way, right, where it doesn't mean that that group that we're looking at is necessarily embodying a Markov blanket, but we can predict things about that group if we model it that way.

And

So if instrumentalist reading for using active inference as a tool, I'm wondering if it's going to keep moving in a similar way that machine learning has, where this is a tool, everybody has a vague concept of what machine learning is, what it does.

And then every company in the world has their machine learning algorithms to predict all of their customer's behavior or

they want to sell you some machine learning algorithm about categorizing some people you're interacting with or some data you have.

Is there, maybe I don't have a specific question.

Maybe I just wonder, what do you see would, how do you see active inference, just in this like, I guess the social script of how we use tools and how industries adopt tools and then how just the general public

perceives tools, how do you see active inference compared to the perception of machine learning?


SPEAKER_00:
Wow, great question.

Get it now.


SPEAKER_05:
Sorry, sorry.


SPEAKER_04:
I'm so glad you asked the question.

I didn't wait.

I'm going to do some shameless plugging right here.

I'm organizing a colloquium on this exact question.

The colloquium is going to be about active inference and collective intelligence, but the real goal is to discuss the ethical future of active inference in terms of social justice.

So, A,

Can we not make active inference into this tool that will mostly serve capitalistic aims and that will serve to further oppress communities that have zero hermeneutic power?

No!

So that's aim number one.

Aim number two is to show that active inference is this wonderful tool because it's not opaque.

It's transparent.

So we don't have a black box where it's like all of these layers of nose.

You're not, you don't know what they do, but it works.

So with active inference, we can see the parameters of the generative model.

We can see how it evolves.

Even if we're using machine learning to change the parameters, we can still see what those parameters are.

So I do see active inference becoming the future of predictive technology.

However, I also see that because it's transparent and because we are doing this work of trying to bring together fields that are thinking about these ethical questions, such as what is the perspective of an oppressed group and how can it inform our understanding of social dynamics?

The beauty of active inference is that it models your anchored position into the world.

This is a fundamental shift because that's intersectionality right there.

If we can understand how intersectionality evolves in the world, how we can model a specific person's reality, understanding it through mechanistic terms, it doesn't have to become this sort of statistical noise that we have to move away and push people into categories.

You can be your own phenomenology.

We do not have to erase you.

And your reality impacts the world in certain ways.

So if we wanted, say, to highlight a type of reality, a lot of work is being done with autistic children or with gender non-binary.

There's a lot of people out there whose realities are starting to emerge because they were erased before.

Through active inference, we could see there's this island there that isn't quite responding like the rest.

Can we zoom in on that?

Can we see what's happening?

Can we maybe stop thinking of society as, well, you either fit into the society's mold or you're moved away.

And can we think of society as something that has to adapt to its members fundamentally?


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for this.


SPEAKER_04:
That was amazing.

Thank you for that.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for this super interesting discussion.

I'll just add a few comments.

So one thing is that the instrumentalist reading, which means using the framework like a toolkit rather than a depicter about what the world quote is,

Instrumentalism and tool building is what allows for a plurality of narratives to coexist, including social justice and non-social justice versions.

So because there's a plurality of narratives, that means there's going to be people who are using the tool who you disagree with, just like linear models and just like trains.

So it's going to be something that includes a big tent.

RJ, I'll get to you in a second.

The second thing is that the goal of society is really, as you pointed out, it's polysemous.

There's a lot of features to it.

And it just made me think, what is the optimal skydiving height?

And what's the optimal skydiving policy?

And for some people, because of cognitive diversity, it's gonna be like, nope, just not for me, but no regulation.

Or not for me, not for anyone.

Or there shouldn't be any regulation and take me to the top.

Or I just like two feet tall.

Every quadrant is going to exist.

So that is the richness of our culture.

And I am very hesitant, as many people should be, about attempts to quantify goals for society.

And the last point is that what

active inference tools could allow would be better definition of institutions, public, private, or new combinations.

So for example, one organization could say our affordances are this, this is our input, this is our output, and this is going to be a currency arbitrage mechanism.

That's it.

We're not going to be able to censor this other domain of your life on this other issue.

and so modularity and flexibility in institutions will become increasingly important and again that will allow for new narratives to diversify and that will be challenging as well as uh embracing for some rj and then mal uh i was gonna say two things um so so one um on uh how much transparency it offers to to give us um i think that


SPEAKER_03:
From what I've seen, and I'm not an expert in these areas, but from what I've seen on the approach toward applying active inference in machine learning models has been that it offers a lot more auditability.

That's one thing because of the causal chains.

And then second is basically echoing what Dan just said, which is that I don't know that anybody will have any control over other people's use of the tool.

So I'm sure it's already being applied in a lot of these models.

So I'm sure that it will end up being applied to do things that most of us wouldn't like.

But I think that it's commendable that you're taking efforts to give people on ramps toward using it in positive directions.

Awesome.

Mao?


SPEAKER_04:
That's exactly it.

While you can't stop a multi-billion dollar company from using the system, you can make it so that people who usually do not have the means to partake in the construction of a tool, to become salient voices in the field.

One of the things that tends to annoy me when I go to a conference

is mantles.

It seems silly, right?

But a mantle is just mostly one type of perspective.

And it doesn't, to people who are on the panel, it doesn't seem that way to them.

They're all different people with different perspectives, but the way that you came into the world, the way that you approach the research, the way that you approach paradigms will have some attractive attracting commonalities because of your position.

And,

A lot of brilliant work has been done in shifting paradigms because new perspectives were coming into the field.

Intersectionality probably could only have been possible because of Kimberlé Crenshaw, who came in feminism from a very different point.

The second idea is that we don't have to necessarily control what the goal state is at every level.

But we can probably say that there has to be bottom-up and top-down communication for things to flow more smoothly.

Right now, highly hierarchical systems tend to go top-down and less bottom-up.

The communication is a bit bottlenecked in one direction and not the other.

Through active inference, we could allow governance to...

allow a better modeling of what is the optimal goal state of X actor and how can we model our vision of this local world to take into consideration all of these optimal goal states?

Is it possible for us to optimize all or a maximum of their goal states given where they are and what we have at our disposition?


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

One note there on the bottom up and the top down and about including people in the conversation is that you're really talking about a reimagining of this nexus of people and institutions.

It's a multi-scale re-understanding about who and what we are.

And we're not going to go into it in this stream, but active inference and free energy has been applied to sub-organismal things like the brain and different organs and physiology.

So we're not going to really talk about that, but cells are also doing this kind of thing.

look inwards and more internally and outwards and more externally without falling into some of these traps.

And then as far as how we can make that nexus a better place, the institutions and the power and the money can be pressured to stay on the rails and can be asked to have more transparent modeling or say, if you're going to use machine learning on my preferences, then I better know X, Y, or Z. Or if you're going to regulate water, you better make promises X, Y, and Z.

And then also as far as rising up from the bottom and making the bottom up side of the communication, you mentioned governance.

There's also a lot of cool work with digital governance related to active inference.

And then also just simply including people in relationships and conversations and teams, because that is what the social fabric is.

So to not do that is to not be doing it.

And to do it is to be doing it.

So that's what I hope would be a cool way for people to be able to come together and talk about through these frameworks.

And linear models, though they explain some variance in some situations, you don't get this kind of conversation with a linear model.

So even if it does fall to pure instrumentalism with active inference, and it's just a way to do generative models that explain more variation in the environment,

And future models might explain even more, maybe like a super neural network that's super next level with a physical computer.

It might explain more variation, but if it can't provide this kind of a transdisciplinary discussion, then it won't be as cool as Act-Inf.

Blue?


SPEAKER_07:
Hi.

So just to kind of piggyback on like what everybody's like been saying.

So I wonder like active inference is more transparent, right?

Then say like deep, like neural networks, but how is that like transparency affected when we don't really know, like at every level, it's like, there's this nested hierarchy.

And so we don't know the affordances of all the components at every level going upward or downward in the chain of command.

And so I just wonder like how we can use active inference to maybe like when we don't know, like maybe that's where we find the edges of

the scripts, right?

Like if we're looking at bottom up or top down, is that like how we probe those edges for transparency when we don't know, or without transparency when we don't know what's happening at all the different levels.

I don't know if that makes sense or if that was just confusing.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just RJ one, and then I'll first though, the transparent idea that came from the Act-Inf previous one, where we talked about transparent concepts in philosophy, like the ones that are the water that we swim in.

So now it's a different concept with the auditability of machine learning.

But similarly, there's this idea about making the invisible visible.

And one suggestion I'd have before RJ them out would be, we aren't just coming to terms on the inference.

Remember also that active means that we're coming to terms on optimal experimentation.

So we might say, all right, whatever

inference you're making about the world, the danger of some group in another country.

What is the policy and what is the experimentation?

What's the info gain we're looking for?

We don't need to go for the ultimate teleos goal of society.

I want this to be the case.

You can just say, okay, given the info on the ground in this other country, what is the policy that you and I are going to continue and deepen our relationship over?

And that's what's way more important is the moving forward together on a journey and on a narrative of togetherness, rather than coming to agreement on these goals.

And I get it, people want to talk about goals, but they're also things that can prevent us from thinking about policy too deeply, but justifying it so clearly important.

So yeah, RJ, then Mao.


SPEAKER_03:
Just responding to what Blue said, and it's kind of making me rethink what I said earlier about auditability.

It sounds like from what I've read that it's less getting rid of a black box and more creating a blanket of black boxes.

So we know where the edges between these black boxes are, but that allows us to get a better understanding of what's going on in each of them, I suppose.

So.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
So, yeah, so it all depends about on the granularity that you're using.

So if you, let's say that I started from each individual.

Every person.

I don't model their cells or their brain.

I model them and their behavior.

And then you scale up and up and up and up.

So the level of granularity of their affordances is going to be obvious at the individual level.

And the higher you go, the more information loss there is, which also makes it more computable, right?

If I start modeling the behavior of a Markov blanket and then I look at all the other Markov blankets at this level, I don't have to recompute every individual.

I have the Markov blanket.

It depends on you and your research.

If you want to start by

modeling every cell in everybody and then try to find the emergent complexity.

But that's great.

That's good.

And you can have more affordances based on this.

I think that's why scripts are so interesting because they allow us to model the likely affordances of someone given where they are and given a set of parameters.

So

Even if it's not their absolute affordances, we can assume that there's the probability of them going towards X. And now if you start modeling all of the possible scripts and how it connects to semantic grounding, so what does it mean for something to be a library?

What is the clustering that I can do?

Then you can start seeing that some clusterings will start overlapping in ways that make it more likely for the person to maybe go in this direction.

So for instance, I want to go to the library, but I live far from the library and I happen to have a car.

Well, could I fly there?

It's unlikely, right?

Could I walk there?

I mean, I could, but in the scripts of today's world, you tend to want to do things within one or two hours.

If it takes more than that, it's like you're wasting your time.

So I'm probably going to take a car.

If I don't have a car, I'm probably going to either call an Uber because I happen to be in this sociodemographic, or I'll take a bus if I'm in a different sociodemographic.

You can also predict this based on whether you think I care about the environment.

So the script of someone caring for the environment probably won't take a car, right?

They'll take the bus or something.

So you can predict the overlaps based on the kind of scripts that are...


SPEAKER_00:
manifest and measurable awesome um just a couple comments there as far as transparency often people want to know more about the details of a model and i would just offer do we really understand a quadratic model or addition or linear regression credit cards bitcoin we can use things without quote understanding them that's a story we tell ourselves about the model so i would offer that

transparency could be approached from the angle of like dashboards and really studying the residuals of your model.

So if you're doing an online learning system and then you find, oh, well, we had this person in this canyon and the feedback surveys that we're asking them are suggesting they're not getting what they need.

So just, you know, philosophical debates aside, how are we going to help this person at this time?

And perhaps it isn't that large of an intervention that needs to be made in that case.

So we can separate the perfect systems depictions goal from the helping real people.

Like in the 100,000 people in this town, there's 500 people who want to go to the library and will really benefit a lot.

How are we going to get these 500?

And then how are we going to make it open-ended with a survey so that if people aren't part of our predicted 500, they're still able to contribute?

These are things that are at the intersection of the model with just some pragmatics and logistics.

So I would say the last mile is going to be just the details of the system.

And this is like the skeleton.

Mao?


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, I thought you had a second point.

I was waiting for your second point.


SPEAKER_00:
No, that was it.


UNKNOWN:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, no, but let's see again, this is really beautiful what you said, because we can promote

The resilience of a community

by looking at what is the true goal of people.

So like you said, an open-ended survey for these people, there's 500 who want to go to the library and the rest don't really.

So, but do they all want to go at X times?

Do they all live in the same area, XYZ?

Knowing this information and knowing what people actually prefer, what would be their goal state allows us to enable them through our resource from the

pull down resources that would actually serve people's purposes.

I think that's a beautiful social aim that we could promote through a new system of allocating resources, depending on people's goals and benefits.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, cool, very fun and exciting and different ACT-INF stream.

So I'll just go to a few of these questions, many of which we will have already brought up in some guise, but here we can just put them all on one page and just think about what are sort of the questions that people might have, again, either from the ACT-INF community looking out or from the social sciences or from the neurosciences and looking in.

so how does active inference unify the disparate scripts concept so people can raise their hand but all emphasize the nestedness and the hierarchical like the vertical nesting and then the heterarchical the collective behavior the horizontal the lateral these two dimensions and the ways that we can use the framework instrumentally to distinguish different models that's a way that we can get the strong versus weak

scripts variation axis and the internalist externalists kind of together by just emphasizing the coherence or uh non-coherence strongness versus weakness of different empirical systems and take a look at them in this multi-scale way that obviates the internal external any appeal of thoughts just raise your hand otherwise i just go through the oh yeah now go for it that was a lot of questions uh the first thing that come that comes to mind is you you mentioned


SPEAKER_04:
hierarchical hierarchical that's kind of beautiful so think about it in terms of um behaviors that lead to goals right so imagine that you have these hierarchies of goals um that both are related to time and to generality so for instance um

I want to be a good person, which is like the highest, the largest possible script ever.

Because like, that's, that's one thing that's like, it's kind of binary and it's like, okay, good, bad person, whatever.

Then how do I be a good person?

Well, I can either be a good person in relation to, um, norm expectation or to values that I myself crafted or values that were given to me or like, there's like, it breaks down.

And then,

within these values set, well, it breaks down again into societal behavioral scripts, et cetera.

So again, see, you can see that as the higher you go, the less your script is a strong script.

It's a series of strong script that becomes this sort of cluster.

Now you take your goal at any layer, pick any of them.

Your goal is where you want to get because it happens to be a gate to get to like the next stage of your script, right?

So to get to this goal, there's several possibilities at the lower levels that lead in this direction.

We can thus unify the different types of scripts and how we understand them

through this sort of pyramid that goes from elements to goal and we can cluster which script doesn't lead to x goal etc etc and then we can understand how um the the individual models this system has a clear understanding of the system based on what they were exposed to so

Their environment is what they were exposed to.

Their cognition is how they brought together this exposition, internalized it, and started behaving into the world.

I feel like I answered the question, but it was a very large question, so let me know.


SPEAKER_00:
nice that was very cool and just one other thought there is that the goal seeking uh let's not think that that's going to put our values in the background because goal seeking is even more about values so this is actually not sidestepping the question of coming to or stating our values or probable preferences for policy this is actually centering it and then acting within it so that's the inference part all right the next question

is in which settings would an active inference script model be valuable?

And kind of related to that would be in that setting, we can already ask, what would the metadata for the script look like?

And also, I'm just curious, are there any empirical studies that are being done in the scripts framework?

Or what next steps are you taking in this line of research?

Or what would excite you, Mao, to see done in a hypothetical dream experiment?


SPEAKER_04:
So, um, the first thing that I think of in terms of valuable is something that relates to, let me check his name.

RJ mentioned we can.

use the scripts idea in active inference and the way we modeled it through weak and strong to understand how social behaviors tend to radicalize or how some policy brought by the top will be received by the bottom.

So anything related to politics or to social movements would find such a model valuable.


SPEAKER_03:
the i'm not sure what you mean by metadata so could you be a little more precise about that yeah rj why don't you go for that and maybe give some thoughts what were you meaning there sure um so first on um using active this this this style model um in political atmospheres talk about

organizations using active inference in ways we might not like, um, is, is governments watching, uh, extremist ideology.

Um, so I was, I was actually going to say one place where I, I wouldn't, um, I know it will be of interest to use it, but I wouldn't love to see it used this way is to see how people radicalize, um, specifically the scripts we use to react to, uh, extremist content.

Um, and because I think that from my understanding, um,

that this type of model would be very useful in identifying when a person has become uh we'll call it like extremist ideology friendly where they're no longer going to call it out and say you know i don't agree with that or i'm not comfortable with somebody talking about say like domestic terrorism um

So I could see it being extraordinarily useful for governments in that context.

When it comes to metadata for scripts, this is included.

So the metadata might be... Well, the data might describe the script itself.

The metadata might describe some key attributes that aren't directly related.

As Dan likes to say, the metadata is the data.

And this is one of these areas where the blur is definitely large.

So for me, when I think about how I would try to start describing the metadata for scripts, it would be, does this script require two people to know that it's happening?

So like, for example, flirting, it might be, you know, one person can enact their scripts without the other person enacting it.

Whereas like a script for swearing in the president of the United States, that is a script that it's a strong script with explicit rules that everybody has to be aware of.

Otherwise it doesn't work.

Um, so I think that there's like categorization values that might be associated with it.

And then, uh, yeah, but anyway, I think there's a lot you could go into that.

So I won't go too far down the rabbit hole.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Let's do blue.

Then Shannon, then now.


SPEAKER_07:
So just to piggyback off of what RJ was saying about radicalization, it's interesting.

Like, when did radicalization become a script?

Right.

And like, this is what we're talking about, finding the edges.

And so, like, where does the script even exist?

Is it like an external construct, like a societal construct?

This is the battle between internalism and externalism.

But when is there like a critical mass of internalism?

internal scripts that develop that then it becomes this external script.

Like you can be a radical, like the first person to become radicalized, like was just radical, right?

Like they just took their own initiative to, you know, it was their own script.

It was like an internal construct.

And so where's the, like the line really, like when a script becomes an acceptable or even an alternative way, like there's some kind of critical mass that has to accrue before that happens.

And it's just something interesting to think about.


SPEAKER_00:
Shannon, then Mo, then RJ again.


SPEAKER_05:
I have a bit of a topic change.

So maybe you want to talk about that first and then ask my question.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

If it's on the same idea, Mo, then RJ.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so exactly.

So how do we figure out when someone is going to radicalize or specifically what leads to radicalization?

Well,

The truth is radicalization tends to happen within clustering.

So it's not just someone who, unless this person has specific psychological issues, which makes them go off on their own tangent away from the cluster.

It tends to be that.

Clusters form around narratives, right?

So what is, let's say a meninist group.

What is a meninist narrative?

Well, women are gaining too many rights and they're taking the spot of men.

And in some meninist group, this narrative becomes women are trying to take down men, to enslave them.

And then the narrative moves forward and it moves.

Women are trying to destroy men.

And then what is the acceptable answer to this?

Well, we must destroy women.

And this is something you can see happening through the shift of the narrative.

The people inside these clusters start bringing categories together and then pinging off each other.

And then I'm giving you this narrative and a lot of people go, oh yeah, you're right.

This is the right narrative.

And then somebody else with slightly different, a little bit more narrative

keeps pushing on and you get this cluster and then people build on each other and the person on top, or at least someone who's believing so much into this narrative, which also identifies it with potentially violence, which we could measure based on the type of narrative that's being used, we will possibly be able to identify, okay, well, this cluster of people and specifically this type of person in there is more likely to do something really bad really soon.

What that means for our governments, that's not up for me to decide.

Ideally, I think it would be bringing help in these areas and being like, well, maybe you need to rethink your narratives.

Maybe we can help you soften whatever it is you're going through that's pushing you to get towards these narratives.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

RJ?


SPEAKER_03:
Uh, well now covered a lot of what I was going to say, um, once again, we're definitely synced.

Um, I would just add that it is definitely one of those areas where, um, uh, I think we, as people who are, who are working in the topic outside of governments, um, to try to create the speed bumps, um, so that.

like like not not i don't want to say speed bumps and it's hard to articulate like like the the like clearly express the limitations so that um government doesn't go and take this and then apply it badly like they've done with um with machine learning and say like the judicial system uh we're trying to predict flight risk and things like that they applied it very quickly and didn't really weren't really sure of what they were doing and they applied it before they really understood what they were working with and it obviously did a lot of damage so


SPEAKER_00:
thanks just one last comment on this uh radical doesn't mean divergence or committed radical means from the root so i think that radicalization as a discussion should refocus us on the seed memes the germ memes in the space and the ways that generative models modelable by scripts and active inference could understand what leads to the adoption the phase transition of the seed memes

And then the policy decisions that someone engages in are probabilistic and can be inferred downstream of these seed memetics.

And so those are the premises of the narrative.

So if someone thinks that they're in Braveheart, or if they think that they're in Batman, or if they think that they're a different role in a movie, that's really what we're getting at is what is the genre of culture?

What kind of movie?

Is it a good one, short one, long one?

What is the cast going to be?

How are they going to treat each other?

We can talk about it that way.

And that is what has been distorted in the public eye for too long.

Shannon.

And then Sasha.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks.

That was a really informative discussion.

And that metaphor really brought it all together at the end, Daniel.

So I don't study social interactions on that large of a scale.

I bring people in a lab, I look at how maybe their motor activity coordinates in like postural sway.

So something that you're not really aware of happening, but it's happening all the time.

You're swaying and maybe you're marrying someone across from you.

And you guys have been having conversation of what the metadata looks like.

But what does the data look like if you were going to use this active inference model at something as large scale as these social movements that you're talking about?

or at smaller scales, like I can see that the kind of data I would look at in very small groups would be, you know, patterns of motor activity, maybe that I'm measuring from filming the body or motor activity in a brain.

But in a large social group like that, would you be

looking at like GPS tracking a phone, like we've been doing a lot of modeling of how people interact in this pandemic and where large clusters of people are interacting and we might have like super spreading events for COVID-19.

Or would these narratives that you've been talking about sound like they're verbal narratives?

So would you be looking at social media profiles, you know, Twitter, Facebook and how,

Honest are those data.

So I know that the data I'm measuring the, the, the postural sway data, my participant, I mean, unless they're actually swaying back and forth, um, intentionally like to a beat of music, they don't have control over all of these small muscle movements in your body that are, that are controlling your posture.

Um, it's really a very embodied behavior.

And I know that when I'm measuring it, I'm getting an honest signal, but if you're looking at, um,

even GPS data, or if you're looking at social media narrative data, the signal could, like people could be intentionally signaling for others who share their view or others who don't share their view or intentionally not signaling because they're afraid of a response or all of the various things that could affect and make the signal that you're measuring not be honest.

So what would the data look like in your

that would make your active inference model of this large social situation be closer to the truth.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for that.

Awesome question.

We're going to do Sasha, then Mao, then RJ.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I guess continuing the conversation of how I would like to see this used, thinking about scripts and stereotypes, I guess my hope for seeing active inference as a tool is for people to

think about it, think about their own role in their active inference story and that instead of just thinking about machine learning and like getting recommendations and ads based on your preferences, that you actually shape your own story and that you are building your narrative, which then leads to policies and goals.

And so

taking a more active role in the kinds of things that will be predicted about us based on our actions, and to try to shape that in a way that signals something deeper, like our values.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Mao, and on the data question too.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I'm going to try and if I forget a question, they were important.

I really don't want to.

So if I forget, please remind me.

The first question was, what kind of data?

Well, you're right.

Social media would be super great because what you said about the honesty of data is that, well, social reality is manifest reality.

Like if you behave a certain way because you know your group behaves a certain way, well, it's because you've integrated what the group wants and that's the script.

The way we could see whether or not this is something that your cognition is entirely geared towards or is just fulfilling because XYZ is how you behave in other groups.

So one of the things that would be difficult to highlight is if you are, let's say, part of a cult, right?

You're part of a cult and you are of no contact with anyone else.

It would be difficult for us to figure out whether this type of behavior is also being contested inside.

We could maybe model this by looking at all of the other members and what kinds of interactions some people who tend to disagree a little bit tend to have.

We have no for sure.

We make inferences about the states of our agents based on what they put out into the world, the observations they put out.

You're right that social media data would not necessarily be enough, though, because you want to have data about what it means to be in the world, even outside of the virtual world.

So if all you care about is online behavior, then, I mean, it doesn't really matter how you move.

But if what you care about is scripts as a whole in society, well, we would use narrative data.

So what are the movies?

How do people in the movies behave and talk?

What is literature?

What are the words that are being used?

In what way?

With what valence?

Is it positive or negative?

then you would use your rights data about how people behave together.

You could do experiments by connecting people and doing hyperscanning data.

There's all of the data that would allow us to understand how a specific semantic cluster tends to be grouped and then tends to be connected causally.

All of this would allow us to derive scripts.

It all depends on where you want to apply this knowledge.

What was the second question?


SPEAKER_05:
I think that covered, I think I just sort of reworded my original question, but that was great.


SPEAKER_04:
But I think Sasha had a question.

I forgot Sasha's question.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, Sasha, do you want to?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, not so much a question, just a statement for how can people...

think about applying scripts and active inference to their own behavior and behave in ways that signal at our true goals in ways that are script and socially acceptable.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

Okay.

So this is the really cool part of having a model that can take both higher level and lower levels and

You're right that giving people power over their data would also help us figure out what their true goal is, right?

So if you're like, I wanna take an active part in shaping my reality, well, essentially you're giving us what your true goal is.

So that's good for everyone.

So you're right, it would be great for society if people had this control.

I think that's where we're trying to get towards in ethical circles where we're like, we're not just gonna take stuff from you.

and then model, and then you won't really have any benefit from it.

Or if you have a benefit, we define what that benefit is.

It's more like we can show you the data that is yours.

We can show you the data that is aggregated from you as well.

And you get to decide what kind of person you want to be based on this.

So we show you the affordancescape around you based on your profile.

Well, now you can pick what you want to do with this affordancescape.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And just so interesting about the inference and then moving towards action and not just targeting the ads or just targeting the consumption, but actually targeting the participation as well.

RJ, and then we'll speed through the figures.


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

I would just add that this is definitely an area where it feels like the data and the metadata, the descriptive data about the data, definitely blur.

And also, Shannon, you were talking about people not having control over how they sway, et cetera.

And I just wanted to thank you for making me hyper aware of my own posture.


SPEAKER_00:
nice um cool well what a fun discussion these are the figures and i think for next week people can start to think about what questions they want to address and then um for now i would just denote we should talk about the figures and about how they relate to some of these more qualitative things we discussed today like maybe we could even work through one of these diagrams for flirting or for ordering a cup of coffee

Figure two was a layout, like a graphical layout of the internal and the external realizer.

And so we could ask, where's the Markov blanket here?

And what does that say about how the world is?

What does that say about how we could model the world?

What are the points where we could intervene?

What are the experiments that could be informative?

Whose perspective could we include when we're thinking about this?

like all these big questions that are what should be at the front of our mind when we approach a system like this.

So that was pretty cool figure.

Let's also come back to that.

And that's basically it.

In our last couple of minutes, we'll hear a final note.

So anyone, raise your hand if you want to make a short note.

Other than that, though, we will give a form for a survey and especially for 10.2 questions from everyone who's participating.

If you're watching it live or in replay, just add a comment with something we could address in 10.2 and stay in communication.

And other than that, let's hear some last thoughts or what was your favorite part of the discussion from anyone who wants to talk.

RJ, then Mao.


SPEAKER_03:
Um, I, after, after this talk, I'm definitely all the more interested in what kind of threshold events there are for the creation of scripts and for the breaking of them.

Awesome.

Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Um, I'm super excited to see that people are interested because when I started thinking about this and, and

and started working on it with Maxwell, my thought was, I'm gonna be this fringe researcher that no one ever quotes because no one cares.

And it has the beautiful side that no one will ever criticize what I do.

But I'm really excited to see that people are being inspired by this work.

People start asking questions and they bring in new possibilities.

People from the field of music are interested, which means that there's gonna be way more input from a variety of fields, which is gonna make this super rich.

And I'm really thankful for your, I'm not sure, administration?

You led this discussion really, really well.

And that was very pleasant to be part of.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Actimstream has the best norms and the best participants, I have to say.

No, I'm just kidding.

But really, thanks everyone for making the discussion so excellent because that's really what it is.

And we hope to see you again in 10.2.

Hear anyone else's thoughts.

See you in future Actimstreams.

So thanks.

And we will talk to you next time.

## IGKUS1W25rY

SPEAKER_01:
Hello everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference Livestream.

This is Active Inference Livestream 10.2.

It is December 15th, 2020, and we are really excited to be having this discussion with all of you today.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us at our website, on Twitter, at email, our YouTube channel, or our public Cubase team and username.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And as far as video etiquette for live streams, remember to mute if there's noise in your background, raise your hand so that we can hear from everyone on the stack and use respectful speech behavior.

Just as a quick little announcement slash point of process, all the rest of the meetings for the rest of 2020 are at 7.30 to 9 a.m.

PST.

Last week, we had 10.1 on the script paper, and today we're having a follow-up discussion on the script paper 10.2.

And then for the final two weeks of December, we're going to be reading the paper, Sophisticated Affective Inference.

So check out the dates and contact us if you want to participate in these final discussions or in 2021, or if you have an idea for an event that we could do on the ACT-IMP stream.

We have a lot to announce coming up soon.

and one good place to stay apprised of that would be on our website where you can find this call for a collaboration link so if you go to active inference.org and check out this aweber link you'll see some information about collaborating in 2021 on the live stream and on other really cool projects great so today in actinf 10.2 we are going to start with introductions and warm-ups and then we're going to go through 10.2 we're

We're going to be talking about the variational approach to scripts paper that we've been talking about for the last week as well.

And check out 10.0 if you want some context and check out 10.1 for last week's awesome discussion.

We'll go through the aims, claims, abstract, and roadmap today.

And then there's some new sets of questions about types of scripts and how do scripts look and other questions.

And then we'll look through the figures, which is something that we brought up last time.

And next week there's going to be a different paper.

So get in touch if you want to participate.

All right.

Thanks for that.

Now onto the intros and warmups.

So for the introductions and warmups, let's introduce ourself by giving a short introduction or check-in and then passing it to somebody who hasn't spoken.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a postdoc in California and I will pass it to Blue.


SPEAKER_05:
I am Blue Knight.

I am an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico, and I will pass it to RJ.


SPEAKER_03:
My name is RJ Corday.

I'm on the east coast of the United States, and I'm mostly doing research in organizational dynamics, intelligence analysis, and narrative warfare.

And I'll pass it to Shannon, if Shannon's here.


SPEAKER_01:
We'll come back to Shannon.

We'll come back.

Alex, then.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.

I'm Alex.

I'm located in Moscow, Russia.

And I'm a researcher in Systems Management School.

And I pass it to Sasha.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, I'm Sasha.

I'm a graduate student also in California.

And I study neuroscience and development.

And I will pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
Hello, I'm Steven.

I'm based in Toronto in Canada.

I do a lot of work with participatory theatre and sort of participatory development workshops and I'm doing a practice-based PhD at the moment and I'm going to pass it to Ivan.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, my name is Ivan.

I'm based in Moscow.

I'm interested in in case of system thinking and I passed it to Shannon.

Shannon,


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Well, I think Shannon will come back online whenever she's ready.

So for now, we can just continue on to the warm-up questions.

For these questions, feel free just to raise your hand.

We're happy to hear from anyone.

So one question, since many of you were here last week, is what is something that you thought about differently after our conversation last week?

And so while people are raising their hand, I just really like this way of thinking about scripts and genres for our encounters and at the life trajectory level and at the sort of sub scene level, what genre are we drawing our scripts from?

RJ?


SPEAKER_03:
So after last week's conversation, what I ended up really thinking about is what happens when we lose our scripts.

So it seems like scripts are a framework for representing how we move through these complex social interactions.

So what happens when, say, in the Spanish Inquisition, where it was a process by which they were actively trying to remove scripts that people had, what happens in the absence of them when we tear them away?

So I've been thinking about that a lot last week.


SPEAKER_01:
Interesting question.

Blue?


SPEAKER_05:
I've been thinking really a lot about the transparency of active inference versus other types of deep learning and how they're kind of a black box.

And really what RJ had said last week about how active inference is more like a blanket of black boxes, I thought that that was pretty cool.

And I've been kind of twirling that around in my head for the last week.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

And it's almost like, if the sentence... oh, go ahead, Sasha.


SPEAKER_04:
Kind of the opposite of RJ, for the last week I've been thinking, what's not a script?

And can there be an absence of a script because...

we're just as apt to follow another set of directions as we are the cultural set of directions that we get for interactions.

So that's been kind of vexing because it's similar to the problem with thinking about free energy and active inference that once you see it, then you wonder like, what's not in that category and

how do we kind of draw the correct boundaries around the definitions of these terms?

Because yeah, once you see scripts, you really see it around you in every situation.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, to your point there, Sasha, it's like if a first time ever social experience or a very ritualized one, if the scripts concept can include both of those, as well as the internalist and externalist concept, it's kind of like how many grains of sand in a heap, like how reproducible or how strong does the pattern of a social encounter have to be before we're going to deem it scripts of a certain kind.

Blue?


SPEAKER_05:
so to kind of to piggyback on what you and sasha were both saying like i've been thinking about like is maybe everything is a script like is a chair a script really like i mean a chair has like a set role and like a thing we do with it or it can you know take on a new like script so like what what about all of these like objects in our everyday society really like once you once you see a script like what is not a script like i i have a hard time like you know unfolding that


SPEAKER_01:
Well, it's like the wood is chairing.

The chair is a noun, but it's a process and it was built and it will eventually not be a chair.

And so while it's chairing, we can draw a blanket, put a seat cover on it and use it in the functional interface of being a chair.

And so, especially when things become sufficiently compartmentalizable or interfaceable so that they have a functional way of dealing with them,

instead of just getting lost in the becoming and unbecoming of chairs, we can start to think, all right, well, yes, that is happening, but also there's this stable pattern that I can sit on.

That's why we're calling it a chair.

And so it's like this emergence of reproducible function and pattern out of continual becoming and unbecoming.

And so that is,

the point with a lot of discussions about the markov blanket or the friston blanket whatever it ends up being and these questions about ergodicity as well like does everything by virtue of having inputs and outputs is everything going to be under this umbrella or is this kind of umbrella only going to be over things that have um input output relationships of some type over some spatial or temporal scale stephen


SPEAKER_02:
think this also made me think about where sense making comes in and how this approach to scripts it kind of it helps extend the active inference work with deontic cues you know they talk about the traffic lights and a lot of other things in the models and this starts to extend these sort of top-down cues into narratives and stuff like that but there's still the the more existential kind of

participatory sense-making and the kind of existential sense-making processes which are maybe um they're still open to sort of somehow integrate with this more scripted kind of way of making sense of the world so i think that's that's something that i'm interested in in where do they start to sort of mesh or override each other in different ways


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

All right, let's go to the next warmup question.

How could a different idea of scripts

relate to how we regulate the behavior of ourselves and others.

So depending on how somebody thinks about scripts, how might they be likely to treat their own behavior differently?

And how might they be likely or willing to engage in different kinds of regulations of other people's behavior?

So let's just say that there's some prop in a script.

So something like a artifact or an object.

So just like to RJ's example about wanting to uproot a script.

So then you could say, well, you can't use this symbol or you can't use this combination of words, or we're not allowing anything from this genre of script.

And we're going to know it because it's going to have this

style and um so depending on how we formalize these scripts maybe in order to regulate other people's deployment of scripts we might take very specific um sub components like a certain set of words or an artifact and then say well this is or isn't ruled in rj uh yeah so so on this um


SPEAKER_03:
One thing, going back to the last question, just when you kind of stole the words out of my mouth, what I wanted to say, which is a cherished script for Wood.

But I also want to note on this is I got to have a conversation yesterday with Eric Sapp from Public Democracy.

And a lot of the stuff they've been doing, as I mentioned to you before, Dan, is like using like traditionally what would be used for advertising for like public good.

So, uh, what they've done in one case was, was be able to, uh, use the same tools that they would use to target advertising, to, um, uh, target recent people who have very recently picked up a heroin addiction, um, looking at their, their behaviors online, be able to figure out that, that they're, that they've recently picked up this addiction or, or that they've very likely had, and then give them on ramps toward treatment at the time when they are most likely.

able to move toward accepting those types of treatments.

They're not very deep into the addiction yet.

So I brought up scripts to him and we talked a little bit about it.

And it seems like their look at it is like, it's almost like one, if you can give people the idea that they're using these scripts and that they can change them and that they're creating them in real time or adapting to them in real time, then you kind of have the self-awareness that can kind of help you

Moving down, we talked about radicalization last week.

If you're aware of the scripts that are in the space, maybe you can be self-aware when you're using them.

So I think that's one thing.

And then in addition, recognizing when you're about to hit a threshold where you're about to start using a script rather than just some behavior, which kind of ties to what Sasha was saying is like,

At what point do we call something a script?

So I'm not sure, but anyway.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

It reminds me of the gateway idea, like gateway drug or gateway website or gateway meme, whatever it is.

It's like using that metaphor.

It's like, whoa, if you go through the gateway, if you pass through, you're not coming back.

It's all downhill from there.

Well, that's one script.

It's a narrative for how you could proceed through different types of experiences.

but could there be a sort of like visitation metaphor?

It's like, hey, you're gonna visit this landia and then your family's still gonna be waiting for you and they all want you to become safe and come home, for example.

And then that could be a tractor that takes some of the same setup.

It's a similar genre, at least in the beginning of the movie, but then it goes a different way.

And so that definitely is a nice point there.

Okay, and then our last warmup question is,

What's something that you're still wondering about or something that you'd like to have resolved by the end of today's discussion?

I really like this question also about the what's not a script or defining by defining what isn't.

Another...

thing that wrote i wrote down to ask about is the the transparency of the concept is something that we'll probably return to many times and is it really more transparent to sub compartmentalize it into a lot of smaller black boxes or are we doing something quite distinct from that what else does anyone think like what could be a fun area to take this script's concept in or what could be somewhere where we could go in the discussion

But if no thoughts here, then no worries because there's a bunch of questions that will be asked in the later stages.

So good.

Okay, Shannon, I hope that you can hear us or rejoin when you can.

But let's get into it.

And then anyone just raise your hand when things come to you and we'll go from there.

Cool.

So the paper that we are discussing this week, as with last week, is a variational approach to scripts.

And we had Mao last week on the panel, which was great.

the aims and claims of the paper.

We went through those in 10.0 and heard it from the authors themselves last week.

But the big question here is about unifying the study of scripts using the Active Inference Framework in all of these different dimensions, the strong and the weak and the internal and the external

the social and the neurobehavioral, all these different aspects of scripts.

How are we going to reframe it within the active inference framework?

And then what would that do?

What would that give us in terms of understanding or unique predictions or explanations?

In the abstract, they also run through this notion that they're going to be leveraging the resources of Active Inference to offer up a formal model of scripts that's not just a flow chart or a mind map or prose, but is actually a relationship amongst variables that specifies how some of these script variations, like weak versus strong, internal versus external, can be considered.

So we'll return to that in the figures especially.

And then in the roadmap, we saw that classic formula with an introduction and then theory X, in this case, script theory, and then active inference in section three.

And then in the following section, a summation of theory X with active inference.

So that's the active inference account of scripts.

And this was an introductory work.

So there's probably many ways to follow down the rabbit hole for a specific subtype of script or other dimensions.

The main dimensions of variability in the scripts concept that were highlighted by the authors were this strong versus weak and internalist versus externalist.

So the strong scripts concept reflects event sequences that are extremely stereotyped or extremely reproducible or kind of like that Grand Canyon in the landscape.

It's like you're being channeled along very strongly by a specific script.

Whereas on the weak side, we see things that are more probabilistic or potentially a preference or bias or more likely to go one way than another, but it isn't exactly pre-specified.

And then on the y-axis, we have this internalist versus externalist axis.

So the internalist perspective is going to look towards smaller things, things that are inside of the person, like the brain or the cells or computational things the cells are doing, or something that the neurons are doing in terms of secretion or firing or electromagnetic rhythms.

Whereas the externalist perspective, as it just would sound like,

is thinking about things that are external to the focal agents so that would be the relationships in the social network as well as quote society and even broader things like the ecosystem cool so those were all things that we talked about in the previous weeks and now i want to raise some new questions about scripts relationships and active inference

So the first question is how might scripts of different kinds, whether the strong, weak, internal, external, or some other feature that people are wondering about, how might they conceptualize of social relationships?

And in this case, just for reference, I'm thinking of this social network on the right.

There's two blue nodes.

Let's just think of them as our focus relationship.

So now we're moving beyond the individual as the focal system.

Let's think about the edge and the relationship as the focal system.

and then seeing that edge in context of a broader network.

So what might anybody think about how would scripts conceptualize of social relationships?

And then I'll just throw up the second question too, which is how could active inference add depths and tools or context to the social scripts concept?

Any thoughts from any domain are good.

Stephen, I might be curious to hear about from a practice side, how do we bring these ideas and then make them tangible and experienced?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, I think this is actually where this scale question becomes kind of...

kind of it becomes a challenge right because as we try to map things out um with social networks so there's a lot of social network or participatory inference mapping is one process which is quite useful for looking at and trying to understand how we relate to each other's stories and experiences in our network but the question becomes is um

how do we relate this kind of perspective we try to take on stuff with the scripts we use and then come back to how much of those scripts are just manifestations of embodied inactive ecological behavior and we've kind of reified them.

So I suppose it becomes this, it's very much I think there's a kind of a,

a situated way that we kind of reenact or recapitulate this whole thing, depending on the discussion.

So like if you're all sitting around a table, like in that board meeting where people are putting together pictures of a puzzle,

they might be working with the scripts of how they should assemble their perspectives.

And then you've got someone who's performing in a ritual and it might be much more about how they need to hold themselves as a person.

So I think there's something quite interesting

that this whole scripts thing raises in terms of the scale question.

And I suppose that's partly why, you know, Maxwell sort of ended up working a lot in here as well, because I think it ties back to the question of, well, what scale is the script happening at?

And that has a big impact when you try to then talk to people in a practice context, because if you're working with a community or an organisation or strategic projects,

strategy levels doing strategic foresight, they may be having their own kind of scripts that shape their social practices in that kind of domain.

So I think this is kind of interesting.


SPEAKER_01:
What you just said there reminds me of two people like looking at a river and they're seeing different things.

They're seeing different scripts for the river.

There's no disagreement about what the river is doing, but one person looks at it and says, yep, at the fork, it goes left.

And the other person says it goes with the flow and today it's going left.

And so in that sense, they're seeing different scripts, but they're not disagreeing about what actually is happening.

And so it's like there's multiple concepts that are being projected onto the observables.

And then there's the story about those two people and how they reconcile their perspectives by the riverbank.

And so...

Yes, the scripts concept does seem to apply everywhere, but maybe to begin to chisel away at what isn't a script, I would say a chair could be a prop, but I don't think a chair has a model where it is actually an agent, doesn't have agency.

It's not an active entity in the script, though it can be mobilized by actors in a way that a prop can become enlivened, but it isn't with a generative model of that situation.

RJ?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I was going to say the chair is an object that can be a part of a script, but I don't think it can, it's not a script itself and it can't act out any scripts, right?

Because it's not an actor.

Unless maybe, you know,

going out there it's like maybe if it were a mechanical chair of some kind like a massage chair then it has a script that has been encoded by by some other actor um but yeah i don't know sasha and then stephen


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, that was a plot twist with the massage chair.

But perhaps the ability to participate in a script, does that imply that you're able to respond differently in different situations?

Because a chair will always be chairing, but an individual or a participator in a script, they can change

based on the context and the kind of script that they're participating in.

So maybe that's a key aspect of being a participator in a script.


SPEAKER_02:
Stephen?

Yeah, I think this chair is quite an interesting example.

Like in theatre, they often work with masks, and the mask, I think they might be sort of bringing this back to the bodies, like there's something about the mask and identity and taking off a mask, and

I haven't really thought about this before, but I don't know, say a throne compared to another chair, could the throne almost be coated with a mask?

You know what I mean?

It starts to have an identity and it's like, you know, so I mean, a red nose is basically the smallest mask you can wear.

It's basically become a clown, but all this work, and we don't tend to do much with masks, but if you go back to sort of indigenous cultures, everyone was working with masks, you know?

So something interesting in,

Is there something about the script which is about how we broadcast and receive through this part of the body?


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

RJ?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, no, no, no.

So bouncing off what Stephen's saying, so one of the things when I first read the paper, I talked to you about this, Dan, like immediately after reading the paper, I think, was that

Uh, if you look at, uh, there there's a common rituals between North American Indians, Nordic cultures, African, like all over the place where, where, um, uh, what happens is there's, there's, uh, it's either dances, something along those lines where you use animal masks and act out the scripts that those animals use.

And it's really important, especially for, you know, like, uh, so I brought up to you Dan at one point, the bear, uh, in particular.

because a bear is an animal that has a set of scripts that you can identify that it's using.

And if you don't have experience, you know, knowing like reading their behavior, then you're more than likely going to get hurt or put yourself in a really dangerous situation.

So like park services in North America routinely make the point that almost all negative bear encounters happen because people don't know how to interact with the bear.

They run.

Um, they, they're, they're not doing the right behavior.

So even with like a, like a black bear, they play dead and it's like, don't play, don't play dead with a black bear because they're going to investigate.

They want to figure out like, okay, easy, you know, easy meal.

They're, they're, they're, they're curious and they're going to go mess with you.

Um, so what, what these rituals did was they gave young people who hadn't had the experience yet an opportunity to see those scripts in action.

Then before they may have ever interacted with the animal, they may be asked to play out that script.

take the place of the bear, wear the mask.

So acting out the script of the other person gives you a better sense of, or in this case, the animal, gives you a better sense of what it's like to be that animal.

So in that case, acting out those scripts that other people may be using or other actors would be using actually is an advantage in the environment.

on you brought up the throne though.

And it's like, yeah, I like the presentation of it as a mask for a chair, but it's really important in denoting the person who sits in this chair should be acting a certain way, right?

And when they don't, it's a joke, right?

So I don't know.

I was just thinking about like a few things there.

It's almost like there's a real advantage to understanding and then acting out the scripts of others.


SPEAKER_05:
nice rj the hero with a thousand chairs as it were um i also didn't bring up wolves and i wasn't praised for that so exactly oh wait blue so just kind of thinking about like the chair itself is actually like supposed to act a certain way like you're supposed to do certain things with the chair right and and i mean i i'm always telling my kids like

That's for sitting.

You've got the wrong end of you on the chair.

Like, so people get creative, right?

Like with the different roles that a chair can play.

It can be like a step stool or it can be, you know, some piece of gymnastic equipment.

And it's just, it's just interesting to think about changing the scripts, even for a chair, let alone the person that's sitting in a chair.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah it's like the setup for an improv scene and yeah the different kinds of chairs are going to lend themselves to different scenes maybe with a throne maybe they could enact a classical monarchy script or maybe it's a monty python it's a satire or with certain kinds of chairs or in certain contexts you can enact a chivalry script and you can pull the chair out for your colleague so there's all kinds of ways that um different props

facilitate or enable different scripts to play out and you can always do a mime like you can sort of act out a uh digging or you can act out playing baseball but you do need the props our extended cognition to actually do some of these scripts that involve our extended niche sasha um i just wanted to touch on something stephen said uh that you said today we don't do much with masks


SPEAKER_04:
I guess I would disagree because it seems like a lot of us are doing a lot with masks and it's just, yeah, kind of obvious to think that that's a prop that is going to change our behavior in ways we might not even recognize.

And yeah, just important to think about how this new prop is changing human interaction and scripts and

behavior in ways that we don't want or really expect a mask to change.


SPEAKER_01:
Blue.


SPEAKER_05:
So Sasha didn't come right out and say it, but I'm gonna like maybe point it at what you're saying.

Maybe not, maybe I took it out of context, but I think that we do do a lot with masks.

Like we are right now using the biggest mask ever.

Like people are totally different.

in like their online persona.

Like some people will hide behind a computer screen and act in ways that they would never ever behave in real life, right?

So they have this like mask up, they can create this new persona and go forward in the world with that.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, very true.

And with new props, there's new scripts.

There's the one person's wearing a mask, but the other one isn't script.

There's the, is that person wearing an N95 script?

There's all these things that wouldn't have even made sense in 2019.

So that's the sense-making and the cultural sense-making and the tension and the friction

when there's differences on opinion or differences in behavior and it's about um not just estimates of state but actually uncertainty and estimates about other people's uncertainty that's this whole like recursive and embedded element of active inference and it's about navigating the uncertainty of a situation not just maximizing the state itself and that's something we'll return to for sure stephen


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think this is interesting when you start to put the mask.

So I suppose I was talking about playing with the mask physically within the proximity of your face.

But yeah, there's this kind of mask out there.

But in some ways, it's become abstracted.

Like it's almost like you put it on and put it off.

It's sort of almost part of the ecosystem that we've kind of created, which is maybe a little bit unhealthy because we don't, there's actually one really interesting activity I did once.

There was a chap from Rwanda who does healing work and he would get you to put a mask on in front of your face and read a poem that was really personal.

And then you had to lower the mask, but it was like you were lowering the whole of your sort of,

masking identity and it left you feeling this incredible rawness which is really interesting so i suppose um yeah there is this tendency now that and i think even maybe more since the 1980s if i look back at videos of people in the 80s on tv and that they're often a lot more nervous in front of the camera now people are used to putting up a

some sort of smiley face type of thing and presenting.

And I think there's something quite interesting in that that might relate to this paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I've been thinking about that too, like with the selfie, new affordance of being able to add an arm's length, look back, not just with a disposable camera and snap the pic and have the perspectival imagination of being at your arm's end, but actually seeing it in real time and then video chatting or live streaming where you can see your own face during an interaction.

So it's like you're seeing

the mask in real time.

And then that's sort of like, I think it's a Campbell quote or it could be someone else.

But like, if you think that you're rejecting the mask that society gives you, you're just wearing the mask of rejection.

Everybody can see that.

It's not exactly the quote, but basically it's like, you can't not play the mask game.

There has to be an epithelium.

There has to be a facade.

There has to be an interface.

And so we're talking about designing that interface because somebody who goes around saying, no, this is me, this is me, I have no mask, this is just what I am.

It's like, right, but there still is an external layer that's being presented, right?

And if someone says, no, I'm all me, there's no external level, it's like,

Whoa, big if true, of course, but then it's not a helpful viewpoint for the world because we do need to interface.

We need to send emotions reliably and receive emotions reliably.

And so a lot there.

Let's continue with some of these fun questions.

The third question is how do the network relationships, the red nodes influence potentially indirectly the focal edges in the network blue.

And then the fourth question would be like a little bit more of a wild card.

What could be a fun or interesting social experiment related to active inference, whether it's something that we do

like a little experiment or just daily routine tweak, or whether this is something that could be carried out with a larger scale laboratory online or in a social setting.

So either of these questions people could raise their hand on.

I would start with that third one.

highlight that that edge it's a relation but it's like an atom in the world of relational thinking the edge is like the atom and so now we're in this network of edges which is what makes it kind of a tapestry and a social fabric and so if we want to understand the relationship between person a and b

then we're always invoking all the other edges that stabilize them whether it's the who brings the food to these different people or how do they get their internet because they're not going to be able to connect if they're not going to get their internet and what are the norms that they're getting the other 23 hours of the day and that's what shapes and in some ways can even define

the focal relationship is again, the other 95% of the person's life or day that they're not in that relationship.

Um, during RJ.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

So, um, uh, I'm just turning hand off.

There we go.

Uh, so on the last question, I think I have, um, something I've been thinking about that may relate to the prior one on network relationships.

so, uh,

Uh, my dog Achilles, uh, he usually wakes me up in the morning, uh, for, for like the last year or so.

Uh, we, we go on a walk at like 5 AM.

Um, and he is usually raring ready to go on that walk.

So I never really had to worry about an alarm clock.

He always, you know, he would always pawn me awake.

Um, and if I like, there's no snooze button on a dog, it is, you know, he he's there until I wake up.

Um, but recently after Thanksgiving, um,

So I have Achilles and my parents have his brother, Socrates, and Socrates has been staying with us.

So now Socrates plays with him during the day, wears him the hell out.

And ever since Thanksgiving, he doesn't wake up in the morning anymore.

He doesn't want to wake up.

He wants to sleep in.

So he had a script that was present in the morning.

that he now no longer has.

And this has led to me oversleeping almost every day because I don't have any script for interacting with an alarm clock in the morning anymore.

So I think that going right back to the beginning of what is not a script and where's the transparency on being able to look at what these things actually look like, I think our wake up

scripts are probably some of the most transparent because they're the most consistent and they're the most, you know, kind of there's not a lot of outside interaction with those scripts.

It's very much like at the moment when you're waking up, becoming conscious in the world.

So there's not a lot of priors of them, maybe your dreams, et cetera.

So I think it would be kind of a fun experiment to have people try to identify what it is their morning script actually is

identify where their first network relationship is in that script, right?

Because maybe it's, I know some people who wake up and immediately go on their phone or, you know, like, so then try to see if they can't pick out one part of that script that's not good for them, that they don't like, that's not healthy, et cetera.

And then like, you know, bringing back to my question, which I wanted to resolve last week,

was how do you identify the threshold events where you're able to change scripts?

I think it would be a fun experiment to try to figure out what are the best methods for changing your morning scripts, which are definitely some of the most difficult to change.


SPEAKER_01:
Good questions, RJ.

Thank you.

That reminds me of somebody being asked, what is your morning routine?

What's your bedtime routine?

And I'm just projecting, but a common response could be, I don't have a morning routine.

It's like, well, surely you do have a probabilistic distribution of places you wake up and how often you brush your teeth, even if it's 0%.

But there's some distribution of routines.

That's the script.

It could be a weak script.

It could be a strong script.

But some people just brush off the question.

No, no, I don't have a mask.

I don't have a routine.

It's like a way of not engaging with that.

But once you recognize that it's about the interface and it can be a probabilistic interface, just to say a morning routine, it doesn't need to be regimented.

It doesn't need to be externalist.

It also doesn't need to be internalist.

We're moving beyond internalism and externalism, as well as beyond restrictive, strong, or loose, weak.

We're taking all of those possibilities.

And now we're just thinking, yeah, so what is your morning script set?

Or maybe what genre are your mornings?

Is it an emergency movie?

Is it a comedy?

And then also this question about the dependencies and to take it back to the social network and the scripts, it's like we often don't know all the dependencies until we do a perturbation.

So like RJ, you didn't know about your lack of an alarm clock, you know, stimuli or script until there was another script that changed in a non-human animal.

And then that had a cascading failure in this network of dependent scripts.

So it revealed new relationships and dependencies because of a manipulation.

And so that's very related to active inference on a few levels, just to provide one is we're always interested, not just in coming to clarity on world states, but actually coming to clarity on which interventions or which experiments or perturbations would maximally inform us.

while also remaining functional about those dependencies.

So then you could be, even when the dog was still waking up early, you could have been experimenting with earlier or later wake-ups and maybe by bumping things by half an hour this way or another, you would have discovered, oh wait, without the dog, I don't have a way to wake up.

Or if the dog is tired, then there's this other relationship and nobody would connect the dog being tired to waking up early

for most people, especially if they don't have a dog.

But in this case, it could have been explored or actively inferred with rightful experimentation.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, that's really kind of funny about the morning routine because

Yeah, we, we of course all have one, but maybe it's not, not very glamorous or effective.

And it just reminds me of these sort of glamorized morning routines of celebrities where like they spend, you know, all this time putting stuff on their face essentially.

And it kind of signals like I have the kind of morning routine that I'm proud to tell other people about, or should be, uh,

you know, a sensational YouTube video that other people envy.

And so kind of changing, yeah, what a morning routine is or should be.

And then also part of that whole like kind of

thinking about your morning routine is that it's very solitary when, in fact, of course, we wake up for other people or other creatures and that we kind of get sucked into someone else's script even before we know that we're part of it.

Like people who wake up to take care of their kids, like maybe they don't want to be waking up, but, you know, and then how to

use Active Inference in a way that helps people modify their morning script

in a way that I guess it just kind of reminds me of biohacking and being very focused on every metric that you have.

So do you have to have all those metrics in order then to change your morning script or to optimize that?

Or is there a way where Active Inference can help us get around that?

kind of self-measurement obsession that biohacking can veer off into when it can be more focused on just the performance and the human script that we're participating in.


SPEAKER_01:
Good question there, Sasha.

And it reminds me of just the imperatives in active inference being to reduce uncertainty and to design optimal experimentation.

And so instead of in this reward framework, thinking we're gonna have the most rewarding morning

It's going to set you up for the most productive day, or it's going to feel the best.

It's all about optimization.

Most, most, most.

And here we're actually saying, yeah, maybe we'll get there.

That'd be great.

But just where we are, how could we reduce our uncertainty?

Like maybe every morning you wake up and you're not sure whether you're going to take mechanism A of commute or B. So how could we start by reducing uncertainty and decreasing anxiety about the coming day, increasing clarity,

and then asking not what is the optimal state, but what's the optimal experiment and policy that's within our scope of affordances, not like waking up and instantly going to the strange attractor of thinking that something could be a different way.

We can focus on our policies.

And then this beyond internalism and externalism, it's just so critical because it's sort of the false dialectic of like worrying about oneself only

and then disregarding systemic issues versus getting extremely obsessed with systemic issues and then losing the sight of the affordances that we do have.

And in the middle is the compromised language, but we're gonna not just be in the middle, we're gonna be all over the map.

And we're gonna be able to dive into the internalist thinking when we need it, we're gonna be diving into the externalist thinking when we need it.

but we're always going to be able to return to the fullness of the niche and what's possible and getting other people's perspectives on the issue.

So that's, I think, a market difference in active inference.

Let's go on to the next slide.

So this one's just kind of a little fun single question.

I was just wondering, what does a script look like?

And so...

The movie script, this is the Lethal Weapon 4 autographed edition script, one of a kind.

That's a movie script.

So the words are syntactically encoded and maybe the semantics are suggested or it gives stage directions like a dramatic script.

And then in the middle is this like peer pressure script.

Like what's the script that keeps people driving on the right side of the road in America and on the left side of the road in the UK?

That is something that's enforced by semiotic cues like signs and counterfactuals.

Like if I were to drive on the other side of the road, I would be in the felony script or something like that.

But how does peer pressure play out and how do we visualize it?

And then just...

a big unknown is what do these active inference scripts look like?

How would we communicate the scripts?

And so instead of using a movie dialogue to convey some of these probabilistic things or the peer pressure narrative to talk about some of these things, is there another visualization or representation?

Just, I'm not sure.

If anyone has thoughts, yeah, RJ, or then anyone else, go ahead.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think I don't know if I'm pretty sure I'm pretty sure the graphic was in was in the was in the slides last time was like kind of, you know, just just, you know, 2D representation of the axes of like strong script to weak script and internalist externalist.

And the paper itself tried to show that it's like, look, these don't have to be divergent views.

They're just different perspectives.

Yeah, that's it.

Yep.

And I feel like the actor's script is just

it's a continuum, it's a very strong externalist script.

You're either performing the script exactly or it's not being performed, it's not happening.

Then you have like, I brought up Always Sunny last time.

It's like to show that allows for a lot more improvisation.

So the scripts they use while strong and externalist aren't as strong as say Lethal Weapon, right?

But then peer pressure,

is something that's far more internalist.

So your interpretation of what you think the script is and maybe talking with people about what you think the script is and trying to work that out.

And it's a weak script where it's like, you can even see there that like in the picture that it's like, not everybody is acting out the same exact script and like, you know, like not the same exact movements.

Whereas you look at something like, you know, opposite end of the script

um, the, the political representation may be represented as like, you know, um, uh, or, or I'm trying to think like historically, uh, like, like, um, uh, you know, um, during, during the third Reich, it's like, these were mixes of, um, of internalist scripts of what you think you're supposed to be acting out.

But then there's also these strong scripts involved where it's like, you are supposed to make exactly these motions, et cetera.


SPEAKER_01:
Great points there.

And yes, the peer pressure, I put it up there partially because it so directly calls us to move beyond internalism and externalism.

I mean, what could be more external than other people?

Yet at the same time, what could be more internal

psychologically or neurophysiologically than your interpretation of peer pressure.

And then on the strong versus weak, just like you brought up, what could be weaker than an invisible and lightly guiding force in some cases?

Like, hey, peer pressure is like, you should wear shoes that have tied laces, but no one's going to like freak out.

But there's other peer pressure things that people will freak out.

And that's a strong script.

If 100% of the time that something happens socially enacted, another thing happens, it's quite strong because 100% of the time from state A, it moves to state B mediated by an external force.

So that's strong and external.

But there's other cases where it's weak and internal, at least in how it appears.

And again, the goal of active inference isn't to be like, yep, we judge strong versus weak and it's strong.

It's rather to see this continuum as an area of theoretical dispute, yes, but now just a parameter in our way of thinking about the world so that there can be subcomponents or different people in the same crowd who are experiencing very different realities or having very different experiences

sort of generative statistics for their decision making based upon some of these features we're discussing but yeah very interesting any other thoughts on the visualization otherwise there's um there's more we'll talk to because um it'll be good to have time for these two figures is that good all right let's go to these um two figures in the last half hour and just

Start out with just what are they showing?

Because especially for those on the social sciences side, it might be like, whoa, interesting conversation about the scripts and the chair and the being and the becoming, but what are these variables and circles and lines?

So let's think about making that bridge between the qualitative things and the experiential and the social that we've been discussing with a more mathematical way that we're gonna be returning to in all these different conversations.

So, and as always, people could just raise their hand, but we're going to do maybe 10 to 15 minutes on each of these two figures.

So figure one in this paper is a simple generative model for policy selection.

And in ACT-INF, policy is always pi, p for policy.

So this is what is being estimated.

The schematic depicts a generative model for policy selection.

It represents probabilistic beliefs about, and then all of this is color coded.

So the first thing is A. A is a probabilistic belief

about how observations are related to the states that cause them.

So here's observations.

This is like red photon on my retina.

And this state is like, I'm wearing a red shirt, okay?

So then there's this mapping.

In this case, it's pretty simple, where if there's a red shirt and the lights are on, then I'm gonna get red photons on my retina.

But one could imagine that there's state estimates that are social, like this person is unhappy with me.

And there's some probability mapping onto different observations of body language,

or of words, for example.

So that's the A matrix.

It links the state estimates of the world to observations.

And A happens instantaneously in time.

Now B is where we start taking lateral moves.

And this diagram goes from the left, initial conditions, to the right through the time steps.

One, two, three.

This is discrete time.

And B, moving us from left to the right, is mapping states onto each other.

So if we were talking about the red shirt, well, if you're wearing a red shirt at one moment, basically 100% of the time, you're wearing a red shirt at the next moment.

So that's one simple format.

Or it could be, again, social.

Like given my estimates of this person, what do I estimate the transition matrix is?

So knowing this person, they get unhappy really fast, but it's really easy to bring them back to being happy.

Or they're always happy, but once they get unhappy, they're going to stay in that state for a while.

So you can imagine like a matrix where the on and the off diagonals are different values.

And that captures whether once somebody is in a certain state, is it an attractor state or a dwell state?

Is it a state that they evacuate very rapidly, like balancing on one foot?

So that's what's captured in this B matrix is how things change through time.

D is the initial conditions.

So those are states prior to sampling the world.

So that's like when we start having a conversation, I am estimating your initial conditions for that conversation.

It's not that I know nothing about you.

I'm bringing in my estimate of before the conversation, before I started sampling in this epoch, where were you at?

And then in the top, we have G, which includes C, which is the preferences and the outcome matrices.

And so G, that's definitely unpacking equations for another day, for 11, as well as for other discussions.

But let's just clarify this upper half.

G bears on the selection of policy.

That's why in active inference, we're so obsessed with free energy and how it relates to control theory, cybernetics, policy selection.

Because all of the coolness of free energy is that it's a different way of thinking about how policy selection occurs.

So that's why G has an arrow pointing down to pi.

Now pi is influencing only Bs.

So this is what's pretty interesting is what is being estimated by the agent is like this whole graph, okay?

But the connections within the model that are relevant are not from policy to state.

So it's not saying how will states be different as a function of me with this investing strategy or of me with this social strategy or me with this navigation strategy, how will the states be different?

Actually, it's policy to state transition matrices.

So this is like saying, if I undertake a policy where I exercise every day, then I believe that the state transition matrix from being unhealthy to being healthy will be modified.

Not that I will move from unhealthy to healthy.

That's the state estimator.

That'd be policy to state.

And it does result in the same conclusion functionally, but it's actually very, very different from a mathematical and from a programmatic standpoint to say that the policy estimate bears on how states transition into each other.

not just at the first level of what the states will be.

So again, I can do policy one, two, three, four, five, and instead of saying, well, if I do policy one, then I would estimate that this state is most likely.

And if I do policy two, this state is most likely.

That's the old way of thinking.

The B matrix way of thinking is under policy one, the world is apt to change in this way.

Under policy two, the world is apt to change in this way.

And then

that is related back to affordances and preferences in the C matrix, as well as other components of G that include for like the curiosity and the maintenance of rewarding states and all these other features.

So what this graph is showing again, just to sort of close out this little section

is we're unpacking this idea of policy selection.

So just like if we were picking out how to drive from point A to point B, we're unpacking this policy selection with an eye towards social interactions.

So where the state estimates are like whether the person is happy or unhappy with me, what are the observations I'm gonna see and how do those get mapped to each other?

What is their state through time or my state through time?

And then how does that change?

What were the initial conditions that set up the first observation we got?

And then as a function of a lot of cool stuff, the sort of bulk of the iceberg in G, how can policies be selected to shape the way that states transition to each other in a way that's most aligned with how I want the world to be?

then agents that succeed in that succeed and those that don't don't so i hope that that sort of conveyed some of the attributes of this graph any thoughts or questions or what's another context where this graph could be sort of lifted up and placed down upon yeah so while people are thinking and raising their hand

Again, I would just try to give one more bridge to the onboarding to Active Inference side, because for those who are familiar with the formalism, this is not even the full formalism.

They've probably already seen more expanded versions.

But for those for whom this type of diagram is relatively novel in a social sciences setting, just always keep in mind that no matter how many letters, how many edges, superscript, subscript, Greek letters, Cyrillic letters, whatever there is,

we're trying to just be specific about what we're talking about and find a generalization or structure that allows us to map structurally analogies from different social settings.

So this could be so many different systems will fit under this type of model, as well as, and importantly, that strong versus weak, internal versus external,

idea that we were talking about earlier so we can have the initial conditions be me going outside with no shoes and here's somebody else estimating um things about me or me estimating things about other people or this could be um the initial conditions of hamlet in a given production or this could be the initial conditions of 2020 and so how in all of those different areas that qualitatively we were talking about how scripts could be used

how are we going to find a sort of skeleton scaffold that all these other situations will be able to kind of hang on in a way that respects the specifics about their situation, as well as might even provide us with new knowledge.

So for some of you that might be hearing it twice the same way in a row, for some of you, it might be zero.

And maybe for others, it's in the middle.

Any thoughts though, before we go to the next figure, which is probably a bit richer.

All right, let's look at the next figure.

So anyways, this was the skeleton generative model.

So hopefully we just familiarized ourself with the idea that things about social situations could be abstracted and represented with vectors and matrices and policy.

Now we're gonna take that to, and here's in the paper where they write about how that could map.

Now let's look at a little bit more expanded of an example.

Okay, so now we're looking at not just the agent, but also the agent and the world, or what are called here the internal realizer and the external realizer.

Because in figure one,

we were just looking at basically the internalist perspective.

We were just looking at, you know, you could imagine that a brain were doing that or a computer were doing that, but there's nothing about the world.

There's no, there's an estimate of the world state, but there isn't an actual world state in this model.

So this is purely internal to the agent.

Now, let's look at figure two.

Figure two is where we're going to start to bring in the world, and we're going to bring it in at a very specific position, and that is generating the observations.

That's really crucial.

The world doesn't intervene by jumping into the internal model.

Now, it might, in reality, this is the instrumentationalism of active inferences.

We're going to model it as if the only interface that the world could have is with observations.

And so in this figure one, the only inputs to the model were basically the initial conditions and then the observables.

And now we're picking right up here at the bottom of the figure, and we're going to graft the world in.

So here's those observations.

And those observations are being generated by world states, which are 11.

So here, reading from the caption.

On the side of the external world, there's only one process in play, which is the likelihood of observation states the world, 11, and the transitions between these states in nine.

That's down here.

Okay, so this, from the point of view of the agent,

is the generative process that's creating the observations.

So like there's a shirt that's generating the red photons that is hitting my retina, for example.

But here's what's really interesting is this model of hidden state mapping observation, transition matrix, change in state, emittance matrix observation again, that is what we just saw in figure one.

flipped 180 degrees, state estimate and transition matrix, and then leading to observations.

That is this deep and fundamental symmetry that has been explored by Axel Constant, Yelle, Brunnenberg, and others.

It's this idea that we're going to do this mathematical phrasing where like, we know which side we're on.

We know which side is the internal side and which side is enclosed by the epithelium.

But mathematically, look at 7, 5, 8, 5, 7.

and similarly 11 10 9 10 11. here you just have observation in the middle it's on the interface that's like the retina being hit by the photon and then there's a mapping on the internal side from the agent through some type of likelihood matrix to the observations so the agent is like reading

It's trying to say, what is the hidden state five given observation?

So what is the best seven to estimate five given the observation?

And then what is eight?

What's the transition matrix from five to five?

And then similarly for the next time step.

And then on the other side, it's the exact same, except the key difference is that in the case of the internal agents, we have six.

And so in six, we have policy.

Here it's a flirting policy, but in the world, there are things that change state to state in the world, but we don't have policy control.

We don't have agency over those states.

And so then in order to select policy, we have that G and that's kind of where we see the similarity to figure one.

So it's just a very interesting formulation.

I'm sure each person's gonna see their own thing in it and let's have some conversation or questions about what's unclear here, but we're setting up the world and the agent, the heuristic description of the generative model of the niche and of the agent.

We're setting them up in this intertwined and inextricable, but also deeply symmetrical way.

where if it was an agent who's like an organism and the niche is the forest, so the forest doesn't enact any strategy.

It has a certain layout of acorns, but that's not a strategy.

That's like a chair for the squirrel.

And then the squirrel is the active inferring agent that's gonna be doing things in this forest.

So we can capture that here.

But also if it was squirrel versus squirrel combat and each squirrel was going to be having a generative model of the other squirrel having a generative model of it, these are higher order theory of mind, recursive theory of mind.

It would be embedded in recursive because it'd be like about other active inference agents in the world.

And it could be deep.

It could be temporally deep.

It could include counterfactuals.

It could include affect or valence.

That's what we'll be talking about in 11.

But it's set up in this way that's very parsimonious because in the limit, it allows for a true symmetry across the interface, across the blanket in the niche, where the niche can be learning and making a model of the agent and vice versa.

So in the extreme, it allows for that type of richness of agent-agent dynamics, or this could be reduced to two inanimate objects.

So if there's two rocks that are just two bumps on a log,

and they're not doing free energy minimization or recursive estimation of anything, they're just doing what they're doing with a certain state transition matrix, that can be captured within a reduced version of this framework.

So yeah, not trying to rant on it, but I just think that's kind of an interesting piece of it.

And we often come back to this idea of niche construction.

And it's like, wait, isn't control theory about what's the best strategy?

Where's niche construction coming into play?

Internalism, externalism?

It's like, we're moving beyond internalism and externalism because we're saying you always need both.

You're always gonna need both.

And there's gonna be many types of interfaces.

One important interface is seven and observations, which is like the sensory states, the sensory capacities of the organism, the umwelt, and the actual observations themselves.

That's like the handshake or the API call that actually crosses the interface.

Those are critical, but almost by definition,

Because if there's something that doesn't cross the interface on the inbound side, like a sense data that doesn't hit a neuron, or on the outbound side, like an action that doesn't act, if it doesn't cross the interface and make the connection, it's almost like it didn't happen.

And so we define the interface in terms of the connections that do happen

And then we can always be sure to be talking about relevant features of the world and always in a way that moves beyond simple conceptions of internalist versus externalist.

We'll have the ability to find situations where the internal features, given a certain blanket of analysis, dominate the dynamics of the system.

Or where given the inclusion of certain parameters or in a certain timescale of analysis, the external features dominate it.

But

But no one can say that's really a win for externalism or a win for internalism.

It's just a description of a situation.

So I think it's an example about how we move beyond some of these theoretical and literature grounded abstractions with a more abstract and general framework that actually lets us be more specific

in the projects.

So we kind of escape this uncanny valley of whose team is better, internalism or externalism.

We're going to escape that valley by taking one step towards abstraction by like, whoa, what if we thought about the agent in the world as acting across an interface in the most general possible way?

But it turns out that by framing it as an interface, we're gonna be able to be very, very specific about the narratives of radicalization or the kinds of cues that are exchanged in a flirting relationship.

Whereas if you're in the debate of internalism, externalism, you could have whole academic conferences on,

narratives of radicalization or behaviors of flirting and potentially the people would leave that meeting still feeling like their side had won so there wouldn't be a true conceptual synthesis so again a little bit another spiral away another tangent but that's why these kinds of formalizations and specifically graphical and computable ways of thinking about them can bring clarity to some of these long-standing qualitative questions and also necessitate the collaboration of

basically quantitative and qualitative expertises.

RJ?


SPEAKER_03:
So I've seen, like, not exactly this graphic, but throughout each of the papers, especially the ones Fristin's involved with, there's always some iteration of it and some iteration of explanation of active inference.

And one thing that I've seen alluded to in the words, but not in the graphic,

is this updating of the observation itself.

And maybe this is being represented here, and I'm not seeing it.

But what I find is like, and I'll get to why this is fairly important to me in a second.

But it seems like, well, in any process of sense making, we have this induction.

And at the state of induction, you're actually like, before you're getting to trying to parse meaning, you're trying to check

whether or not what you've observed is even the correct observation.

So it's the double take.

And this is one of the reasons in intelligence analysis that collection is separated

from, from, from your, your all other elements of the production cycle, because what they're trying to do is they're trying to make sure that there's not this like constant seduction of going back and checking again, checking again, checking again, they're trying to make it so that there's pipeline.

So when something comes in, it's going up the pipe.

It's not your job to look any further into whether or not what you saw with meant something or whether or not it was correct, or it's just report what you saw, push it through.

And now it's not your problem anymore.

It's up.

It's up somebody else's problem.

Right.

So like now at the at the scale of the individual, though, we're constantly double checking ourselves whether or not we saw we thought we saw.

So like if I'm if I'm reading a paper and I find, you know, something cited and I kind of.

know where that's coming from.

So this happened when a few people on this call, we were working together on a paper for active inference and behavioral engineering.

And I was looking into a spirit decor.

And while I was doing that, there was a big problem because there were so many different interpretations of what a spirit decor meant.

So what ended up happening is every time I saw the words, I'm checking myself and going, wait, am I actually observing what I think I'm observing?

I'm checking against priors and I'm updating my observation.

So what I'm kind of wondering is like,

One, is this represented in this graphic and I'm not seeing it?

And then two, I know that over time we're starting to see actual computational models using active inference, are those models, if they were applied in an agent-based model or applied in machine learning, are those models trying to act that process out of checking back on the observation and making sure that it's actually observing what it thinks it's observing?

rather than just taking data in.


SPEAKER_01:
Does that make sense?

Yep.

Thanks for the question, RJ.

It is lightly indicated in this figure, as with the other figure, there's a movement from left to right.

The nodes are numbered by the kind of things that they are.

And so it's lightly indicated where the direction of time is going with these dotted arrows.

So like, for example, the first 10 on the bottom left, that's like a hidden state of the world, right?

And through an 11, it emits an observation at time point one.

Then there's a transition matrix nine.

And so if you did hourly checkpoints, the nine matrix that you calculate is going to be the hourly transition matrix.

If you do one minute

checkpoints, like a discrete time with an interval of one, nine is going to be a different matrix.

So it's kind of like how the candle chart of a stock or a crypto looks different depending on what time length the candle is.

So it's not the same matrix for all time intervals.

It's always model interval dependent.

But nine moves us from the left 10 to the right 10.

And then at that 10, again, it's the type 10, not like node number 10, it emits through the same or a different 11, another observation.

Now, the early models, all the 11s were fixed.

So like the hidden state could go from daytime to nighttime, but like the 11 was fixed.

And then you could imagine that a more advanced version of the model would be like, yeah, actually the hidden state through time, it changes in how it emits 11.

Okay, now flip the interface.

Seven is perceiving the observation, the left seven.

And then it's doing estimation of the hidden state S. So that, or five, it just looks like an S and it is S in the models.

So it's kind of like at each time point, we have this like 10 hidden state of the world emits through 11 in observation.

That's on the interface.

That's that holographic boundary that Chris Fields is going to help us understand.

Then on the organism side, the internalist side, seven does a state estimate five.

Then we move through time.

The organism updates its estimate through time with eight and the world updates its actual state with nine, its hidden state.

And then there's another time point, another stack of that.

And so in the example that you gave with like going back and double checking information,

It's like you get an observation at one moment and then whether or not it's concordant with something, at least you're instantaneously sure of what it is.

But then here's another dimension that the computational models are going into, which is at each time point, it calculates an integral through time of policy.

So that's the part where we're gonna talk about it in 11 and a few other ones.

But the simplest model would be like, again, red shirt or black shirt.

And then it's like the photon is the observation and the state estimates pretty straightforward.

It's like a two by two matrix.

There's an unchanging characters in the matrix because the red shirt always emits red and there's no ambiguity.

Okay, now we can start to relax those assumptions and we can think about, okay, maybe there's more ambiguity in the signal

Maybe there's a non-stationary 11 matrix.

Maybe we can learn seven.

We can learn better about how observations are related to world states.

Maybe we can learn eight better, which is sort of like trying to reflect nine.

We can learn about how states in the world transition better.

And we can learn better policies too, better sixes, but that what we've just been focused on is really just the loop with the 10, 9, 10, 9 in the world, 5, 8, 5, 8 in the agent.

And then this interface that has a symmetry of the sevens and the 11s around the observation itself.

so yes they're the kinds of things that people are starting to roll out but i think that especially if you watch 11 coming up you'll get a sense at how rudimentary these rollouts are really it's at like the uh ibm chess 1995 status where like many many branches of counterfactuals are being processed and then evaluated

and more modern chess computers don't use this branch rollout evaluation strategy in the same way so we're still in a very early stage that's basically um defining what that rollout would be through time and then there will be other ways of heuristically approximating very good rollouts sasha


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, nice.

Thanks for walking through that on the diagram with all the numbers.

Yeah, just some things that RJ reminded me of is in thinking about data collection.

it would be great if we could separate the data collection from the data interpretation and acting on it.

And, you know, in formalized kind of scientific approaches, we can do that.

Like, I'm just thinking about my own work when I do microscopy and I'm looking at some cells under a microscope and I might have like an emotional reaction to how they look, which is like,

They look really good and I want to analyze them or something went terribly wrong and they look like not even cells at this point.

So I think part of going through this process is being able to separate the individual steps.

So I have to actively prevent myself from... Yeah.

kind of throwing in the towel preemptively when I don't, when the data doesn't meet my expectations until I go to the next step of like randomizing and analyzing it such that I can remove my expectations and just try to collect what is there.

And I think that

Yeah, that's something that's nearly impossible to do in the human experience, that we can't really separate the data collection from the data interpretation.

And yeah, it just moves too fast.

And then in the realm of uncertainty and what does this word mean in different contexts, as RJ was saying, that is the kind of thing that in teaching, we try to think

You know, if you don't know every single word in what we're learning today, it's going to be really hard to build on any next level concepts.

So and students will often say, like, well, I don't really know this word, so I don't know.

But the first thing to do is to, like, just look up what the word means so that you can move past that uncertainty and move on to move on to the next layers of things.

And so that really, to me, makes me think of like social anxiety and people not being able to interpret social cues appropriately and that creating uncertainty, which is just like it kind of snowballs once you're uncertain about one aspect of an interaction or a script.

You kind of are prevented from participating in the next levels or carrying out the script.

And so that perhaps is something interesting to discuss in next week's interactions, discussions.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Thanks.

I think that question especially, Sasha, really makes me think about script design.

And we're talking about the analysis and the descriptive ways of talking about systems, but also about designing the scene and the stage.

I think Steven dropped off, but is somebody with drama experience, performance experience, social performance, performing our roles, a lot of these terms are starting to blend together.

with the mask and previously that would be seen as dramatic or ritualized now it's seen as a matter of public safety so many of these things are actually coming together in a way where we can um certainly within our own life if not at a higher level ask about what kind of scripts we want to design for moving forward especially about the uncertainty from all these different issues so um

Here's just a couple of questions I wanted to throw up.

We only have, you know, three minutes.

So really just for the listeners live or in replay to add comments or start a discussion in whatever platform we're using, just questions like thinking about how this could be a unifying topic.

How could this be a valuable model?

What unique insights are we looking for?

How could we rethink our experiences?

What would be,

explanations or predictions and what would be next steps for the research and um

Thanks for participating.

I'm going to just pause it on this final slide as we hear our last thoughts.

So everyone prepare a little last thought if you'd like.

And to listeners, thanks for listening.

We will have follow-up forums for the live participants.

It's in the calendar invite.

And anyone is welcome to provide us with feedback and stay in touch.

But for the last three minutes, let's just hear from our panelists.

Anybody who would like to, what is a last thought?

What's something you're still wondering about?

Or now that we're done with 10, where does that leave us?

What are some last thoughts?

RJ and then Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
So I think we did find some conclusion on what can't use a script.

Um, but, uh, I still don't feel like we have a good conclusion on what a script isn't.

What is that line?

So, um, I'm going to be thinking about that the next week and I hope we touch on that next discussion.

Awesome bloop.


SPEAKER_05:
So I'm just wondering, left really wondering, where can we use this to engineer social behavior or to change scripts that are perhaps unnecessary or unwanted in society, like radicalization scripts or things like that?

So that's where I'm left.

How do we then go out and apply what we've learned?


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Either of the Sashas or Avant.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, similar to Blue, I'm left thinking about what is the application of active inference in scripts.

And I guess instead of feeling unsatisfied, I feel excited about it.

That's my perspective.

But it seems that maybe at the end of the last conversation, I felt ambivalent or confused about scripts.

And now I'm a bit more...

directed in their use or their possibilities.

So I'm really happy to kind of have talked through this and find a way out.


SPEAKER_01:
That makes me feel excited about scripts that hold space specifically for things like freedom of expression or speech or improvisation.

It's like a protection within the script.

This is the part of the song where there's a drum solo.

So for this part, you get to play in time.

And then for this part, it gets to be wacky.

And so in that way we can, and like Blue is saying as well with the design, we could be able to converge on scripts that protect certain freedoms as intrinsic to the structure of the script and being able to have a discussion about that that is nuanced, like we hopefully are representing and learning how to represent here.

that could be a really productive discussion instead of just about rights versus all these other things that can get tangled down in so everybody thanks so much for participating and for the great discussion as always this is it for 10.

We will have 11 in the final two weeks of December 2020, the 11th hour, the 11th Act-Inf stream.

And then we will have 12.

The clock will strike midnight on Act-Inf 2020, and we will be heading into a very exciting 2021.

So thanks again for listening and for participating, and see you later.