## hHhIUocRkts

All right. Hello everyone. Welcome back
to the active inference uh institutees
textbook reading group. Uh today this is
cohort 7 wrapping up with chapter 10.
It's been quite a journey through uh the
first part of the book which as we know
is a bit more focused on formalisms on
theory on anything from marov blankets
to wrapping our heads around
hierarchical uh variational message
passing in microcortical circuits as
well as looking at sort of a basian
framework for doing updating and then
linking that to action and perception
and action perception loops.
uh from the active inference framework
perspective. And then with the second
part of the textbook, we saw a lot more
in terms of application models. We had a
recipe for active inference ranging from
uh defining our generative models, our
generative processes, considering
different kinds of components for
models, likelihood and state transition
matrices, looking at the discrete case
versus the continuous case and all the
rest. And then our last chapter for this
cohort prior to chapter 10, chapter
nine, we were looking at what what
happens whenever we want to actually fit
models to empirical data. Whenever we
want to do group analysis, uh, and and
kind of wrapping our heads around the
idea of composing a subjective model for
our agents, then having our own kind of
model of the agents model. So something
like metabasian modeling or analysis.
Now the chapter 10 which kind of sticks
out a little bit uh a bit of an outlier
in the the second part of the book. It's
almost as if they could have written a
third part of the book that would have
been labeled something like you know
active inference and its connections. We
saw in this chapter that we're actually
no
longer directly talking about kind of
the mechanical or or sort of of of uh
engineering aspects of creating or
testing or fitting models. Now we're
just kind of wrapping up with looking at
the inter relationships between active
inference and a variety of other fields.
Both fields from which active inference
kind of grew as well as fields to which
it can contribute and uh and those which
fall within both of those prior
categories. So in uh the introduction to
chapter 10 we're uh described uh it's
described to us active inference is a
complete solution to sentient organisms
adaptive problems which attempts to
provide a unified perspective on action
selection perception attention and even
emotion regulation. Uh that list could
continue on and on actually for those of
us who have kept up throughout the book.
Um and it's kind of reiterating you know
we know that active inference is
essentially a unified it's a normative
framework operating from first
principles brings back the old uh neats
and scruffies uh argument or debate from
the first chapter of the book where we
are in the realm of the neats although
we certainly would not uh deny a scruffy
or two uh especially to welcome them
into the fold if they so chose um in In
section 10.3 there's a pretty inf
interesting quote uh from Daniel Dennett
the late Daniel Dennett of course and uh
his suggestion to kind of model the
whole iguana uh with active inference uh
we we we do something like that in an
attempt to create proxies of reality
whether it be creating a model to
simulate in silicone or it be to fit a
model to a a real world organism or
phenomena or otherwise where here free
energy minimization acts as a kind of
first a first principle by which we can
derive implications about specific
cognitive processes in their neuronal
underpinnings. So active inference takes
a kind of inactive integrative approach
to things like preference realization,
self-evidencing, self-preservation. And
we're reminded of homeostasis or or as
well as alostostasis or a kind of
homeostasis of the future. Uh the idea
that you know we have bound there's
bounded rationality that that organisms
and agents and so on kind of exist
within their immediate context. They
come with you know their their own
histories or memories and and beliefs
that they're you know actively kind of
updating and and also testing through
action. And then um we we're we're
reminded again of the self-evidencing
aspect of action perception. Both of
these are self-evidencing in the sense
that they both lead to the agent
aligning its expectations given its
generative model by either changing the
world or changing its mind. So memory
and attention also are thought to be
optimizing the same objective. Long-term
memory develops through learning model
parameters. Remember that learning
operates at a somewhat slower time scale
than than inference itself which
inference is usually seen as kind of a
real time moment to moment process.
Whereas learning could happen it was
just slowly or you could imagine like
it's almost like a a mouse in the T-mase
uh moment by moment position from
position uh or to position in the T-maze
as they move left or right or visit the
informative queue at at the speed of
real-time inference. You might say, you
know, perhaps after the entire trial,
you know, they achieved the cheese or
unfortunately they didn't and they, you
know, obtained a a negative stimulus.
Uh, in either case, it's kind of like
maybe after the whole trial, that's
where you kind of take in the whole
experience as it were and maybe that's
where learning happens or maybe it
happens at another time or maybe it
happens during sleep, you know, which
which we certainly uh interestingly do.
Of course, our brains are never fully
off, right? So there there's variety of
processes that occur during sleep and
including uh the kind of modeling terms
would be both parameter learning as well
as structure learning. You know it's
interesting to see what a night of sleep
does you whenever you uh are are working
on a problem and then suddenly the next
day maybe you feel as if you've realized
the answer or at least have found some
kind of clarity that you didn't have
prior.
Um see we're also reminded of uh you
know the the deep relationship between
active inference and when we're talking
about action perception planning all
these kinds of things they not just look
at you know neuronal processes in the
brain but it also has heavy overlap with
a lot of uh ideas from of course
cognitive science as well as kind of uh
psychology in a broader sense. You know
there there are interesting papers for
those who might be interested in uh
psychology and you know there's uh um
some interesting work that's been done
on trying to relate you know that active
inference though it is operating first
principles it of course I mean the whole
point of chapter 10 is not to say oh
this is a first principles kind of
framework and therefore we reject all
else instead it is it is kind of opening
doors to interdisciplinary
um uh communication, dialogue and so on.
And so it's just you know interesting
work that's been done on trying to make
the you know make the point that there
sometimes it's more of a matter of
ontology your your your terminology you
use and your respective onlogical take
or or what words are in your vocabulary
for describing different kinds of
processes or phenomena or perhaps even
the word process has a different meaning
from one field to another, right? Um but
uh nonetheless they do uh kind of
discuss some other things that that I
always kind of emphasize whenever I
describe active inference to others. You
bec because with with the kinds of work
that can be done in active inference,
say in psychology or something like
precision psychiatry and you know the
the notion that that a neurotransmitter
might be modeled as a kind of precision
or attention related or or synaptic gain
related parameter over a distribution in
a model. Um, you know, we're we're we're
we're finding, especially today, the
relationship between a lot of these kind
of cognitive science and and and and
kind of psychological sciences like
concepts and notions, but actually being
able to find different ways to
approximate them or or or even test them
and fit them to experimental data using
modern machine learning, reinforcement
learning. Active inference in some ways
can be interpreted as a kind of
variation of reinforcement learning. Um,
and so it's it's just kind of leveraging
modern tools, technologies, and so on,
not just to try and create the next kind
of superhuman AI, but
to actually find ways where possible to
kind of, you know, model the dynamic or
or or causal relationships
um in in living organisms or or uh in
broader processes or modeling, you know,
potentially entire uh societies in some
way and looking at collective emergent
collective behavior otherwise and so
it's I like to emphasize sort of um the
work of someone who collaborated with uh
Carl Friston at one point in time uh uh
Yori Busousaki uh who who's a I took a
lot of influence from he's done a lot of
work in kind of like rhythmic uh
processes in in in in neuronal activity
looking at things like gamma versus beta
and alpha uh frequency bands as has kind
of extracted through uh and and engaged
in with like spectral analysis when
looking at neuroiming data. And uh he
and many others have been making the
point that you know the cognitive and
psychological sciences should perhaps
today be a little bit more wary of uh of
you know a really brilliant mind that
was William James in in the 19th
century. But but we should maybe be wary
of kind of a lot of these inherited
Jamesian categories which quote despite
their great horistic value may be quite
arbitrary or they may not correspond to
separate cognitive and neural processes.
So the authors here again they they
reference Busaki as well for example
whose work suggests a more critical
stance towards using James as a
theoretical springboard from which to
kind of confine our empirical
undertakings. Though James' work should
not be neglected per se, Busaki advised
an inside out approach to neuroscience
and neurobiology such that mechanisms
and neural underpinnings are studied at
or alongside if not prior to determining
the supposed cognitive mechanisms
mechanisms in play. And you know there's
a kind of um you know in an interview he
said like oh we'll take any you know
college level psychology class and look
at a lot of the terminology that's being
used then and then go to you know some
of William James's classic work and have
a look at the table of contents and
you'll realize there's a lot of the same
terms that we're using today right like
perception and perception kind of you
know is broken into so many different
sorts of meanings and and uh is used
differently and there you know debates
over what perception is and active
inference kind of inserts itself into
that debate to say, "Oh, yeah, there's
perception, but we don't just passively
perceive things, which is kind of a a
kind of uh artifact of the the 19th
century and and its its take on on
something like what was emerging in it
later called psychology, which is, you
know, the idea that we're just kind of
passively taking in sensory stimuli. Uh,
instead we're acting in the world,
right? and we pick up objects and we
look at them from different angles and
we sort of test our beliefs, you know,
and that's part of the learning or and
inferential process. And again, that
kind of bounded rationality notion,
right? We're in bodies and we're, you
know, we're functioning. Um, all this is
to say, uh, it it it's it's interesting
one to to kind of kind of situate active
inference within a broader historical
context, one that is contending with
sort of, you know, the history of of of
of psychology and the in and the social
and behavioral uh, and cognitive
sciences and also looking at it in the
context of, you know, today the world of
of AI where you could you could
effectively make an active inference
agent who who does a variety of things
that anyone would want them to do as far
as something like reinforcement learning
goes, right? Like they're they're taking
in data or observations and then
they're, you know, doing different kinds
of inferial processes and then emitting
some kind of output depending on what
kind of actuators you connect to it,
right? So if you get it, you give it
arms and then it can maybe move its arms
um and and so on. So, so the the book
nonetheless is is trying to kind of kind
of rally together a lot of these
different disciplines, you know. So, we
we look at um anything from cybernetics
and kind of control theory. We look at
its relation to more general notions of
of predictive processing uh which is a
rather broad category also relationship
to predictive coding is a sort of subset
or variation of predictive processing.
uh we're you know kind of re-
reintroduced to the basian brain
hypothesis which is you know heavily
related of course the notion of the
brain uh does something like you know
it's it's it's it's still a matter of
debate if if we're saying it expressly
does this or if it does something like
but we could say at minimum for active
inference it does something like
updating its beliefs using some kind of
prior information right in order to
infer some sort of updated belief or a
posterior uh belief
And then uh we're looking at action
control theory, idiom motor theory
reminded of you know um proprioception
and and kind of you know motor commands
and movement uh utility and decision
making which then can start to kind of
actually look like something like
economics and we know that uh there are
these risk terms that are kind of
interpreted from some variation the uh
variations of the expected free energy
formula. Um again behavior bounded
rationality
um veilance emotion and motivation. Uh
I've personally always kind of found
that interesting and that touches kind
of on psychology again uh and and
cognitive science. But uh I I've I've
repeatedly shared this paper with others
just because I think it's kind of
enlightening for those who are kind of
starting to get more deeply into active
inference. It seems like people commonly
come across this one uh deeply felt
affect which is a few years old now. Um
but it it it just you know a lot of
these kind of names on the paper are you
know some of the kind of the early kind
of who have done a lot of the the kind
of heavy lifting with developing active
inference and and sort of finding ways
to formalize it, advance it, uh teach it
and uh who are still very active today.
And this is a nice like you
know in some ways it falls in line with
with in a effective neuroscience the
work of uh there are some who would not
like that I I say this but I still see
the connection with uh with something
like socially constructed affect or not
affect but rather emotion whenever
trying to talk about like what is
emotion what is you know what what does
that mean how does it work so we have
you know in some variations we have like
um punk concept and the idea that
emotion can be broken into like you know
seven or so discrete categories and then
any kind of emotional you know
expression that you see someone have or
they say they're feeling some kind of
emotion it's going to be somewhere in
the realm of of those seven categories
as if they were like clusters that we're
extracting from a bunch of noisy data or
something like that. um you know that
that would then be linked kind of to to
the more archaic area of our of our
brains and be related to evolution. And
we have this and then there are others
who you know do this more socially
constructed idea of emotion where
actually it it aligns with active
inference as far as my take on it goes
which is that you the idea is that
actually it's your body and
interosception that generate a
significant amount of obs you know
signals that we can then observe. So
it's actually it's not that we start
with feeling sad and then we feel a
tightness in the stomach or you know
some some other kind of bodily feeling
you know a feeling of exhaustion or
instead it's the other way around it's
like we start feeling the observations
first then we start to infer like oh I
must be sad right like that it's
actually that kind of direction and and
it's quite similar to active inference
whenever we think of of state in uh
state inference right because the idea
is that you're taking in observations
and then you infer a kind of hidden
state of the world or belief including
beliefs about one's own body and then of
course we have you know human language
is you know a way or attempt to
articulate what those feelings are and
so actually it's saying you're sad is
coming after all of that right um is one
take in any case um you know it's it's
it's very interesting to see like this
is one example of kind of how using an
active inference sort of framework can
can
help us to to interpret or reinterpret a
broad variety of of phenomena just by
kind of relying on or sticking to some
of these normative framework like you
know perspectives on what is what is
hidden state inference and and what does
that say about about uh emotion or
emotionality and then um how do we how
do we construct those things and how do
we you know how do we model them and so
I just thought I'd spend an extra minute
on this just because it's sort of an
example example of you know the many
active inference papers that have been
published. It's like well yes we can
talk about these sort of everyday
phenomena seemingly everyday phenomena
uh you know like like emotion or or or
affect but then what we can do is
actually start to sort of formalize
different kinds of models consider like
okay well if if we did have to make a
model that was simple as possible but no
simpler um what what does that look like
in order to properly model a motion
beyond just you know at some point the
ideal is to fit it to empirical data but
even getting you know Even prior to
that, how do we how do we even start
imagining this? We've had questions in
the past from learners who say, you
know, what what if you have bad what if
you're modeling something? What if your
priors are just bad in the sense of like
what if what if they don't work
appropriately or what if they don't lead
to the sort of the optimal or expected
outcome that you know that we have? Um,
you know, isn't that kind of a funny
thing to, you know, include poor priors
in the beginning? And yet, I
mean, whenever we're getting started on
modeling, we just don't we don't know,
right? You you use prior literature
that's been published or or developed
and ideally, you know, peer-reviewed and
and you move in the direction of, you
know, you have a hypothesis and you so
you end up having your own hypothesis
about the model. uh and then and then
you you kind of try different things and
then you try to fit it to empirical
data. Uh and and that's sort of the
interesting aspect of of active
inference and and other models that kind
of work similarly is that you know it's
you might start with bad priors but over
time uh if if the if the model engages
in different kinds of inference and
learning you know processes then ideally
it gets better. In the same way that
someone who doesn't know calculus can
can sit down and start studying
calculus. They have awful priors
presumably because they haven't learned
anything about it yet. And over time
they learn it, right? Hopefully. So
that's kind of the, you know, we find
ourselves on the outside here. we are
constructing our own kind of objective
model or almost think of it like we're
creating an object out of you know an
agent and and and trying to understand
them and kind of how they work on the
inside right um so uh anything else
um you know I think I've largely covered
a lot of this we also talked about um
attention salience and epistemic
dynamics which is an interesting piece
you know and we didn't cover these terms
too strongly in this in this uh
particular run of the textbook. But uh
we know that that attention is related
to to something like precision. So the
idea of like kind of sharpening one's
precision in the sense of uh you know
how how certain are you uh about your
your beliefs or how certain are you
about about the the the stimuli that
you're receiving, what you're observing,
right? You imagine someone who's kind of
sleepy and so they're not fully taking
in what's going on uh in their in their
visual field for is a kind of a crude
quick example, right? Versus someone
who's, you know, fully taking in uh sort
of the moment, but these very kind of,
you know, everyday use of terms here. Um
but but we've already we've already made
it through a lot of the kind of
mechanical uh aspects and and formula
and hurdles in the textbook up to this
point. So I'm just avoiding rehashing
them. Um relationships with causal
inference. How do you establish
causality in these kinds of models? The
the the nice thing is that whenever you
construct a model like this like we're
constructing
uh if you can view a model kind of as a
graph and then you can kind of start to
look at the flow of it. Or whenever you
look at hierarchical message uh uh
message passing like we saw in chapter
five we can actually see you know we can
start to look at these models as like
nodes and
edges with a kind of directedness in the
in the edges right so me passing matches
uh messages from from one node to
another or or from one variable to some
other uh piece of the model whether it
be you know some some kind of equation
or or or or conditional probability
distribution or otherwise that connects
them and relates them and allows for
inference um or or or reaching kind of a
the end or a kind of like delta or
clamp. Um it is essentially I mean it's
you know the sometimes modeling is as
much an art as it is a a science and I
think many other people would be quite
inclined to agree. Um and then a few
more things you know we already know
that this is heavily related to machine
learning. We saw a lot of examples of of
other models in chapter 4 before we got
to uh the what eventually we understood
to be the POMDP model. It's like yeah if
if you know you create a machine
learning model or a linear regression
model or something more simple but the
idea of being able to take in values
using some kind of transformation in
order to uh you know elicit elicit some
kind of output. Um that that's that's
the broader theme.
um robotics which is which has been very
you know very interesting to see you
know the sort of developments in
robot I've spoken with a couple recent
learners who had interest in uh excuse
me I'll uh find a better way to this um
but there is
a I just I hope I can find this if I
can't if there's anyone who's interested
I'll I'll share again in future but
um this is a few years ago so there's
going to be a lot more by now um active
inference
robotics yeah so I mean there there
there you know last year we did an
entire symposium robotics was a theme um
you know with the with the institute and
then if you just kind of browse around
this is 2019 right uh active inference
for robot control and and there's just
oh this again 2019 I so so it's just a
because because I I think in the theme
of chapter 10 of kind of the breadth of
what active inference can touch upon or
or cover or relate to or inform uh is
this is just like looking at the breadth
of you know these kinds of principles
can be used like in real world settings
uh for those who are interested in like
you know business or enterprise or
production or something like that I mean
you can you know use them to create uh
actual, you know, effective agents who
who operate within the world, right?
Whether whether it be some kind of, you
know, real- time uh online learning, you
know, model that's act, you know,
repeatedly taking in data. It could be,
you know, robotics. We know that from uh
last year there was an active inference
um like a a drone uh that was built uh
in and showcased though sadly there's no
uh there probably is a public video.
somewhere. But um got the
uh
yeah, directions of travel and active
inference. Um anyway, I'm I'm jumping
around a little bit, but it's just to
show that these can relate to a variety
of, you know, fields and of course many
of the the folks who started Fristen and
the rest are are quite familiar with a
lot of these other fields. So it's just
to say that you know active inference is
more so start it's it's starting a
conversation with other fields. It's
it's continuing conversations with other
fields and all the while it's kind of
establishing its own normative framework
which in you know in my opinion is is
highly interpretable because we have a
capacity for relating uh you know a
variety of functionalities and and
formula and equations in models to
actual terms like habits or or planning
or or you know what what is you know
perception and and these other kinds of
things. So, um, is there
anyone who would like to touch on
anything in particular or if this was
Yeah, John, please go for it. Uh, yeah.
So, I have some concerns about some of
the wording in this chapter and I'd like
some clarification.
Um, let's see. I have to doing the
control S thing. Uh,
What? Uh oh. See?
Okay. Sorry. I thought I had this queued
up.
Um to go through again.
[Music]
So, okay. So um one of the one of the
things I have concerns about is it says
that one benefit of active inference is
that it provides a complete solution to
the adaptive problems that a sensient
organism have to solve. Um what do you
mean by that? Because you know for
affordable system can't be complete and
consistent among among other things like
normally if I hear someone say they have
a complete you know framework of
everything that has to do with thought
it sounds a bit odd so I wonder what you
mean by complete.
Mhm. No, good. Uh, no, good pointing
that out. And I am also rather
suspicious whenever someone, you know,
it almost sounds like a sales pitch or
something to say that something's, you
know, full a complete solution, you
know, end all be all. So here I mean
I've always interpreted that
as earlier on in the textbook they they
they give this explanation you know
whether it's necessary or not they give
a explanation of uh what they call the
the neats versus scruffies neats always
seek unification beyond the
heterogeneity of brain and mind
phenomena which usually corresponds to
designing top- down normative models
that start from first principles.
Meanwhile, but just because something's
just because something's from first
principles doesn't mean it's complete,
right? All math is from first principles
and no math can be complete. Yeah. Yeah.
It's so they're not they're not
necessarily saying they're not
necessarily making some broad on kind of
ontological or epistemological
statement. I think from my understanding
of this uh it's kind of a weird thing to
say. So, I wonder what they mean by that
cuz No, it's a good it's a good Well,
what it does do, what I do think they
they mean by it or or what kind of value
there is to take away from that
sentence. So, I I do kind of implicitly
agree that maybe it could have been
rewarded to to make it clearer on what
they're going for. But with I brought up
the neats versus scruffies bit because
in the the scruffy's ideas that there
are a lot of you know uh it's it's kind
of like imagine a lot of researchers who
are sort of you know going against the
grain and they're they're moving in
their own kind of unique direction and
they're going after you know what
whatever it is that's driving them or
they're working with a team or or you
know have some kind of funding or other
whatever it is that's kind of drawing
them towards wanting to hyperfocus or
specialize on a particular phenomena
potentially to the detriment
of looking at other phenomena, then what
happens is you can potentially end up
with someone who's so terribly focused
on perception that they leave out action
or they're so focused on, you know,
planning that they leave out attention.
And so I my take on this is that it's
it's trying to say a complete solution
in the sense that, you know, the book is
focused on something like sentient
organisms. you know what what is the
task that they're trying to solve. Um
active inference is a framework where
it's saying you know they're not trying
to model necessarily the entire brain.
It's kind of focused on a sort of
beliefsbased framework where agents are
trying to, you know, solve a a problem
or a task, whether it be, you know, as
simple as, you know, the autonomic
system who who is who is breathing and
and regulating blood oxygen flow to to a
mouse in a T-mas or an entire society
trying to function within an you know,
an economic system. Uh and and so with
that it's like well now we we have an
understand it provides a kind of
understanding or or solution for
understanding all of these different
phenomena right is it ever going to be
fully complete I mean I that's you know
I well no mathematically impossible
yeah yeah if you want to take that
hardline assumption that this is about
mathematics but I don't know if this
sentence is purely about mathematics is
all I mean to I think it's more it's
more about describing a kind of
perspective and that's the issue right
with with theory is that we're dealing
in words and in sentences and full you
know par that things can get kind of
meshy for lack of a a better word. It's
it's about as ambiguous as I think this
statement could be interpreted as if
looked at from particular angles. So
okay but I I have concerns about this
other phrase too and it's sort of the
same concern because they kind of go
together. It says uh what does it say?
It says evolution appears to have
discovered increasingly sophisticated
design structures for brains and bodies
that made organisms able to deal with
and shape rich ecological niches. Fine.
But then it says modelers can reverse
engineer this process and specify brains
and bodies of the creature of interest
in terms of generative models. Like
really? You know how to build a cat?
It's so with that let's see let me just
make sure I understand it in context
complex
pursu
Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. So I mean I mean in a sense
yes to answer your question in a sense
yeah I mean in so in chapter seven we
look at the teammates example right like
that's like a really simple thing though
it's not like you you couldn't you
couldn't build a cat brain in a
laboratory using that or as far as I can
tell any of this
right like the idea that you're reverse
engineering design and that you can
specify the designed for brains and
bodies like that that implies that you
could you could make one.
Yeah. I mean it's not I mean it's
not it's not contradicting like Yeah.
Yeah. I it it is kind of saying that in
a sense you're still ultimately modeling
it, right? But you're so you do have to
make decisions. But it kind of goes back
to what I was saying earlier. It says
you can specify the designs for brains
and bodies. that that implies that you
can design them because if you have a
design, you can design it, right? Are
are you are you trying to point out the
the the separation between actually
modeling, you know, a a a cat's brain,
for example, versus the reality? And are
you making an assumption that we'd never
be able to do that? And therefore, well,
no, it it doesn't matter if we'd ever be
able to do it. The problem is, uh, we
can't do it now. And so saying modelers
present tense can reverse engineer this
process and specify present tense the
designs for brains and bodies the
creatures of interest. That's it's a
weird thing to say. That's like Victor
Frankenstein almost like I I I
don't I sorry I'm I'm not to be honest
I'm not really sure how to address this
much further because so in chap just to
stick to the textbook chapter 7 we you
know they make a mouse right they model
a mouse they model it in a T-maze none
of it's real so the formal technical
term for that would be incilico and so
you know that that is what they do and
and if you. It's not the design of the
brain in the body. It It's just It's
just a very It's just a very simple
model of one aspect of something that a
mouse can do. But it it its brain isn't
its brain isn't I believe in that model,
which is very simple there. The brain of
the mouse and the body of the mouse
aren't even even really in the model at
all. It's just um
they they they are and they're not. I I
agree that in a literal sense, no,
they're not. uh in
this we're trying to sorry John and what
we're trying to do with with active
inference is that we're just trying to
model the you know it is expressly what
the the textbook states it's just trying
to model the the problem that the brain
is trying to solve in that instance. If
you think that the problem that the
organism is facing is much bigger, such
as, you know, oh, it's not a mouse in a
T- maze, it's a it's a mouse, you know,
in in the woods or something, you know,
and to where to where you have now you
have to create like a broader
environment. Maybe you create other
agents who are in there as well. Maybe
there's some kind of, you know, uh,
world design where they they have
movement that goes beyond just moving
left or right or moving to a queue.
instead it's a much more like a broad
like grid discrete space or maybe it's
continuous space or or otherwise but I
mean that that's a temp you know that's
in a sense we are trying to anyone who's
modeling something is trying to recreate
its dynamics to better understand how it
functions and so I just kind of quickly
googled like cancer modeling it's like
this the majority of research that's
being done on cancer is involving
computational modeling of cancer so
Well, I do I think I do I kind of
sympathize and understand maybe the
point that you're making like you know
but it's not to say that there's some
kind of hubris of saying we're going to
model the brain perfectly. We're going
to reverse engineer and we're you know
just assume that we can just magically
do that. But it is making the point that
like this is this is what most most
people are doing in in a sense. I maybe
it's not worded well. Maybe it's a
little bit clever to say like, oh well,
if if because they're relating it to
other fields, right? So, we're looking
at, you know, they relate it first to
evolution. It's kind of like saying,
well, evolution is what's kind of
producing the the reality of of the
organisms that we find in the world
around us, but then from the other end,
it's like a modeler is attempting to
reverse engineer that. They're
attempting to kind of create that or
recreate that in in kind of like, you
know, the opposite direction. No, I
understand what modeling is, but I think
my problem is really more with two words
here. Specify and designs. Specify
implies that it's specific. It's not
just some general vague thing that
that's like that that that simulates
some aspect, but the specific design for
the brain and the body. And then designs
of course implies you can build one, but
no, no one can build a cat. So, I'm just
perplexed as to why
uh it's it's like this.
Okay. Yeah. I don't know. I think we
might have to kind of agree to disagree
on this one a little bit because I I
don't fully I mean that that is, you
know, that is what we do. I if if I sit
down to kind of model uh I don't know I
don't want to get too far away from the
example we're talking about but if I
want to model like I don't know the end
of day stock price from financial data
like I'm going to have to make some
decisions on how to do that right I'm
going to have to specify some things and
I'm going to have to design some things
in order to make that happen right so I
think these are rather broad terms But
you would specify the designs for plants
which is easy. Specifying the design for
a brain is is not easy. I don't think
anyone can do it. And it it's, you know,
not a not a thing I would say.
Um I I don't there's there has been some
interesting work. There's there's been
some attempts to, you know, do this. I
think there are plenty of people who
would still agree with you,
but I mean there there are folks who are
who who at least have the aspiration and
are even, you know, I know there's an
aspiration. I sort of hear it myself,
but but to to suggest that it's already
been achieved is uh Yeah, if I can jump
in. I Yeah. Yeah, please do. Steve, I
take John's part here. I'm very
sympathetic um to what you're saying,
John. Um I
I
also just assume there is so much not
said or rather implied in the textbook
that uh it I don't take it uh to a
mathematical precision. The the words
are an approximation of what is
intended. Uh,
and I I completely agree that this isn't
a closed system. And if it were a closed
system, uh, it could not be, um,
completely described without, I mean,
consistently completely
described. Uh, and I really think what
you're bringing up is worth bearing in
mind always that um, a model is not the
system itself. It's a model of the
system. You
know, designing saying that the brain
can be reverse engineered
uh is in I I just assume that means
uh a an approximation of the
architecture can be created uh based on
this framework.
I I I think too many people do have the
assumption that yeah the brain can be
created uh can be re represented and I
just don't think that's possible. Uh the
complexity is beyond the ability at the
at this point in our technology.
But it's I
think intending to mean an approximation
always. That's that's the my take on it.
Yeah. Well, yeah. So, probably Okay. Oh,
sorry. I was I I'm just seconding that.
I mean, that that is essentially the
what's going on with the modeling,
whether it be an active inference or
otherwise. But it but it is it is made
explicit. I mean, I I agree with you
both. the complexity of actually
modeling the brain and not only that but
what would be you know another qu a
whole another question that comes up is
what would be the the purpose of that I
mean we we can maybe intuit it like oh
it would be interesting or we'd find
some kind of realization but it's I mean
we start to get a little close to sci-fi
right it's like well once you create the
brain it does it's not really a brain of
any particular person it's its own thing
now and it's going to go off on its own
trajectory so now is it even reflected
is it going to be useful for simul ating
or studying anything if you if it's if
that makes any kind of sense. Well, you
bring up a good point why it's really uh
useless to try to create AGI uh in the
way we think of it. I mean to create uh
intell artificial intelligence that
thinks just like a human you would have
a human
intelligence. So wait, we have that
already. What's the point of that?
Right. Right. Exactly. It's like, you
know, it's it's so it would be
superhuman immediately. Then it wouldn't
be what we think of as intelligence. It
would be something else.
That would be wonderful, but it would be
something else. I want to talk about
this thing of modeling and approximation
because like sort of everything in
science is a model, but there are
different kinds of things in science.
There are models that are precise enough
to build stuff with and there are models
that aren't really precise enough to
build like real world things. I'm not
talking necessarily about computer
programs. Um there there are models that
aren't really precise enough to build
real world things. And by saying that
you can specify the design, you're
you're suggesting that you have enough
precision to build real world things.
But I I haven't seen
uh I I haven't even seen that claim or
anything like it made anywhere else in
this book. Uh like I don't know. It's
odd. Yeah, it's it's a it has a
different meaning than what I think you
take it as or it has we have to assume
it means something different otherwise
it wouldn't make any sense just as
you're pointing out.
Yeah, there there's a I'm mostly asking
for clarification. I want to know
what what that what does that mean? Why
would you write that? Yeah, it it it is
it is a strong piece that they you know
that was quite a choice I guess for lack
of a better phrase. I mean that they
they expressly say earlier in the
textbook like they are not trying to to
recreate or even emulate the entire
brain piece by piece is to find a
generative model that describes the
problem the brain is trying to solve.
And that might not be, you know, that
might not be a particularly
satisfying sort of um that might not be
a very satisfying take for those who are
interested in doing something like
trying to recreate the entire, you know,
behavior of the of the I'm all for it.
The whole thing. Sorry. I'm all for it
if you can do it. just saying that you
can do it when you can't is
yeah they I think it's a it's a mistake
for them. I think well I don't think
that sentence should be read so
literally. Um, but that that is that's
kind of my final word from myself on my
opinion on that because I think we're
I'd just be belaboring it if I tried to
in describing it more because the whole
I mean if whenever I see that phrase for
example complete solution
uh you know if I think about in terms of
mathematics it looks um ignorant or or
or or just incorrect like why would you
say that but if I look at at it from the
perspective of kind of the neat
scruffies bit, right? Where where there
I mean you do have a broad variety of
different departments doing very
different things who have very strong
debates with one another.
Um if if there were a way to model the
brain, you know, piece by piece as we
were talking about earlier, I I imagine
it would at minimum take many more of
these departments coming together and
agreeing upon a few things in order to
even get going with something like that.
Not to mention the kind of funding that
might be necessary to realize something
like that. Um, as long as fields stay
broadly disperate, including how they
use words, their
ontologies, you know, I I think debates
are fine, but but I I do appreciate in a
sense the attempt to make uh kind of a
broader framework. Is the word complete
well used or or even relevant here?
Probably not. But so the other thing is
they do it twice. So on page um on page
on page 196 they do it again. Um they
say it that means active inference
starts by providing a complete solution
to the problems that organisms have to
solve. So they say it twice to to the
problems that organisms have. Okay.
Sure. I Yeah. I I don't know. I I I
think we're I don't know. Um I mean
the question they said what they said is
all right go ahead Stephen I mean just
that statement then immediately brings
up the question in one's mind well in
what sense are we talking complete
solution and that's why mostly asking
for clarification because I I assume it
can't mean what it says. Yeah I I agree.
Yeah, that's like author's author's
framing. You know, the book you you
write gets to have it how you think. And
then but I'm also thinking like does a
wing in an engine provide a complete
solution to the problems faced by
flight, right? Yes. But that doesn't
mean that any given plane is going to
fly or any given company is going to
work. It's like it's not a guarantee.
But it's like but yes between lift and
thrust that between sensemaking and
cognition and action it is like the
scheme of a complete solution to the
problems of the kind that they do face.
Yes. Any given inquiry is going to be
successful but but it it it is like okay
the complete meal is the main dish and
the side dish doesn't mean you're going
to have a successful restaurant but it
is a complete approach to cooking dinner
if it has those two components. Yeah,
it's like the idea of, you know,
perception without action, right? Is so
that was my attempt to kind of
contextualize some of these things
which, you know, there there's an entire
sub field known as intellectual history,
right? that that that people try to like
do this kind of hermeneutical or
exeetical approach to the study of
literature including psychology or
otherwise looking at the ontologies
extracting them relating them to one
another contradictions and and all of
that and so it's kind of like active
inference is kind of placing itself in a
certain part of that trajectory and you
know they they have their own take and
they're claiming I maybe maybe they
should use the phrase more complete I
think that would get closer to maybe
what they're actually going for um you
I'd be happy with that. Then hyper
desperate. Yeah. Yeah. Um but we're not
the authors, so
um yeah, so it goes. Yeah. Food for
thought, but it's still I mean it's
still a good question, right? Because it
does open up onto these bigger questions
and and then um and and also to
Stephen's point earlier, right? Like at
the end of the day, we're still making
proxies. So if you if you quote unquote
design or specify or design the brain of
the the mouse and the T-mas it's like
well no you're not really but in a sense
you you are in this only in the sense of
if active inference is making the claim
that that the brain or does something
like uh perception and action as we're
we've described it and looked at state
inference and policy inference and so on
then it kind of like you kind of are
because the mouse is carrying out the
the hypothetical encilico mouse is
carrying out those processes, right?
We're just kind of running the code that
represents that. Well, I thought
it would but but just Andrew in the last
um four minutes, could you look at read
Isabella's question up in the chat and
just give a first anyone can give a
first thought on that and then we'll end
in a few minutes. Yeah, absolutely. Uh
no, and thanks for your question
Isabella. What is the relationship of
active inference and autopoetic
uh systems? It just occurred to me
robots can perform active inference
while not being autopoetic and there are
living systems without central nervous
systems. Like what does it mean about
the relationship between active
inference and life? So let's just um we
we do see this term in the textbook but
just to like get a quick like autopois
self-making a systems ability to
self-organize self-rerodce and
self-maintain through its own internal
processes. So one interpretation of that
is you know to ensure their own
reproduction and maintenance. Well, with
robots, yeah, not so sure about the
reproduction part.
Maintenance potentially, right? Like
like you could have a robot that maybe
it doesn't necessarily reproduce, but it
might have actions that are available to
it that it could then use to or or have
available to it to take care of itself.
But I mean that's the that's kind of
what separates the the the claim in the
textbook about what evolution is led
towards such as beings such as us who
who who who are you know able of not
just reproducing but also full
maintenance versus a robot that you know
if it if it if it doesn't have arms to
reach for the the power cord to plug
itself in or something along those
lines, right? I mean it's kind of a
silly way of saying that but but in any
case but that is a broader philosophical
question as well. um you know what is
the relationship between this and life?
Um there are you know there are many
people who have made claims about things
like pansychism
uh things like you know well if you if
really something like sentience or
something like you know active inference
related processes uh are just kind of
like mathematical formalisms that are
playing out before our eyes thanks to
you know the Hamiltonian pathist action
uh or or other kind of physical
processes then is it the case that many
things that we didn't think of as
sentient before in fact are uh is it not
the case that like a rock rolling down
the hill because of a variety of is it
not doing some kind of state inference I
that these are larger debates that one
can engage in um but uh I I personally I
don't really follow that line so much um
but but there has been some really kind
of philosophy of mind active inference
Yeah, a reference in the chat that is
related to that. The the uh handbook of
abductive cognition uh kind of gets at
this whole
epistemological issue of what are what
is cognition? Uh how do we know what we
know? How why do we call something
sentient and not other things? uh you
know a self
uh regulating system that is not even
biological uh you know chemical
processes. We don't have to imbue any
sentience to that. It's just a natural
process in and just in the same way that
biological systems are natural processes
but biological systems interact with the
environment in adaptive ways in self
generate self-perpetuating adaptive
ways. I I think it Isabella's question
is uh relevant in that u it it uh active
inference is a way of describing
processes in any framework we want to
place it if it is self-perpetuating or
not in a you know
evolutionarily versus in this closed
time frame you know in this single
environment experiment closed time
frame. We're still talking about the
same natural processes. Uh I think um
variational free energy uh is
describing a system and we just decide
what that system is that we're applying
it to.
Yeah. And it's a great a great
connection with the abductive logic and
the pragmatism and the open-endedness of
evolution because it's like the success
of generations
intergenerationally or successive
beliefs or hypotheses
intragenerationally like behavior. They
aren't just induction
deduction elevator rides. They're moving
laterally and generating new pieces and
new compositions in the sort of
open-ended reconfiguration and then the
niche sweeps it off the table if it
doesn't maintain autopois in actuality.
But that doesn't mean that every map you
make of that territory is describing its
autoois. Like in the T-mas, it's just
taken for granted we're talking about a
behaviorally alive mouse. Yes, we're not
studying the autoois of that mouse. But
that might be another inquiry.
Yeah. Yeah. Is a classic kind of
phrasing that's been used in active
inference and elsewhere. But the idea of
like, you know, the map is not the
territory. And that relates back to, you
know, what we were talking about earlier
with uh with modeling.
Anyway, we got kind of, you know, broad
and
it's, you know, in reference to that bit
about overcoming, you know, old
categories and 19th century kind of
constructions. It's like the notion of
sentience. Like, I'm not sure if going
back to read William James or or even
something from the mid 20th century
actually is going to align well with
whatever it is that we're discovering in
in modern science. Same thing for any
notion of things like consciousness,
right? I mean it for some consciousness
is literally just like you know you're
going to put someone under anesthesia
you need to make sure they're
unconscious you use you know an EEG you
know headset or or otherwise to try and
measure quant consciousness is like a
quantitative signal and that's it right
it's not even it's not a big broad
philosophical category it's literally
just a pragmatic practical concept that
is useful there in medicine uh others
will say you know dramatically different
things. So, it's uh always uh always
interesting conversation. Uh in any
case, we're a few minutes over. So,
thank you all so much for your for your
question. Sorry, Isabella for only
getting to the question at the end, but
I hope that that uh kind of subcon
conversation was helpful in in some kind
of way. Thanks. Also, I'm just looking
at this book. $699 for the
ebook. Let's get it. It's worth it.
And it's hard to get copies. I have to
do library loan uh you know scan chapter
at a time. Wow. Cool. All right. Thank
you all. Bye. Thanks everyone.