## FV7pW4p60VI

SPEAKER_00:
all right hello and welcome everyone this is active book stream number 2.0 we are going to be discussing the textbook active inference the free energy principle in mind brain and behavior 2022 textbook by thomas parr giovanni pizzullo and carl friston

In this live stream with Ali and I, we're going to be giving some overviews and some kind of points that you'll want to have in mind, a little bit of background and context, specifically on chapters 1, 2, 3, and 6.

We're going to do more live streams in the future that will cover the other chapters.

There's 10 chapters overall.

And the goal of this live stream is to use the live stream format to produce materials that we can then clip out so that the textbook groups, which we have multiple ongoing cohorts,

at the institute so that those textbook groups can be really engaging and discussion oriented because after several cohorts of going through this ali and i and others have started to kind of hone our understanding of the textbook and so we are starting to feel ready to put down some background and context dot zero videos and then ideally people who are participating in the textbook group cohorts

we'll be able to view and think about those videos leading up to a discussion so that when we do have the discussions in the textbook group that those can be maximally interactive and engaging so before we jump into chapter one Ali do you want to just add anything about uh the textbook or anything else hello I'm Ali I'm very happy and excited to be here


SPEAKER_01:
to discuss the book that we've fallen in love for the last year.

And despite the fact that we've been studying and discussing this book for more than a year, there's still a lot to learn and unpack.

So yeah, great.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

So then we will begin in just a few seconds, the chapter one and overview.

all right this section is going to be the chapter one and overview of the active inference textbook so shown here are the table of contents there are 10 chapters and three appendices in this book and they're separated into part one with chapters one through five and part two chapter six through ten Ali do you want to give any overview thoughts on the organization or structure of the book


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so can you hear me now?

Sorry.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so part one is basically more aligned in terms of the theoretical construction of the active inference, and it provides some conceptual and theoretical tools to be utilized in the second part.

Because for the second part, we mostly deal with the practical side of active inference, how to actually implement active inference to model some of the systems of interest.

So that's basically the main justification behind dividing up these chapters into two.


SPEAKER_00:
great all right we're going to pass over the short preface written by Carl Friston but it's worth a read it's only several pages long so let's go to chapter one overview so do you have any opening thoughts on chapter one or where does one even begin with such a book sure uh yeah


SPEAKER_01:
For chapter one, I think probably the most central theme of chapter one is about the two different approaches to active inference, namely the high road and the low road.

And I think it provides a really nice perspective to view a kind of a whole picture and how the different components of active inference

fit together.

So, but also, I highly recommend chapter 13 from this book, Andy Clark, and it's and Andy Clark and his critics, written by chapter 13, I think is entitled beyond the desert landscape written by Carl Friston, in which he provides more elaborate and a bit philosophical

reasoning behind what exactly are low road and high road and what are the aims of each approach and the distinction between those two.

So for chapter one, we begin

obviously with an introductory paragraph, which sets the stage for all the components that would be discussed in this chapter.

But a very important section, I believe, is section two here, which is how do living organisms persist and act adaptively, which is basically the main...

question active inference is trying to address.

So if we want to describe active inference in, I mean, minimalistically with only one sentence or two, probably we can say something to the effect that it's a theory that addressed this very question here.

So that's why they've opened up this chapter with the important question.

And then section three, which is again a continuation of section one, but a bit more specifically about active inference and how active inference is

addressing the question provided in the section two so basically again active inference is a modeling framework for modeling the behaviors from first principles and what is meant by first principles will be elaborated upon in the following chapters the following sections and also obviously in the following chapters

But very briefly, it's a kind of modeling framework that tries to somehow use variational principles such as free energy principle to construct modeling and mathematical tools that will enable us to

to describe the dynamical systems of living and even non-living agents in terms of those variational principles and how those agents or those systems are coupled with their environment.

So that's basically the unificatory principle that is at the heart of this active inference approach because

Yes, exactly here.

It's a kind of description of this action perception loop that is at the heart of active inference or FEP framework.

And then we go to section 1.4, which is, again, a description of the structure of the book and why

Those two parts are divided as such.

So as I said earlier, first part is more concerned with the theoretical underpinnings of active inference.

And the second part is more about the practical side of it, as we see in the subsection headings here.

So that's, yeah.

And then a very important diagram

which will provide very helpful as we whole book is provided in figure 1.2, which kind of ties all the different strands of various related theories, such as predictive coding, predictive processing, Bayesian brain hypothesis, and so on.

into a kind of unified and integrated framework by using those two trajectories of constructing active inference, namely the high road and the low road.

So it literally here is represented as the high road and the low road in this diagram.

So very briefly,

High Road is a kind of top-down approach to active inference.

It begins with the question, how things should act if they exist, in other words, if they persist through time, sorry.

In other words, it kind of sets the stage for developing the concept of markup blankets.

and then obviously with by setting that also surprise minimization it attempts to elaborate that road by adding other aspects of modeling other aspects of theory such as

predictive processing, self-evidencing, autopoiesis, and so on, and then reach an integrated version of active inference, which is basically an integration between perception and action.

So I believe the main thing that sets active inference apart from all the other related theories, such as predictive processing and predictive coding,

is the very deep integration of action and perception.

So action is not just some afterthought or some additional component that needs to be accounted for.

It is deeply woven into the fabric of the theory.

So as we'll see, especially in chapters two and three,

Even the mathematical formalism for perception and action are interestingly similar to each other and even symmetric.

And it shows that perception and action are actually not separate and distinct, totally distinct entities and concepts and active inference

definitely provides a very promising framework to integrate them into a holistic framework.

And another approach to construct that same theory is to begin with the probabilistic description of Bayes' theory and try to build up

the formalism of active inference using Bayes' Inference Theorem, Bayes' Theorem and Bayesian Statistical Inference.

So again, we here see some very...

I mean, apparently different and distinct strands, such as predictive coding, Bayesian brain hypothesis, and so on.

But as we see, all of those different strands can be united and tied together within this low-road approach to active inference.

So I guess that's... I'll just give one short thought.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

These are great.

just one short thought thank you ollie for these great summaries the low road and the high road are going to be explored in a lot more detail in the coming chapters two and three we can think of the high road as being a y because it describes how persistent or remeasurable systems exist now they might be using bayes theorem or they might be using any other kind of mechanism internally but the high road is describing the y of existence

From the low road, the bottom-up approach is kind of like a how.

You could use Bayes' theorem to describe persistent autopoetic entities.

Or you could use Bayes' theorem for other purposes too.

So where these two roads intersect is active inference.

And we have a lot more discussion coming and of course unpacked in the textbook groups about how these really map on to bottom-up and top-down causation and the plurality of whys that we approach in different settings.

Good to continue?

yes sure some of the coming sections uh of this chapter continuing from page eight are going to describe what are happening in the next chapters so chapter two is going to set out the low road perspective

Chapter three is going to describe the high road.

Chapter four, we will unpack active inference more formally.

That's one of the math heavy chapters.

Chapter five, we'll move from formal treatments to biological implications of active inference with a special focus on mammalian neurophysiology.

chapter five sets out the process theory associated with active inference and gives a lot of hands-on and empirical examples and that's a lot of the first part of the book they're then going to summarize some of the key points and distillations from that theory heavy first section one of them is that as ali mentioned perception and action are complementary processes and ways that fulfill the same imperative

free energy minimization.

We sometimes summarize that by saying that in the pursuit of the minimization of free energy, agents can either change their mind or change the world.

Change your mind is associated with perception and learning, and those are distinguished later.

And changing the world is associated with action.

There's some discussion about action selection and optimal policy selection.

And all cognitive operations in active inference are conceptualized as inference over generative models.

So the true kernel, the cognitive kernel of active inference is going to be the generative model.

Want to pick up from here or give any thoughts on generative models and then carry on.

Thanks, Ali.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one point is there is a common misconception about generative models, which is that generative models only refers to the inner states of the system and also its markup blanket.

But actually generative model kind of encompass all the states of interest of the situation we're trying to model.

So it also

encodes the probabilistic information about the external states as well so generative model can be thought of as kind of the whole state of the system and by system here I mean the coupled dynamics between the internal and external states so that might be helpful to keep in mind


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

One other distinction that comes up and is used a lot nowadays, although it's not always used in prior literature, is the distinction between the generative model and the generative process.

We're going to come back to it, but usually...

The generative model is being used to describe our statistical model of the agent of interest, and the generative process is the process that generates observations that are then passed to the generative model as observations.

However, because generative models can be generative processes for each other, these two are not necessarily distinct in principle.

So in different simulations and in different specific cases, generative models can also be generative processes for each other.

That leads us towards talking about ecosystems of shared intelligence and interactions amongst generative models.

But when we're talking about generative model, it's like the organism or the system of interest that we're focused on.

there are some more uh themes that arise from the first half of the book now we're on page 11. action is quintessentially goal directed and purpose of we talk a lot about how preference plays a role in shaping action selection in active inference and the goal directed nature of active inference will be unpacked in chapters two and three they discuss how various constructs of active inference have plausible biological analogs in the brain

Once one has defined a specific generative model for a problem at hand, one can move from active inference as a normative theory to active inference as a process theory, which makes specific empirical predictions.

And there's many, many interesting philosophy of science type discussions that we have about explain, predict, design, control.

And then we get to section 1.4.2, giving overview on part two, active inference in practice.

So I'll just continue on.

Chapter six is going to introduce a recipe for building active inference models.

So this is where the step-by-step comes into play.

It's gonna give a sequence of steps and approaches that you can take to go from

understanding the structural aspects of a system or phenomena of interest and build your way towards having an active inference model that can then be implemented in code and we have various examples and we're there in the textbook group to work with everyone who wants to take this journey but chapter six is going to describe that process of building the active inference generative model so that's a recipe chapter

there's a lot more that goes into the restaurant also as we kind of have fun exploring chapter 7 and 8 are like a pair and they describe two different broad families of generative models now these two families of generative models they work well they play well with each other but they are very educationally relevant to also consider separately chapter 7 is going to focus on the discrete time

generative model and chapter eight is going to focus on the continuous time generative models and again these discrete and continuous time models can be nested and interoperable however they do describe some very important different situations and so chapter seven and eight have a lot of technical information on the discrete and continuous time formulations of active inference and also about how they integrate together

chapter nine is illustrations of how active inference models can be used to analyze data from behavioral experiments and so this kind of goes beyond chapter six's recipe and it talks about some of the process of making a behavioral experiment and then using the outcomes of that behavioral experiment the data from that experiment and using that to parameterize and do statistics with the active inference generative model

chapter 10 brings it all together chapter 10 is a lot like chapter one and we've even joked of reading the book backwards that's how great chapter 10 is so for those who are reading chapter one consider reading chapter 10 next and then picking back up with chapter two because chapter 10 is going to give some judgments and also sketch some exciting future directions for where active inference is in relationship to other fields and where it's going


SPEAKER_01:
So I also second that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

The second part of the book illustrates a broad variety of models of biological and cognitive phenomena.

So it's an application oriented second half of the book.

And we have a lot of accessory code and approaches and notebooks.

So one may not find that this is the one stop shop that they were looking for.

However, for those who dive in, there's absolutely more than enough to scaffold their learning journey.

And then section 1.5 is the summary.

The chapter introduces the active inference approach to explain biological problems from a normative perspective and preview some implications of this perspective that will be unpacked in later chapters.

It describes the structural outline of the book, chapters one through five being theory, chapter six through 10 being practice.

And then it signals that the next two chapters are going to develop the low and the high road perspectives.

And all together,

That is chapter one.

Any other thoughts on chapter one?


SPEAKER_01:
Not as specifically, but I think it provides a really good context to the rest of the book in terms of how all the different elements of active inference comes into play in addressing different problems.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
on to chapter two the low road to active inference so all chapters begin with a short quotation and the quotation here reads my thinking is first and last and always for the sake of my doing William James so even before reading the chapter these quotations are often great places to jump off and have a discussion so Ali please begin and go as long as you want on the low road to active inference


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so I guess chapter two, as the title suggests, it's the construction of active inference theory from the viewpoint of the low road of active inference.

So it begins by providing this notion of perception as inference.

Because more often than not, we usually think of perception as something just

in a computational sense, is a processing of the inputs, or rather, it's a raw processing of the inputs.

But here it shows that it can also be described as, or even more accurately described, as a kind of inference.

So it's not just a simple and raw processing of the inputs, as my computational model...

or a computer analogy might suggest.

It's more like something that we predict and then we compare our inputs or the

inputs we get from the stimuli with our prediction and then try to somehow minimize that prediction error.

So I believe that this notion of perception as inference is the most central notion of

all the related theories of predictive coding, predictive processing, Bayesian brain hypothesis.

So up to now, active inference is not very different from all the other theories.

It's basically a subset or a variant of those theories.

But then it progresses into distinguishing

distinguishing the active inference from all the other theories and how

it stands apart from the other ones.

So in section 2.1, we began with some of the basics of probability theory, namely the Bayes theorem in box 2.1, and some simple examples about how Bayes theorem can be applied.

And again, a very important

page or important part of this section will be page 20, which describes the concept of surprisal and specifically the statistical surprisal and how it differs from the phenomenological surprise or psychological surprise.

And how we can formulate the statistical surprise.

Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
yes just just to catch up here this example that's going to come back again and again is a person who's guessing the object that's in their hand and it could be a frog or an apple and the object is going to jump or not and so that's used as a way to talk about the bayesian updating that forms the kernel of a variety of bayesian brain like models including active inference and

and then um there are the presentation of the exact base so in simple cases you can compute exactly what you want with bayes theorem however it's a lot more effective on large data sets to use certain approximations and heuristics that we're going to be discussing and then

Ali has highlighted that there are two concepts that are very closely related to each other regarding surprise.

There's surprise by itself and then there's Bayesian surprise.

So please pick up there what are surprise and Bayesian surprise and why do they matter here.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So, well, surprise, I mean, the regular surprise, as we're all familiar with, is something more related to our sense of surprise or psychological sense of surprise of

observing some unexpected phenomena or unexpected behavior.

But Bayesian surprise or statistical surprise is, of course, closely related with the psychological sense of surprise, but a bit more rigorous in which it's a way to compare two probabilistic information using callback-Leibler divergence.

and somehow getting the, I mean, how unexpected that information emerging from callback divergence

And they call it the surprisal.

So surprisal is, in other words, is a way to formulating those unexpected probabilistic information.

And it doesn't necessarily align or maps onto perfectly our psychological sense of surprisal.

But as I said, it's closely related with that.

Yes.

By surprise, I mean for almost... Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
No, you take it, Ali.


SPEAKER_01:
I was just going to say that by surprise, almost in the rest, all the other sections and chapters of the book, we basically mean this Bayesian surprise sense of the world.

And in order to distinguish that,

With the regular sense of surprise, sometimes in the literature, surprisal is used to refer to Bayesian surprise.


SPEAKER_00:
yes so they're both measured in information theoretic units this is all happening in information geometric spaces the first concept of surprise is applied to a given single observations how surprising is that one observation and so in that sense it's a lot like the z-score of a data point coming in with respect to a statistical distribution

So it's like you have a height distribution in a classroom and you measure one person, and then you can say, what is the z-score of that measurement?

Was it right at the center of the distribution with a z-score of zero, or were they two standard deviations higher with a z-score of two?

So it's kind of like that.

And that's why there's a discussion of probability distributions and their support, which is the x values for which they're defined, and surprise function with the fancy i.

And that's going to be a function that helps you compute how surprising each observation is given a parameterization of that distribution.

Whereas this Bayesian surprise is more related to learning.

It has to do with how much updating happens between the prior and the posterior, and that's before and after the observation.

So one could imagine a surprising observation, surprise concept one,

that either does or doesn't update the prior into a very different posterior so as ali mentioned they are not exactly the same but it's going to be important to understand how they're different and that's worked out again in the case of the apple jumping

box 2.2 continues with a discussion of expectations now expectation in everyday parlance might be specifically referring to something in the future like i expect it to rain tomorrow and in statistics when we talk about the expectation we're talking about the weighted average or the center of gravity of a distribution and that can be in both a discrete distribution at which point you have a weighted sum

or a continuous distribution in which case it's an integral so you can have an expectation for the humidity tomorrow and so that might refer to the center of gravity at a t equals plus one but just taken alone expectation means center of gravity of a statistical distribution not anticipation

Section 2.3 is going to describe how some of this, how this low road that we're on is going to connect to biological inference.

There's more discussion of the generative model and the generative process, and a little bit of a hint that the generative model captures aspects of the generative process, which is where we see a lot of the classical cybernetic theorems and concepts like requisite diversity, good regulator theorem, and so on.

However, the generative model does not have to be exactly isomorphic with the generative process.

For example, the generative process, the temperature in the room might be a continuous variable, but then the generative model might be discrete, only modeling integer-based temperatures, or might be categorical, like too hot, just right, and too cold.

So there's a lot of articulations that can be done because of how flexible and interoperable generative models are with each other.

Figure 2.2 is going to expand upon that chapter one representation of the cybernetic action perception loop.

And we're going to see this more in terms of a generative model and generative process articulation.

And there are incoming, speaking from the perspective of the generative model, the agent, there are incoming and outgoing

dependencies in this graph and this is a little bit like a schema more so than a formal graph but also it is like a bayesian graph where nodes are variables and edges are causal relationships and so we have the internal states of the model

the external states of the generative process, and then the blanket states that make internal and external states conditionally independent.

And again, speaking from the perspective of the agent, although there is a symmetry, we can talk about the incoming

sensory signals happening from the observations handed from the process passed on to the internal states of the generative model and then the outgoing actions that are selected that then can influence the hidden state of the world for example going and turning on the heater to increase the temperature in the room and so this action perception loop or particular partition is going to get explored in a lot more detail in the coming sections

previous section 2.3 was on perception as inference and now action as inference is going to be discussed and that is where they say the discussion to this point is common to all Bayesian brain theories we now introduce the simple but fundamental Advance offered by active inference which is the extension of this inferential perspective to consideration of action as inference perception and action cooperate to realize a single objective

section 2.5 is about minimizing the discrepancy between the model and the world we already described that there's two ways for this to happen change your mind and change the world that's how the discrepancy can be reduced or managed we see a variant of the action perception loop where the agent is making perceptions predictive models of the world

that through perception are being juxtaposed with observations handed from the generative process, the world, and a discrepancy is realized, some non-zero discrepancy.

And then here are those two paths to minimize free energy, change beliefs by perception and learning, or change the world through action.

Section 2.6 is going to discuss how the exact Bayesian approach described earlier is absolutely spot on if you have infinite computing resources.

However, we're often interested in rapid or large data sets where we want to be able to get approximate Bayesian computation or probably approximately correct computation in a vastly accelerated fashion.

so that is going to be approached using what's called variational bayesian inference that's unpacked in chapter four but it suffices to say that variational bayesian inference implies substituting two intractable quantities the posterior probability and log model evidence

with two quantities that approximate them but can be computed efficiently.

The approximate posterior Q and a variational free energy.

So it transforms an intractable estimation problem into a highly tractable optimization problem.

Pick up from there, Ali.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, sorry, I just wanted to point out

out a couple of things especially about section 2.3 because I believe it is one of the crucial sections of this chapter and in fact the whole book because it provides some of the justifications of using Bayesian inference as opposed to some other mathematical techniques such as maximum likelihood estimation but

More important than that, I think it's this concept of optimality, which comes into play in almost

everywhere in the literature and, of course, in this book.

So there are actually two notions of optimality, which is not discussed in detail here, namely Bayesian optimality and Jayne's optimality.

But in some of the recent papers on Bayesian mechanics, Dalton, Sack, DiValle, Maxwell, Ramstein, and others have shown that those two concepts of optimality

are actually congruent with each other.

So that's one of the reasons that the duality between FEP, free energy principle, and constrained maximum entropy principle

I mean, it's one of the justifications for providing that dual formalism between those two.

But another point I wanted to mention here is because I've seen that using the word hidden state,

can be a bit confusing for some people because when we observe something as an observation, obviously it is not quote-unquote hidden, right?

So what a hidden state here refers to is actually the hidden cause of that observation.

So it's not that the observation itself is hidden from the observational or it's unobserved.

So that might be a bit confusing if

if we don't take into consideration the exact meaning of the hidden state or latent state here and in the rest of the literature.

So continuing from section 2.6, here we see one of the two central equations of active inference, which is equation 2.5 for variational free energy.

So it's, as I said, I mean, understanding this equation and how each line of its formulation represents in terms of the, I mean, trade-off between energy entropy or complexity and accuracy or divergence and evidence is key to understanding almost everything in the

rest of the book and in many other literature on active inference.

So this is the perceptual part of active inference.

So variation-free energy is

a parameter that is a notion that parameterizes the surprisal of our perceptual information we have about the external states.

And then we'll see in the next section the related and almost symmetrical formulation to variational free energy, namely expected free energy,

which is basically the action part of the active inference.

So we can see how those two can somehow be seen as a kind of unified formalism but described in alternate expressions.

But another thing about equation 2.5 is it may be a bit, I don't know, daunting to see all the relations between those three lines of equation and how we can get from one to the other.

So there are some supplementary materials that we have developed in the past weeks, which I think,

can help in clarifying how the derivations of these three lines of equation be done.

So I hope they would be clarifying, I mean, and help to understand how those three lines relate to each other.

But the key point here is to understand that variation of free energy is not something absolute, but it's just an upper bound for the minimization.

So as Daniel just mentioned, it's untractable to have an absolute amount for the surprisal to be minimized.

So we need to have

an upper bound in order to make that more tractable.

Because by Jane's inequality, as we saw in chapter four, I think, we can see that how the upper bound of a surprisal

necessarily provides a condition for minimizing the precise or the exact free energy.

And that's the key insight of equation 2.5, or the notion of variation of free energy, which is to provide this upper bound instead of the exact amount of surprisal to be minimized.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah what i'll what i'll add there is if you knew exactly how well you should be surprised by a given data point y then you would have had the optimal model however that is not tractable and so

by making a quantity that's always higher or an upper bound, the variational free energy F, which is a function of broadly Q, our beliefs, our variational beliefs, which are built in a way that makes them very compositional, very optimizable, very interpretable, and data.

and we can reduce the divergence here the kl divergence with a double line between q our beliefs and p the kind of actuality of it and if we can reduce this divergence in other words minimize the free energy then we will come closer and closer to the true surprise function and do that in a tractable incrementally optimizable way so equation 2.5

is going to be the variational free energy different ways that it can be represented as it takes in data and beliefs about the world q and then this is going to be expanded into the future to include action with g the expected free energy

Now, there's a lot more that we can say about this.

There's a lot of technicalities to go into.

But broadly, notice that G, the expected free energy, is a functional of policy, pi, because it's only being evaluated to select amongst different action outcomes, pi.

and another important difference is that it's going to be describing sensory outcomes that haven't yet happened a sort of what would i perceive if i did a or what if i did b and it's that kind of comparison that allows the expected free energy functional here to be used in action selection or policy selection as inference planning as inference

That section is expanded upon.

And in figure 2.6, we see a very nice representation of the expected free energy equation, and then how when certain aspects of this equation or situation are zeroed out, we get certain other familiar cases.

For example,

where there's no epistemic value there's no information to learn then you get ruthless expected utility theory and conversely where there is no pragmatic value to extract so all outcomes are equally valid or preferable then you get things like infomax principle and optimal bayesian design

And then everything in between is the space that we're interested in.

And so this figure 2.6 shows that the expected free energy functional can be seen as like a generalization of a lot of other settings related to perception and action and planning amidst uncertainty.

and section 2.9 closes the low road they took us all the way to active inference from bayes theorem through the generative model on to active inference and clarifies these two notions of variational free energy that's the real-time perceptual unfolding evidence lower bound on surprisal tractable optimizable and so on

and f and g the expected free energy which is able to do planning as inference or policy selection as inference expected free energy is fundamentally prospective and that enables counterfactual cognition

section 2.10 summarizes active inference is the theory of how living artifacts underwrite their existence by minimizing surprise or attractable proxy to surprise variational free energy via perception and action and they motivate that from a first principles base theorem starting place any closing thoughts on chapter 2 ali


SPEAKER_01:
I would just humbly suggest for the people who want to go through this chapter to try their best to really understand specifically what equation 2.5 and 2.6 represents and how to use those equations to describe different

situations with uh some uh missing elements as well uh because uh i believe those sections and uh particularly those equations are absolutely essential uh to for understanding uh everything active inference related both in this the rest of this book and uh in rest of the and in almost all


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

And just the last thought I'll give on chapter two is this is exactly the work that we do in the Active Inference textbook group.

We really welcome all backgrounds.

Every single question and uncertainty you have is beautiful.

We have a lot of resources that Ali and others make to make the math approachable and rigorous.

and natural language descriptions of the equations and so on so yes it's really important to understand the equations because after all that's like the skeleton that gives meaning to our usage and fluency of the active inference ontology which ali and i are speaking right now

we're not just saying surprise is related to this because we felt it that way it there is an underpinning and it is a really interesting life's work to explore it but we're finding ways to communicate it and learn and teach it better and better every time so that's chapter two that's the low road moving on to chapter three the high road to active inference and so recall that the high road is like the why

So Ali, please begin.

Just go as long as you want on through the high road to active inference.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so the high road to active inference begins with the question about the conditions for the persistence of quote-unquote things.

I mean, what would we expect for a thing to behave if it persists through time?

And that's why sometimes FVP is referred to as the theory of every thing.

space thing and it's not absolutely everything but thing just in this sense of I mean persisting through time and the notion that allows for this

thing to act as it as it persists through time is markup blanket so markup blanket is one of the most essential ingredients of the high road approach to active inference and that's why this section opens up with describing how markup blanket allows to

describe the situation of interest through this conceptual and mathematical tool.

But one thing that I always point out in almost all our textbook cohorts is

In this section, it doesn't exactly describe markup blankets rigorously enough in terms of its carving up the state space and so on.

So one thing I think can be clarifying in following

all the discussions around Markov blanket, is to keep in mind that it's just a boundary in the state space.

So it's not a necessarily spatiotemporal boundary.

Although in many cases, it manifests itself as spatio-temporal boundaries, such as the, I don't know, cell membranes or organelle membranes and so on, but it's not necessarily the case.

So I think it can be helpful to keep that in mind everywhere we see markup blanket.

But in a very simply markup blanket,

is what allows for the agent or the system to be statistically separated from its environment as is shown here in figure 3.1.

So basically Markov Blanket mathematically is just the

I mean, the sensory and active states together, it consists of both of those states, and it statistically separates what happened externally or internally from each other.

So, in other words, internal states cannot observe or infer anything about the external states directly.

but only through the Markov blanket.

And that's why it's essential to describe the systems in this way, because obviously, in any sparse coupled systems, there isn't the possibility to observe the external states directly, but only

through those sensory and active states.

And one other thing that I also believe can be a bit confusing in this picture is that, yes, typo in the active states and sensory states, because it's important to observe that active state only, or the flow in the active states more precisely, only depends on

internal n-Markov states or blanket states.

And on the other hand, sensory states only depend on the external n-blanket states.

So mu and x in those two equations should be exchanged.

Yes.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Let me just unpack this.


SPEAKER_01:
Anything to add before we continue?


SPEAKER_00:
yes so this is what's known as the particular partition and that terminology was brought to the fore by Carl Friston's famous monograph in 2019 and it's a little bit of a pun it's a particular partition because this is just one way to partition agent from environment figure from ground

And we call what it partitions out, the blankets and internal states, as the particle.

So we can think about the most inert, least cognitive particle is like a speck of dust doing brownian diffusion.

But also, there are more sophisticated kinds of cognitive particles that can include...

world models counterfactuals what would happen if i did this all of those kinds of sophisticated cognitive operations that we can explore in active inference so note the small typo that ali mentioned internal states and also these edges reflect causal possibilities

amongst internal, external, and blanket states.

Blanket constituting the active U and sensory Y states.

So these are map, not territory.

This is not a spatio-temporal articulation.

These are like causal maps of the world

that may have to do with spatial temporal boundaries, but are not simply that.

And sensory data or sensory states flow on to internal states.

Internal states are involved in action selection, resulting in active states.

which have some causal consequence in the world, the generative process, the external states, which results in different sensory states coming in again.

And so the Markov blanket is what makes the internal and the external states conditionally independent.

And that can be thought of as just a no telekinesis, no telepathy clause.

The only way that information comes across internal and external states, which are symmetrical with each other,

is through the boundary or the holographic screen or the Markov blanket.

You can continue on, Ali.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so the next section is...

about surprise minimization and self-evidencing.

So again, this term self-evidencing is a common term in active inference literature, first proposed by Jacob Howey.

So basically, it refers to how a system or agent, or in other words, a particular state can

gather the evidence for its self-persistence or self-existence through time.

In other words, by inferring the state of the environment and comparing that inference with its internal states, or in other words with its generative model, it's basically a way, I mean, an interpretation of that

that kind of inference is, on the one hand, there is this dynamical interaction between the internal and external state, but we can somehow interpret that physical dynamics as engaging in the active inference or

as a model for the persistence of the agent through time.

So that's basically what refers to as self-evidencing.

And then we go through the subsection 3.3.1, which sets the stage for the recent formulation of active inference as in mechanics.

which is to somehow interpret the act of surprise minimization as minimizing the action through the Hamiltonian principle of least action, which is a variational principle.

And by variational principle, what is meant here is

just a computational or mathematical tool that allows for the computation or the derivative,

mean specific derivations to happen so it's not uh identical to scientific theories or scientific i don't know facts or observations it's just a tool a principle mathematical uh tool uh so again one of the main um

misconceptions about free energy principle is that it is unfalsifiable.

Obviously if we see it in this way it doesn't make sense to say that a mathematical tool or principle is unfalsifiable because it doesn't say anything about the empirical evidence of the phenomena we're talking about.

So that's why here it's important to understand how the surprise minimization can be seen as this kind of variational principle.

And then equation 3.1 draws the parallel between

the surprisal as defined in section in chapter two sorry and this chapter so it kind of ties up all the arguments provided in the previous chapter with this one and how everything comes together in a single formulation of active inference that but they're just the two distinct approaches to arrive at same destination

And then we go also, sorry, the other important equation.

And again, another key equation here is equation 3.2, which is a kind of, sorry,

Yes, I meant to say equation 3.2, not equation 3.1.

Sorry, my bad.

So yes, the other section is about the relations between inference, cognition, and stochastic dynamics.

I mean, all the previous discussions around how the act of inference can be seen as a kind of self-evidencing through the variational

principles such as FEP comes together to reframe the previous discussions we saw in chapter two about perception as inference and action as inference and to see the concepts of variational free energy and expected free energy through the lens of

variational principle of least action.

So it unifies nicely all the material from chapters two and three into something that, I mean, not necessarily distinct from each other, but just two sides of the coin.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Yeah, I find Table 3.1 to be very exciting.

It draws together statistical physics, Bayesian information, information theory, and cognitive interpretations.

So it's kind of like learn one thing, learn many things.

statistical physics has been talking about minimization of variational free energy for a long time and such methods are absolutely every day and professionalized in bayesian statistics active inference is using exactly just that to describe perception and action and so on so that's very um exciting box 3.2 describes

free energy in statistical physics and active inference.

I sometimes joke that we have a few kinds of free energy.

We have Tesla, like electrical power should be available to everybody for no cost.

We're not talking about that right now.

There's Gibbs free energy, which is the quantity that makes chemical or thermochemical reactions irreversible.

like the hydrolysis of atp and when we're talking about variational free energy we're talking about an information geometric space with similar dynamics similar kinetics and thermodynamics but rather than describing the reaction coordinates of a chemical reaction we're thinking about it in terms of bayesian updating and this is all called the bayesian mechanics

3.41 continues on with variational free energy.

3.42 goes into expected free energy.

So we see this a lot.

F, variational free energy.

That's the real-time unfolding sensory flow.

And then G, expected free energy and the policy planning as inference.

Section 3.5 concludes with a novel foundation, active inference, to understand behavior and cognition.

And it describes a few features of active inference, including its distinguishing features from a few other ways that people have looked at behavior and cybernetics.

Section 3.6 goes into a bit more detail on models, policies, and trajectories having to do with agency and policy selection.

3.7, reconciliation of inactive, cybernetic, and predictive theories under active inference.

Again, the exact kind of thing that there's a whole literature on, and it's always amazing to hear everybody's perspective on in the textbook groups.

3.8, active inference from the emergence of life to agency.

And 3.9, summary.

You want to just give any other thoughts that you have on chapter three.


SPEAKER_01:
Again, it's one of the probably most fundamental chapters, and the topics covered in this chapter is essential.

are absolutely essential to understand everything active inference related.

But specifically, the discussions in section 3.6 onward, again, I believe is really important to understand the broader context of active inference and how it relates to all the other theories.

But specifically, section 3.8

provides a nice view of how we can use the same modeling, the same theoretical tools to model both non-living dynamical systems or sparse coupled dynamical stochastic systems and also to

the systems that has agency or sentience so it's a much broader theoretical framework that doesn't restrict itself to only particular kinds of systems or agents and we'll see much more elaboration on that in the later wonderful


SPEAKER_00:
right that concludes our overview on chapter three now we're gonna skip to chapter six

so again this live stream is just providing some materials on chapters one two three and six eventually we're going to get to all chapters and version them and have as many of you as want join into the process of constructing these but this is also that our textbook groups can be really interactive and people can show up having listened to these background and context videos all right so now we are in chapter six a recipe for designing active inference models

Abraham Lincoln, give me six hours to chop down a tree and I will spend the first four sharpening the ax.

All right, Ali, what does the quote mean?

And please lead us in to this discussion.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so as the opening quotation suggests, it's about honing the skill set for applying Active Inference Framework to model the actual empirical situations that we may use Active Inference for.

And it frames it as a four-step recipe

actually do this kind of model.

Although it's termed as recipe, but I believe it's more like a guideline.

It's not like, I don't know, cooking recipe that needs to be observed strictly.

So it's more like suggestions or guidelines to...

to begin to apply Active Inference Framework in any kind of situation we'd like.

So section 6.2 outlines those four steps.

So the first step is which system are we modeling?

in terms of how we can define the markup blanket that most effectively and efficiently the problem or question we want to explore through that modeling, through the modeling of that situation.

So first step is about defining those boundaries

through Markup Blanket.

And the second step is about what's the most appropriate form for the generative model, because obviously we can have many different types of generative models, depending on, again, what phenomena or what questions we're trying to address.

The third stage is

how to set up the generative model.

So after settling upon the type of the generative model we want to use, we can talk about the details of the generative model and how it can be efficiently modeled to be both tractable and also

useful to address the situation of interest.

And finally, how to set up the generative process.

So as we saw in chapter two, there's an important but slight distinction between generative process and generative model.

So they're not always the same, but they're closely related to each other, generative process,

the hidden states of the external world and generative model is how the agent infer about those hidden states provided by generative process.

So considering that the

Environment is always very complex to be modeled precisely and exactly with every parameter accounted for.

We need to have a restricted set of parameters to account for in the generative process.

So that's what stage four deals about.

So all of these steps

even if not observed or followed sequentially, are really essential to setting up or the initial setup of the situation we're trying to model.

And I cannot imagine how

Any scenario can progress without observing any of these steps, at least, I mean, just by thinking about how to set up the situation or scenario.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_01:
And in the rest of the chapter, yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Just wanted to highlight again, these steps don't have to be followed in order.

They really are like a summary as Mark has just written in the live chat here.

It really is like a summary of the earlier parts of the book in terms of things that you want to capture in your consideration.

And also it's a great way to connect a lot of the technical ideas that are brought up about generative model, generative process, and so on with some bigger questions like, who are we?

Why are we making this model?

is the model going to be used so we take that in a lot of different ways in the textbook groups but which system are we modeling what is the most appropriate form for the generative model how should we set up the generative model and how to set up the generative process are all questions that must be addressed at least when actually coming through with carrying out a theoretical or empirical active inference modeling task

And the following sections are going to go into more detail on each of those four questions.

So, Ali, do you want to go for this 6-3 and carry on?


SPEAKER_01:
OK, so section 6.3 is the elaboration of the first step that we just saw, which, I mean, what systems are we modeling?

And by this question, we mean what kind of system

I mean how the system carves up the state space using the markup blanket or more precisely the active states and sensory states and I believe it is both one of the most fundamental and also one of the probably one of the most challenging steps to be carried out because

Well, markup blanket is just a conceptual tool we use to frame the natural phenomena or any other scenario we want to model.

So that scenario or that model obviously doesn't care about how we set up our markup blanket or how we knit our markup blanket.

Deciding on a proper set of active states and sensory states that would allow us to address the problems we need to explore or the questions we need to answer is not a trivial task.

and it needs lots and lots of consideration and even creativity on part of the researcher or anyone who wants to design an active inference-based model for the problem.

So that's where the significance of doing these kinds of modeling with the insights and creativity

researcher uh is i mean it will be obvious because it's not just something mechanical or despite the fact that uh the word recipe uh can somehow make us believe that it's just a recipe to follow but uh in actuality it's not uh the case at all so uh that's uh

the discussion of a markup blanket and what criteria we need to keep in mind to settle upon a proper markup blanket around our system.

And the next section, what is the most appropriate form for the generative model?

So here, again, we can have various

way to set up our generative model in terms of whether it's discrete or continuous variables we want to account for, about the time scale, is it shallow or hierarchical, about the temporal depth of the inference and planning.

So these are all problems we need to

be precise about or questions we need to precise about whenever we want to set up our generative model.

And then we go to section 6.5, how to set up the generative model.

So after precisely describing what needs to be accounted or what parameters and the nature of the

uh generative model uh needs to be accounted for uh then we will obviously need to uh address this question of how can that generative model be actually set up so setting up the variables for the generative model uh will uh

I mean, we'll be concerned about how those matrices as A, B, C, and D matrices can be defined as we saw in chapter four, and then which parts of the generative model are fixed and what is learned.

So again, it's really important to know what are the dynamics of those parameters are in terms of

the learning process and what needs to be updated consistently or learned as opposed to the variables that either don't require consistent updating or they vary quite slowly as compared to the timescale of the generative model.

And then we go

through the process of setting up the generative process.

And as I mentioned earlier, it is probably one of the most complicated steps of the recipe because of the enormous complexity of any real-time situation, and particularly the environment that the agent

will act and behave, but even if not having, I mean, even if there is not any strict or, I don't know, obvious way to go through this stage of setting up the generative process, this section provides some helpful

criteria or helpful points in order to help us in that stage as well.

So finally, after going through all of these stages, we need to somehow get, I mean, obviously we need results and we need to provide our results in a, we get our results from our active inference model and

section 6.7 addresses that, uh,

I mean, that very idea of how to simulate, visualize, analyze, and fit data using active inference.

Because it's not just enough to set up the model.

We need to get the model to work.

So how can we feed the data into the model?

How can we read the data?

And finally, how can we analyze the simulated data through the

active inference so this is in a way a kind of preliminary recipe or preliminary procedure for doing active inference or active inference modeling or at least suggested way to do those kinds of modeling but in the subsequent chapters in particular chapters seven and eight we'll go through some

helpful case studies for how to actually use these procedures to model some real world situations.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thanks.

Well, there's a lot to say on chapter six.

One piece that comes up a lot is what is in the active inference kernel, the cognitive kernel, and what are situations that we can model with active inference?

There's a huge variety of cognitive phenomena and statistical outcomes that we might be interested to study.

counterfactuals and planning like multi-scale attention and covert action like the complex ways in which memories might um influence decision making in the moment based upon associations made between different sensory modalities every amazing real world situation you can imagine and it's really helpful to think about active inference as more like a framework of

interoperable motifs that we can compose and indeed even be creative with rather than giving us all the answers at the core model because the kind of essential minimal active inference model doesn't necessarily include

every single attribute that you might be interested in just like any given linear regression isn't going to include every single feature that you're looking for this is happening in a different type of modeling framework but still there's a lot of customization and development that goes into adapting or elaborating an active inference type model for your given system or scenario of interest chapter six gives us some helpful

guidelines and things to consider which we've unpacked and expanded on elsewhere and in the textbook group we work together to characterize different systems of interest to map different parts or different observables from that system using the active inference ontology into a unified active inference type model so chapter six starts

The second half of the book, which is the more practice-oriented part of the book, and the rest of the part two is going to be a lot more about the specific kinds of generative models that you can use, discrete and continuous time, and about using them with empirical data in chapter nine.

But chapter six just stands alone as a summary of part one of the book in some ways, and a set of four questions.

Which system are we modeling?

what is the most appropriate form for the generative model how to set up the generative model and how to set up the generative process so that we can be active inference modelers ourselves all right well Ali thanks so much for all of these great uh conversations and cohorts

We will be able to process this video to clip out these first versions of the background and context overviews and we'll distribute them to the cohort so that people can show up with their curiosities and passions and we'll see where that goes.

Any last thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

It was a pleasure to go through these chapters once again with each time, obviously with a bit more understanding than the previous one.

So I'm looking forward to the next cohorts.

Awesome.

All right.

Thanks, Ali.

Farewell.

## PHfgUApaWgk

SPEAKER_01:
Moving on to chapter three, the high road to active inference.

And so recall that the high road is like the why.

So Ali, please begin, just go as long as you want on through the high road to active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so the high road to active inference

begin with the question about the conditions for the persistence of quote-unquote things.

I mean, what would we expect for a thing to behave if it persists through time?

And that's why sometimes FAP is referred to as the theory of every thing.

space thing and it's not absolutely everything but think just in this sense of uh i mean persisting through time and uh the notion that allows for this

thing to act as it as it persists through time is markup blanket so markup blanket is one of the most essential ingredients of the high road approach to active inference and that's why this section opens up with

describing how Markup Blanket allows to describe the situation of interest through this conceptual and mathematical tool.

But one thing that I always point out in almost all our textbook cohorts is

In this section, it doesn't exactly describe markup blankets rigorously enough in terms of its carving up the state space and so on.

So one thing I think can be clarifying in following

the discussions around Markov blanket is to keep in mind that it's just a boundary in the state space so it's not a necessarily spatiotemporal boundary although in many cases it manifests itself as spatiotemporal boundaries such as the

I don't know, cell membranes or organelle membranes and so on.

But it's not necessarily the case.

So I think it can be helpful to keep that in mind everywhere we see markup blanket.

But in a very simply markup blanket,

is what allows for the agent or the system to be statistically separated from its environment as is shown here in figure 3.1.

So basically Markov Blanket mathematically is just

the sensory and active states together, it consists of both of those states, and it statistically separates what happened externally or internally from each other.

So, in other words, internal states cannot observe or infer anything about the external states directly.

but only through the Markov blanket.

And that's why it's essential to describe the systems in this way, because obviously, in any sparse coupled systems, there isn't the possibility to observe the external states directly, but only

through those sensory and active states.

And one other thing that I also believe can be a bit confusing in this picture is that, yes, typo in the active states and sensory states, because it's important to observe that active state only, or the flow in the active states more precisely, only depends on

internal n-Markov states or blanket states.

And on the other hand, sensory states only depend on the external n-blanket states.

So mu and x in those two equations should be exchanged.

Yes.

Yeah.

Let me just unpack this.

Anything to add before we continue?


SPEAKER_01:
yes so this is what's known as the particular partition and that terminology was brought to the fore by carl friston's famous monograph in 2019 and it's a little bit of a pun it's a particular partition because this is just one way to partition agent from environment figure from ground

And we call what it partitions out, the blankets and internal states, as the particle.

So we can think about the most inert, least cognitive particle is like a speck of dust doing Brownian diffusion.

But also, there are more sophisticated kinds of cognitive particles that can include...

world models counterfactuals what would happen if i did this all of those kinds of sophisticated cognitive operations that we can explore in active inference so note the small typo that ali mentioned internal states and also these edges reflect causal possibilities

amongst internal external and blanket states blanket constituting the active u and sensory y states so these are map not territory this is not a spatio-temporal

articulation these are like causal maps of the world that may have to do with spatial temporal boundaries but are not simply that and sensory data or sensory states flow on to internal states internal states are involved in action selection resulting in active states

which have some causal consequence in the world, the generative process, the external states, which results in different sensory states coming in again.

And so the Markov blanket is what makes the internal and the external states conditionally independent.

And that can be thought of as just a no telekinesis, no telepathy clause.

The only way the information comes across internal and external states, which are symmetrical with each other,

is through the boundary or the holographic screen or the Markov blanket.

You can continue on, Ali.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so the next section is...

about surprise minimization and self-evidencing.

So again, this term self-evidencing is a common term in active inference literature first proposed by Jacob Howey.

So basically it refers to how a system or agent, or in other words, a particular state can

gather the evidence for its self-persistence or self-existence through time.

In other words, by inferring the state of the environment and comparing that inference with its internal states, or in other words, with its generative model, it's basically an interpretation of that

that kind of inference is on the one hand there is this dynamical interaction between the internal and external state but we can somehow interpret that physical dynamics as engaging in the active inference or

as a model for the persistence of the agent through time.

So that's basically what refers to as self-evidencing.

And then we go through the subsection 3.3.1, which sets the stage for the recent formulation of active inference as in mechanics.

which is to somehow to interpret the act of surprise minimization as minimizing the action through the Hamiltonian principle of least action, which is a variational principle.

And by variational principle is what is meant here is just a computational or mathematical tool

that allows for the computation or the specific derivations to happen.

identical to scientific theories or scientific i don't know facts or observations it's just a tool a principle mathematical uh tool uh so again one of the main um

misconceptions about free energy principle is that it is unfalsifiable.

Obviously, if we see it in this way, it doesn't make sense to say that a mathematical tool or principle is unfalsifiable because

it doesn't say anything about the empirical evidence of the phenomena we're talking about.

So that's why here it's important to understand how the surprise minimization can be seen as this kind of variational principle.

And then equation 3.1 draws the parallel between

the surprisal as defined in section in chapter two, sorry, and this chapter.

So it kind of ties up all the arguments provided in the previous chapter with this one and how everything comes together in a single formulation of active inference.

But they're just the two distinct approaches to arrive at same destination.

then we go also sorry the other important equation and again another key equation here is equation 3.2 which is a kind of ex sorry yes equation

I meant to say equation 3.2, not equation 3.1.

Sorry, my bad.

So yes, the other section is about the relations between inference, cognition, and stochastic dynamics.

I mean, all the previous discussions around how the act of inference can be seen as a kind of self-evidencing through the variational

principles such as FEP comes together to reframe the previous discussions we saw in chapter two about perception as inference and action as inference and to see the concepts of variational free energy and expected free energy through the lens of variational free energy variational

principle of least action.

So it unifies nicely all the material from chapters two and three into something that, I mean, not necessarily distinct from each other, but just two sides of


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Yeah, I find Table 3.1 to be very exciting.

It draws together statistical physics, Bayesian information, information theory, and cognitive interpretations.

So it's kind of like learn one thing, learn many things.

statistical physics has been talking about minimization of variational free energy for a long time and such methods are absolutely every day and professionalized in bayesian statistics active inference is using exactly just that to describe perception and action and so on so that's very um exciting box 3.2 describes

free energy in statistical physics and active inference.

I sometimes joke that we have a few kinds of free energy.

We have Tesla, like electrical power should be available to everybody for no cost.

We're not talking about that right now.

There's Gibbs free energy, which is the quantity that makes chemical or thermochemical reactions irreversible.

like the hydrolysis of ATP.

And when we're talking about variational free energy, we're talking about an information geometric space with similar dynamics, similar kinetics and thermodynamics, but rather than describing the reaction coordinates of a chemical reaction, we're thinking about it in terms of Bayesian updating, and this is all called the Bayesian mechanics.

3.41 continues on with variational free energy.

3.42 goes into expected free energy.

So we see this a lot.

F, variational free energy.

That's the real-time unfolding sensory flow.

And then G, expected free energy and the policy planning as inference.

Section 3.5 concludes with a novel foundation, active inference, to understand behavior and cognition.

And it describes a few features of active inference, including its distinguishing features from a few other ways that people have looked at behavior and cybernetics.

Section 3.6 goes into a bit more detail on models, policies, and trajectories having to do with agency and policy selection.

3.7, reconciliation of inactive, cybernetic, and predictive theories under active inference.

Again, the exact kind of thing that there's a whole literature on and it's always amazing to hear everybody's perspective on in the textbook groups.

3.8, active inference from the emergence of life to agency.

And 3.9, summary.

You want to just give any other thoughts that you have on chapter three.


SPEAKER_00:
Again, it's one of the probably most fundamental chapters and

I mean, the topics covered in this chapter is essential or absolutely essential to understand everything active inference related, but specifically the discussions in section 3.6 onward, again, I believe is really important to understand the broader context

of active inference and how it relates to all the other theories, but specifically section 3.8 provides a nice view of how we can

use the same modeling to the same theoretical tools to model both non-living dynamical systems or sparse coupled dynamical stochastic systems and also to

the systems that has agency or sentience so it's a much broader theoretical framework that doesn't restrict itself to only particular kinds of systems or agents and we'll see much more elaboration on that in the later wonderful


SPEAKER_01:
right that concludes our overview on chapter three

## U0rdFwflr4M

SPEAKER_01:
on to chapter two the low road to active inference so all chapters begin with a short quotation and the quotation here reads my thinking is first and last and always for the sake of my doing William James so even before reading the chapter these quotations are often great places to jump off and have a discussion so Ali please begin and go as long as you want on the low road to active inference


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so I guess...

Chapter 2, as the title suggests, it's the construction of active inference theory from the viewpoint of the low road of active inference.

So it begins by providing this notion of perception as inference.

Because more often than not, we usually think of perception as something just

in a computational sense, is a processing of the inputs, or rather, it's a raw processing of the inputs.

But here it shows that it can also be described as, or even more accurately described, as a kind of inference.

So it's not just a simple and raw processing of the inputs, as my computational model...

or a computer analogy might suggest.

It's more like something that we predict and then we compare our inputs or the inputs we get from the stimuli with our prediction and then try to somehow minimize that prediction error.

So I believe that this,

Notion of perception as inference is the most central notion of all the related theories of predictive coding, predictive processing, Bayesian brain hypothesis.

So up to now, active inference is not very different from all the other theories.

It's basically a subset or a variant of those theories.

but then it progresses into distinguishing the active inference from all the other theories and how it stands apart from the other ones.

So in section 2.1,

We began with some of the basics of probability theory, namely the Bayes theorem in box 2.1 and some simple examples about how Bayes theorem can be applied.

And again, a very important page or important part of this section will be

Page 20, which describes the concept of surprisal and specifically the statistical surprisal and how it differs from the phenomenological surprise or psychological surprise.

And how we can formulate the statistical surprise.

Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
yes just just to catch up here this example that's going to come back again and again is a person who's guessing the object that's in their hand and it could be a frog or an apple and the object is going to jump or not and so that's used as a way to talk about the bayesian updating that forms the kernel of a variety of bayesian brain like models including active inference

and then um there are the presentation of the exact base so in simple cases you can compute exactly what you want with base theorem however it's a lot more effective on large data sets to use certain approximations and heuristics that we're going to be discussing and then

Ali has highlighted that there are two concepts that are very closely related to each other regarding surprise.

There's surprise by itself and then there's Bayesian surprise.

So please pick up there what are surprise and Bayesian surprise and why do they matter here.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

So, well, surprise, I mean, the regular surprise, as we're all familiar with, is something more related to our sense of surprise or psychological sense of surprise of

observing some unexpected phenomena or unexpected behavior.

But Bayesian surprise or statistical surprise is, of course, closely related with the psychological sense of surprise, but a bit more rigorous in which it's a way to compare two probabilistic information using callback-Leibler divergence.

And somehow getting the, I mean, how unexpected that information emerging from callback divergence, and they call it the surprisal.

So surprisal is, in other words, is a way to formulating those unexpected probabilistic information.

And it doesn't necessarily align or maps onto perfectly our psychological sense of surprisal.

But as I said, it's closely related with that.

Yes.

By surprise, I mean for almost... Yes.


SPEAKER_01:
No, you take it, Ali.


SPEAKER_00:
I know.

I was just going to say that...

I was just going to say that by surprise, almost in the rest, all the other sections and chapters of the book, we basically mean this Bayesian surprise sense of the word.

And in order to distinguish that with the regular sense of surprise, sometimes in the literature, surprisal is used to refer to Bayesian surprise.


SPEAKER_01:
yes so they're both measured in information theoretic units this is all happening in information geometric spaces the first concept of surprise is applied to a given single observations how surprising is that one observation and so in that sense it's a lot like the z-score of a data point coming in with respect to a statistical distribution

So it's like you have a height distribution in a classroom and you measure one person, and then you can say, what is the z-score of that measurement?

Was it right at the center of the distribution with a z-score of zero, or were they two standard deviations higher with a z-score of two?

So it's kind of like that.

And that's why there's a discussion of probability distributions and their support, which is the x values for which they're defined, and surprise function with the fancy i.

And that's going to be a function that helps you compute how surprising each observation is given a parameterization of that distribution.

Whereas this Bayesian surprise is more related to learning.

It has to do with how much updating happens between the prior and the posterior, and that's before and after the observation.

So one could imagine a surprising observation, surprise concept one,

that either does or doesn't update the prior into a very different posterior.

So as Ali mentioned, they are not exactly the same, but it's going to be important to understand how they're different.

And that's worked out again in the case of the apple jumping.

Box 2.2 continues with a discussion of expectations.

Now expectation in everyday parlance might be specifically referring to something in the future, like I expect it to rain tomorrow.

And in statistics, when we talk about the expectation, we're talking about the weighted average or the center of gravity of a distribution.

And that can be in both a discrete distribution, at which point you have a weighted sum,

or a continuous distribution in which case it's an integral so you can have an expectation for the humidity tomorrow and so that might refer to the center of gravity at a t equals plus one but just taken alone expectation means center of gravity of a statistical distribution not anticipation

Section 2.3 is going to describe how some of this, how this low road that we're on is going to connect to biological inference.

There's more discussion of the generative model and the generative process, and a little bit of a hint that the generative model captures aspects of the generative process, which is where we see a lot of the classical cybernetic theorems and concepts like requisite diversity, good regulator theorem, and so on.

However, the generative model does not have to be exactly isomorphic with the generative process.

For example, the generative process, the temperature in the room might be a continuous variable, but then the generative model might be discrete, only modeling integer-based temperatures, or might be categorical like too hot, just right, and too cold.

So there's a lot of articulations that can be done because of how flexible and interoperable generative models are with each other.

Figure 2.2 is going to expand upon that chapter one representation of the cybernetic action perception loop.

And we're going to see this more in terms of a generative model and generative process articulation, and there are incoming, speaking from the perspective of the generative model, the agent, there are incoming and outgoing

dependencies in this graph and this is a little bit like a schema more so than a formal graph but also it is like a bayesian graph where nodes are variables and edges are causal relationships and so we have the internal states of the model

the external states of the generative process, and then the blanket states that make internal and external states conditionally independent.

And again, speaking from the perspective of the agent, although there is a symmetry, we can talk about the incoming

sensory signals happening from the observations handed from the process passed on to the internal states of the generative model and then the outgoing actions that are selected that then can influence the hidden state of the world for example going and turning on the heater to increase the temperature in the room and so this action perception loop or particular partition is going to get explored in a lot more detail in the coming sections

previous section 2.3 was on perception as inference and now action as inference is going to be discussed and that is where they say the discussion to this point is common to all Bayesian brain theories we now introduce the simple but fundamental Advance offered by active inference which is the extension of this inferential perspective to consideration of action as inference perception and action cooperate to realize a single objective

section 2.5 is about minimizing the discrepancy between the model and the world we already described that there's two ways for this to happen change your mind and change the world that's how the discrepancy can be reduced or managed we see a variant of the action perception loop where the agent is making perceptions uh predictive uh models of the world

that through perception are being juxtaposed with observations handed from the generative process, the world, and a discrepancy is realized, some non-zero discrepancy.

And then here are those two paths to minimize free energy, change beliefs by perception and learning, or change the world through action.

Section 2.6 is going to discuss how the exact Bayesian approach described earlier is absolutely spot on if you have infinite computing resources.

However, we're often interested in rapid or large data sets where we want to be able to get approximate Bayesian computation or probably approximately correct computation in a vastly accelerated fashion.

And so that is going to be approached using what's called variational Bayesian inference that's unpacked in chapter four.

But it suffices to say that variational Bayesian inference implies substituting two intractable quantities, the posterior probability and log model evidence,

with two quantities that approximate them but can be computed efficiently.

The approximate posterior Q and a variational free energy.

So it transforms an intractable estimation problem into a highly tractable optimization problem.

Pick up from there, Ali.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, sorry, I just wanted to point out

a couple of things especially about section 2.3 because I believe it is one of the crucial sections of this chapter and in fact the whole book because it provides some of the justifications of using Bayesian inference as opposed to some other mathematical techniques such as maximum likelihood estimation but

More important than that, I think it's this concept of optimality which comes into play in almost

uh, everywhere, uh, in the literature and, uh, of course in this book.

Uh, so there are actually two notions of optimality, uh, which has not discussed, uh, in detail here, namely Bayesian optimality and Jane's optimality.

Uh, but, uh, some in some of the recent papers and Bayesian mechanics, uh, Dalton's active, I develop Maxwell Ramstein and others have shown that those two, uh, concepts of optimality.

are actually congruent with each other.

So that's one of the reasons that the duality between FEP, free energy principle, and constrained maximum entropy principle

I mean, it's one of the justifications for providing that dual formalism between those two.

But another point I wanted to mention here is because I've seen that using the word hidden state,

can be a bit confusing for some people because when we observe something as an observation, obviously it is not quote-unquote hidden, right?

So what a hidden state here refers to is actually the hidden cause of that observation.

So it's not that the observation itself is hidden,

hidden from the observational or it's unobserved.

So that might be a bit confusing if we don't take into consideration the exact meaning of the hidden state or latent state here and in the rest of the literature.

So continuing from section 2.6, here we see one of the two central equations of active inference, which is equation 2.5.

for variational free energy.

So it's, as I said, I mean, understanding this equation and how each line of its formulation represents in terms of the, I mean, trade-off between energy entropy or complexity and accuracy or divergence and evidence is key to understanding almost everything in the

rest of the book and in many other literature on active inference.

So this is the perceptual part of active inference.

So variation-free energy is

parameter that is the notion that parameterizes the surprisal of our perceptual information we have about the external states.

And then we'll see in the next section the

related and almost symmetrical formulation to variational free energy, namely expected free energy, which is basically the action

part of the active inference.

So we can see how those two can somehow be seen as a kind of unified formalism, but described in the alternate expressions.

But another thing about equation 2.5 is it may be a bit, I don't know,

daunting to see all the relations between those three lines of equation and how we can get from one to the other.

So there are some supplementary materials that we have developed in the past weeks, which I think can help in clarifying how the derivations of these three lines of equation be done so.

I hope they would be clarifying and help to understand how those three lines relate to each other.

But the key point here is

to understand that variation of free energy is not something absolute, but it's just an upper bound for the minimization.

So as Daniel just mentioned, it's untractable to have an absolute amount for the surprisal to be minimized.

So we need to have an upper bound in order to make that more tractable because

By Jane's inequality, as we saw in chapter 4, I think, we can see that how the upper bound of a surprisal necessarily provides a condition for minimizing the precise or the exact free energy.

And that's the key insight of equation 2.5, or the notion of variation of free energy, which is to provide this upper bound instead of the exact amount of surprisal to be minimized.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, what I'll add there is if you knew exactly how well you should be surprised by a given data point Y, then you would have had the optimal model.

However, that is not tractable, and so

by making a quantity that's always higher or an upper bound, the variational free energy F, which is a function of broadly Q, our beliefs, our variational beliefs, which are built in a way that makes them very compositional, very optimizable, very interpretable, and data.

and we can reduce the divergence here the kl divergence with a double line between q our beliefs and p the kind of actuality of it and if we can reduce this divergence in other words minimize the free energy then we will come closer and closer to the true surprise function and do that in a tractable incrementally optimizable way so equation 2.5

is going to be the variational free energy different ways that it can be represented as it takes in data and beliefs about the world q and then this is going to be expanded into the future to include action with g the expected free energy

Now, there's a lot more that we can say about this.

There's a lot of technicalities to go into, but broadly, notice that G, the expected free energy, is a functional of policy, pi, because it's only being evaluated to select amongst different action outcomes, pi,

and another important difference is that it's going to be describing sensory outcomes that haven't yet happened a sort of what would i perceive if i did a or what if i did b and it's that kind of comparison that allows the expected free energy functional here to be used in action selection or policy selection as inference planning as inference

that section is expanded upon and in figure 2.6 we see a very nice representation of the expected free energy equation and then how when certain aspects of this equation or situation are zeroed out we get certain other familiar cases for example

where there's no epistemic value, there's no information to learn, then you get ruthless expected utility theory.

And conversely, where there is no pragmatic value to extract, so all outcomes are equally valid or preferable, then you get things like InfoMax principle and optimal Bayesian design.

And then everything in between is the space that we're interested in.

And so this figure 2.6 shows that the expected free energy functional can be seen as like a generalization of a lot of other settings related to perception and action and planning amidst uncertainty.

and section 2.9 closes the low road they took us all the way to active inference from bayes theorem through the generative model onto active inference and clarifies these two notions of variational free energy that's the real-time perceptual unfolding evidence lower bound on surprisal tractable optimizable and so on

And F and G, the expected free energy, which is able to do planning as inference or policy selection as inference.

Expected free energy is fundamentally prospective and that enables counterfactual cognition.

section 2.10 summarizes active inference is the theory of how living artifacts underwrite their existence by minimizing surprise or attractable proxy to surprise variational free energy via perception and action and they motivate that from a first principles base theorem starting place any closing thoughts on chapter 2 ali


SPEAKER_00:
I would just humbly suggest for the people who want to go through this chapter to try their best to really understand specifically what equation 2.5 and 2.6 represents and how to use those equations to describe different

situations with uh some uh missing elements as well uh because uh i believe those sections and uh particularly those equations are absolutely essential uh to for understanding uh everything active inference related both in this in the rest of this book and uh in rest of the and in almost all


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

And just the last thought I'll give on chapter two is this is exactly the work that we do in the Active Inference textbook group.

We really welcome all backgrounds.

Every single question and uncertainty you have is beautiful.

We have a lot of resources that Ali and others make to make the math approachable and rigorous.

and natural language descriptions of the equations and so on so yes it's really important to understand the equations because after all that's like the skeleton that gives meaning to our usage and fluency of the active inference ontology which ali and i are speaking right now

We're not just saying surprise is related to this because we felt it that way.

There is an underpinning and it is a really interesting life's work to explore it, but we're finding ways to communicate it and learn and teach it better and better every time.

So that's chapter two.

That's the low road.

## rJXyQzwUFJE

SPEAKER_00:
all right so now we are in chapter six a recipe for designing active inference models abraham lincoln give me six hours to chop down a tree and i will spend the first four sharpening the axe all right ali what does the quote mean and please lead us in to this discussion


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so as the opening quotation suggests, it's about honing the skill set for applying Active Inference Framework to model the actual empirical situations that we may use Active Inference for.

And it frames it as a four-step recipe

actually do this kind of model.

Uh, although it's termed as recipe, but, uh, I believe it's more like a guideline and it's not like, uh, I don't know, cooking recipe that needs to be, uh, needs to be observed, uh, strictly.

Uh, so it's more like suggestions or guidelines to, uh,

to begin to apply active inference framework in any kind of situation we'd like.

So section 6.2 outlines those four steps.

So the first step is, which system are we modeling?

in terms of how we can define the markup blanket that most effectively and efficiently the problem or question we want to explore through that modeling through the modeling of that situation so first step is about defining those boundaries of

through Markup Blanket.

And the second step is about what's the most appropriate form for the generative model, because obviously we can have many different types of generative models depending on, again, what phenomena or what

questions we're trying to address.

The third stage is how to set up the generative model.

So after settling upon the type of the generative model we want to use, we can talk about the details of the generative model and how

It can be efficiently modeled to be both tractable and also useful to address the situation of interest.

And finally, how to set up the generative process.

So as we saw in chapter two, there's an important but slight distinction between generative process and generative model.

So they're not always the same, but they're closely related to each other, generative process.

The hidden states of the external world and generative model is how the agent infer about those hidden states provided by generative process.

considering that the environment is always very complex to be modeled precisely and exactly with every parameter accounted for, we need to have a restricted set of parameters to account for in the generative process.

So that's what stage four

deals about.

So all of these steps, even if not observed or followed sequentially, are really, I mean, essential to setting up, I mean, or the initial setup of the situation we're trying to model.

And I cannot imagine how

Any scenario can progress without observing any of these steps, at least, I mean, just by thinking about how to set up the situation or scenario.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_01:
And in the rest of the chapter, yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Just wanted to highlight again, these steps don't have to be followed in order.

They really are like a summary as Mark has just written in the live chat here.

It really is like a summary of the earlier parts of the book in terms of things that you want to capture in your consideration.

And also it's a great way to connect a lot of the technical ideas that are brought up about generative model, generative process, and so on with some bigger questions like, who are we?

Why are we making this model?

is the model going to be used so we take that in a lot of different ways in the textbook groups but which system are we modeling what is the most appropriate form for the generative model how should we set up the generative model and how to set up the generative process are all questions that must be addressed at least when actually coming through with carrying out a theoretical or empirical active inference modeling task

And the following sections are going to go into more detail on each of those four questions.

So Ali, do you want to go for this 6.3 and carry on?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so section 6.3 is the elaboration of the first step that we just saw, which

I mean, what systems are we modeling?

And by this question, we mean how, I mean, what kind of system, I mean, how the system carves up the state space using the markup blanket or more precisely the active states and sensory states.

And I believe it is,

both one of the most fundamental and also probably one of the most challenging steps to be carried out because

Well, markup blanket is just a conceptual tool we use to frame the natural phenomena or any other scenario we want to model.

So that scenario or that model obviously doesn't care about how we set up our markup blanket or how we knit our markup blanket.

deciding on a proper set of active states and sensory states that would allow us to address the problems we need to explore or the questions we need to answer is not a trivial task and it needs lots of lots of consideration and even creativity on part of the researcher or anyone who wants to

design an active inference based model for the problem.

So that's where the, I mean, the significance of doing these kinds of modeling with the insights and creativity of a

researcher uh is i mean it will be obvious because it's not just something mechanical or despite the fact that uh the word recipe uh

can somehow make us believe that it's just a recipe to follow.

But in actuality, it's not the case at all.

So that's the discussion of Markup Blanket and what criteria we need to keep in mind to settle upon a proper

proper markup blanket around our system.

And the next section, what is the most appropriate form for the generative model?

So here, again, we can have various ways to set up our generative model in terms of whether it's discrete or continuous variables we want to account for.

About the time scale, is it shallow or hierarchical?

About the temporal depth of the inference and planning?

So these are all problems we need to...

be precise about or questions we need to precise about whenever we want to set up our generative model.

And then we go to section 6.5, how to set up the generative model.

So after precisely describing what needs to be accounted or what parameters and the nature of the

generative model needs to be accounted for, then we need to address this question of how can that generative model be actually set up.

So setting up the variables for the generative model

will be concerned about how those matrices as A, B, C, and D matrices can be defined as we saw in chapter four.

and then which parts of the generative model are fixed and what is learned.

So again, it's really important to know what are the dynamics of those parameters are in terms of

the learning process and what needs to be updated consistently or learned as opposed to the variables that either don't require consistent updating or they vary quite slowly as compared to the timescale of the generative model.

And then we go

through the process of setting up the generative process.

And as I mentioned earlier, it is probably one of the most complicated steps of the recipe because of the enormous complexity of any real-time situation, and particularly the environment that the agent

or act and behave.

But even if not having, I mean, even if there is not any

strict or, I don't know, obvious way to go through this stage of setting up the generative process.

This section provides some helpful criteria or helpful points in order to help us

in that stage as well.

So finally, after going through all of these stages, we need to somehow get, I mean, obviously we need results and we need to provide our results in a, we get our results from our active inference model.

And section 6.7 addresses that very idea of how to simulate, visualize, analyze, and fit data using active inference, because it's not just enough to set up

the model, we need to get the model to work.

So how can we feed the data into the model?

How can we read the data?

And finally, how can we analyze the simulated data through the active inference?

So this is, in a way, a kind of preliminary

recipe or preliminary procedure for doing active inference or active inference modeling, or at least suggested way to do those kinds of modeling.

But in the subsequent chapters, in particular chapters seven and eight, we'll go through some helpful case studies for how to actually use these procedures to model some real world situations and


SPEAKER_00:
awesome thanks well there's a lot to say on chapter six one piece that comes up a lot is what is in the active inference kernel the cognitive kernel and what are situations that we can model with active inference there's a huge variety of cognitive phenomena and statistical outcomes that we might be interested to study like

counterfactuals and planning like multi-scale attention and covert action like the complex ways in which memories might influence decision making in the moment based upon associations made between different sensory modalities every amazing real world situation you can imagine and it's really helpful to think about active inference as more like a framework of

interoperable motifs that we can compose and indeed even be creative with rather than giving us all the answers at the core model because the kind of essential minimal active inference model doesn't necessarily include

every single attribute that you might be interested in just like any given linear regression isn't going to include every single feature that you're looking for this is happening in a different type of modeling framework but still there's a lot of customization and development that goes into adapting or elaborating an active inference type model for your given system or scenario of interest chapter six gives us some helpful

guidelines and things to consider which we've unpacked and expanded on elsewhere and in the textbook group we work together to characterize different systems of interest to map different parts or different observables from that system using the active inference ontology into a unified active inference type model so chapter six starts

The second half of the book, which is the more practice-oriented part of the book, and the rest of the part two is going to be a lot more about the specific kinds of generative models that you can use, discrete and continuous time, and about using them with empirical data in chapter nine.

But chapter six just stands alone as a summary of part one of the book in some ways, and a set of four questions.

Which system are we modeling?

What is the most appropriate form for the generative model?

How to set up the generative model and how to set up the generative process so that we can be active inference modelers ourselves?

All right.

Well, Ali, thanks so much for all of these great conversations and cohorts.

We will be able to process this video to clip out these first versions of the background and context overviews and we'll distribute them to the cohort so that people can show up with their curiosities and passions and we'll see where that goes.

Any last thoughts?


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

It was a pleasure to go through these chapters once again with each time, obviously with a bit more understanding than the previous one.

So I'm looking forward to the next cohorts.

Awesome.

All right.

Thanks, Ali.

Farewell.

## spYhr_SdqOw

SPEAKER_00:
this section is going to be the chapter one and overview of the active inference textbook so shown here are the table of contents there are 10 chapters and three appendices in this book and they're separated into part one with chapters one through five and part two chapter six through ten ali do you want to give any overview thoughts on the organization or structure of the book


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, so can you hear me now?

Sorry.

Yes.

Okay, so part one is basically more aligned in terms of the theoretical construction of the active inference and it provides some conceptual and theoretical tools to be utilized in the second part because for the second part,

where we mostly deal with the practical side of active inference, how to actually implement active inference to model some of the systems of interest.

So that's basically the main justification behind dividing up these chapters into two.


SPEAKER_00:
great all right we're going to pass over the short preface written by carl friston but it's worth a read it's only several pages long so let's go to chapter one overview so do you have any opening thoughts on chapter one or where does one even begin with such a book sure uh yeah


SPEAKER_01:
For chapter one, I think probably the most central theme of chapter one is about the two different approaches to active inference, namely the high road and the low road.

And I think it provides a really nice perspective to view a kind of a whole picture and how the different components of active inference fit together.

Uh, so, but, um, also I, I, uh, highly recommend, uh, chapter 13 from this book, Andy Clark and it's, uh, and, uh, Andy Clark and his critics, uh, written by, um, chapter 13, I think is entitled beyond the desert landscape written by Carl Friston in which he provides more elaborate and a bit philosophical, uh, reasoning behind, uh, what exactly are.

low road and high road and what are the aims of each approach and the distinction between those two so

For chapter one, we begin obviously with an introductory paragraph, which sets the stage for all the components that would be discussed in this chapter.

But a very important section, I believe, is section two here, which is how do living organisms persist and act adaptively, which is basically the main

question Active Inference is trying to address.

If we want to describe active inference in, I mean, minimalistically with only one sentence or two, probably we can say something to the effect that it's a theory that addressed this very question here.

So I opened up this chapter with the importance

question and then action three which is again a continuation of section one but a bit more specifically about active inference and how active inference is addressing the question provided in the section two so

Basically, again, active inference is a modeling framework for modeling the behaviors from first principles.

And what is meant by first principles will be elaborated upon in the following chapters, following sections, and also, obviously, in the following chapters.

somehow use variational principles such as free energy principle to construct modeling and mathematical tools that will enable us to describe dynamical systems of living and even non-living agents in terms of those variational principles.

and how those agents or those systems are coupled with their environment.

So that's basically the unificatory principle that is at the heart of this active inference approach because, yes, exactly here, it's a kind of description of this action perception loop that is at the heart of active inference

FEP framework.

And then we go to chapter, sorry, section 1.4, which is, again, a description of the structure of the book and why those two parts are divided as such.

So as I said earlier, first part is more

concerned with the theoretical underpinnings of active inference.

And the second part is more about the practical side of it, as we see in the subsection headings here.

So that's, yeah.

And then a very important diagram, which will provide very helpful as we whole book is provided in figure 1.2.

which kind of ties all the different strands of various related theories, such as predictive coding, predictive processing, Bayesian brain hypothesis, and so on.

into a kind of unified and integrated framework by using those two trajectories of constructing active inference, namely the high road and the low road.

So it literally here is represented as the high road and the low road in this diagram.

So very briefly,

High Road is a kind of top-down approach to active inference.

It begins with the question, how things should act if they exist, in other words, if they persist through time, sorry.

In other words, it kind of sets the stage for developing the concept of markup blankets.

and then obviously with by setting that also surprise minimization it attempts to elaborate that road by adding other aspects of modeling other aspects of theory such as

predictive processing, self-evidencing, autopoiesis, and so on, and then reach an integrated version of active inference, which is basically an integration between perception and action.

So I believe the main thing that sets active inference apart from all the other related theories, such as predictive processing and predictive coding,

is the very deep integration of action and perception.

So action is not just some afterthought or some additional component that needs to be accounted for.

It is deeply woven into the fabric of the theory.

So as we'll see, especially in chapters two and three,

Even the mathematical formalism for perception and action are interestingly similar to each other and even symmetric.

And it shows that perception and action are actually not separate and distinct, totally distinct entities and concepts and active inference

definitely provides a very promising framework to integrate them into a holistic framework.

And another approach to construct that same theory is to begin with the probabilistic description of Bayes' theorem and try to build up

the formalism of active inference using Bayes' inference theorem, Bayes' theorem and Bayesian statistical inference.

So again, we here see some very,

I mean, apparently different and distinct strands, such as predictive coding, Bayesian brain hypothesis, and so on.

But as we see, all of those different strands can be united and tied together within this low-road approach to active inference.

So I guess that's... I'll just give one short thought.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

These are great.

yeah just one short thought thank you ollie for these great summaries the low road and the high road are going to be explored in a lot more detail in the coming chapters two and three we can think of the high road as being a y because it describes how persistent or remeasurable systems exist now they might be using bayes theorem or they might be using any other kind of mechanism internally but the high road is describing the y of existence

From the low road, the bottom-up approach is kind of like a how.

You could use Bayes' theorem to describe persistent autopoetic entities

or you could use bayes theorem for other purposes too so where these two roads intersect is active inference and we have a lot more discussion coming and of course unpacked in the textbook groups about how these really map on to bottom up and top down causation and the plurality of y's that we approach in different settings good to continue

yes sure some of the coming sections uh of this chapter continuing from page eight are going to describe what are happening in the next chapters so chapter two is going to set out the low road perspective

Chapter three is going to describe the high road.

Chapter four, we will unpack active inference more formally.

That's one of the math heavy chapters.

Chapter five, we'll move from formal treatments to biological implications of active inference with a special focus on mammalian neurophysiology.

chapter five sets out the process theory associated with active inference and gives a lot of hands-on and empirical examples and that's a lot of the first part of the book they're then going to summarize some of the key points and distillations from that theory heavy first section one of them is that as ali mentioned perception and action are complementary processes and ways that fulfill the same imperative

Free energy minimization.

We sometimes summarize that by saying that in the pursuit of the minimization of free energy, agents can either change their mind or change the world.

Change your mind is associated with perception and learning.

And those are distinguished later.

And changing the world is associated with action.

There's some discussion about action selection and optimal policy selection.

And all cognitive operations in active inference are conceptualized as inference over generative models.

So the true kernel, the cognitive kernel of active inference is going to be the generative model.

Want to pick up from here or give any thoughts on generative models and then carry on.

Thanks, Ali.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one point is there is a common misconception about generative models, which is that generative models only refers to the inner states of the system and also its markup blanket, but actually generative model kind of encompass all the

states of interest of the situation we're trying to model.

So it also encodes the probabilistic information about the external states as well.

So generative model can be thought of as kind of the whole state of the system.

And by system here, I mean the coupled

couple dynamics between the internal and external states.

So that might be helpful to keep in mind in the book.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

One other distinction that comes up and is used a lot nowadays, although it's not always used in prior literature, is the distinction between the generative model and the generative process.

We're going to come back to it, but usually

The generative model is being used to describe our statistical model of the agent of interest, and the generative process is the process that generates observations that are then passed to the generative model as observations.

However, because generative models can be generative processes for each other, these two are not necessarily distinct in principle.

So in different simulations and in different specific cases, generative models can also be generative processes for each other.

That leads us towards talking about ecosystems of shared intelligence and interactions amongst generative models.

But when we're talking about generative model, it's like the organism or the system of interest that we're focused on.

are some more uh themes that arise from the first half of the book now we're on page 11 action is quintessentially goal directed and purpose of we talk a lot about how preference plays a role in shaping action selection in active inference and the goal directed nature of active inference will be unpacked in chapters two and three they discuss how various constructs of active inference have plausible biological analogs in the brain

Once one has defined a specific generative model for a problem at hand, one can move from active inference as a normative theory to active inference as a process theory, which makes specific empirical predictions.

And there's many, many interesting philosophy of science type discussions that we have about explain, predict, design, control.

And then we get to section 1.4.2, giving overview on part two, active inference in practice.

So I'll just continue on.

Chapter six is going to introduce a recipe for building active inference models.

So this is where the step-by-step comes into play.

It's gonna give a sequence of steps and approaches that you can take to go from

understanding the structural aspects of a system or phenomena of interest and build your way towards having an active inference model that can then be implemented in code and we have various examples and we're there in the textbook group to work with everyone who wants to take this journey but chapter six is going to describe that process of building the active inference generative model so that's a recipe chapter

there's a lot more that goes into the restaurant also as we kind of have fun exploring chapter 7 and 8 are like a pair and they describe two different broad families of generative models now these two families of generative models they work well they play well with each other but they are very educationally relevant to also consider separately chapter 7 is going to focus on the discrete time

generative model and chapter eight is going to focus on the continuous time generative models and again these discrete and continuous time models can be nested and interoperable however they do describe some very important different situations and so chapter seven and eight have a lot of technical information on the discrete and continuous time formulations of active inference and also about how they integrate together

chapter nine is illustrations of how active inference models can be used to analyze data from behavioral experiments and so this kind of goes beyond chapter six's recipe and it talks about some of the process of making a behavioral experiment and then using the outcomes of that behavioral experiment the data from that experiment and using that to parameterize and do statistics with the active inference generative model

and chapter 10 brings it all together chapter 10 is a lot like chapter one and we've even joked of reading the book backwards that's how great chapter 10 is so for those who are reading chapter one consider reading chapter 10 next and then picking back up with chapter two because chapter 10 is going to give some judgments and also sketch some exciting future directions for where active inference is in relationship to other fields and where it's going


SPEAKER_01:
So I also second that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

The second part of the book illustrates a broad variety of models of biological and cognitive phenomena.

So it's an application oriented second half of the book.

And we have a lot of accessory code and approaches and notebooks.

So one may not find that this is the one stop shop that they were looking for.

However, for those who dive in, there's absolutely more than enough to scaffold their learning journey.

And then section 1.5 is the summary.

The chapter introduces the active inference approach to explain biological problems from a normative perspective and preview some implications of this perspective that will be unpacked in later chapters.

It describes the structural outline of the book, chapters one through five being theory, chapter six through 10 being practice.

And then it signals that the next two chapters are going to develop the low and the high road perspectives.

And all together,

That is chapter one.

Any other thoughts on chapter one?


SPEAKER_01:
Not specifically, but I think it provides a really good context to the rest of the book in terms of how all the different elements of Active Inference comes into play in addressing different problems.

Awesome.

## xlrZ00NQNHo

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome it's february 20th 7th 2023 we're here in active inference book stream number 2.1 with thomas parr as well as terry and ali so thank you all for joining this should be a very fun discussion and let's go first by way of introduction and beginning to thomas

Welcome, and please, how did you come to write this textbook in collaboration with Pizzulo and Friston?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, again, thank you very much for having me here.

How did we come to write the textbook?

That's a good question.

I think Giovanni was the person who really had the idea and pushed for this, but I think Carl had already

previously been approached by the editor who ended up managing the publication of the book.

And when Giovanni had the idea that this would be a really useful contribution, he and I had a number of discussions about it, both in London and in Rome where he's based.

and sort of put out a plan and sort of came up with something that we hoped would be useful for the community.

I suppose part of the reason why we thought it'd be a useful thing to do is that active inference is a very multidisciplinary type field that draws a lot from lots of different domains.

And I think one of the struggles

know we all had when we started out in it and i think certainly what students and people who are interested in the topics say to us is that it's often quite difficult trying to find all of these different topics trying to find the right background when they don't all come from one field so putting it all together in one book with a consistent notation consistent language and trying to make it complete we hoped would uh just make the field a little bit more accessible um to others who wanted to get involved


SPEAKER_00:
How did this dovetail or integrate with your own education and research directions?

What phases or stages were you moving through while this discussion was happening?


SPEAKER_03:
When we initially started discussing it, it must have been probably the last year of my PhD.

By that stage, I'd spent

three or four sorry two to three years sort of getting to grips with active inference having spent you know being relatively recent in terms of learning some of the key material myself I think it was quite a good stage to be at in terms of thinking about what I would have wanted to know a few years previously

The actual writing of the book then carried on over the next year or two.

So by that stage, I was back in clinical training as well, which I think is also a useful perspective in terms of some of the later chapters and thinking about application of active inference type models in the context of clinical conditions and psychiatry and neurology and those sorts of areas.


SPEAKER_00:
That's actually a really interesting note.

How did the clinical experiences give a perspective on the book or how did the book or your learning in these abstract and theoretical domains give a different insight in the clinical setting?


SPEAKER_03:
It's a good question, and I think you're right to highlight the bidirectionality of it.

Both are useful in different ways.

I think, for me, the clinical setting is quite useful in terms of thinking, first of all,

interacting with different sort of audience.

So people who may be much more skilled on the clinical side of things, maybe had less experience on the mathematical computational side of things, but may still find the concepts very useful.

So from that side of things, it's quite a useful exercise in being able to communicate these things.

And then there's sort of the interaction on the patient side of things and trying to, you know, I think it makes a big difference, first of all, in

interacting with patients has an impact on how you might think about the interesting questions and the things you might want to use that to inference for but also having an understanding of principles behind it helps you I think formulate your questions about how individual patients might present or the reasons for that I think is a useful way of thinking about I mean I suppose on two levels so one in terms of understanding

understanding particular sorts of pathology in terms of the inferences that might have gone wrong, but also in terms of understanding your own active inferential processes when you're trying to work out what's going on yourself, asking the right sort of questions to gather the right sort of information and test those internal hypotheses.

I think that's a very useful way of thinking about being a doctor.


SPEAKER_00:
awesome yeah a lot to say about that the bayesian optimal differential diagnosis ali or terry on any of these thoughts do you have any questions or comments you want to raise there or any follow-ups


SPEAKER_01:
Well, yeah, actually, I just wanted to ask, what are the intended audience of the book?

And what do you think are the minimum prerequisites for going through the whole book?

Because I'm sure you'll agree that even today, the intersection between the people who are well-versed in mathematics and the people who have a solid background in, say, neurobiology are

uh quite narrow so um so what's the solution here and what did you think about about the organizational structure of the book that could accommodate various audiences so um yeah


SPEAKER_03:
Again, another really good question and I think you're right to highlight that that intersection is relatively narrow and there are lots and lots of people who I think struggle to feel involved in those kinds of discussions and you're absolutely right to say that and I think one of the solutions is the sorts of things that you guys are doing in terms of setting up these reading groups, trying to open that up, trying to provide educational resources.

I think that's really very important.

In terms of the specific questions about the book itself, who's the audience?

And what are the prerequisites?

I think it sort of depends what you want to get out of it and what your purpose is in reading it.

So some aspects of the book I suppose will appeal more to some audiences and others to other kinds of audience.

I would hope that the readership or the audience is relatively broad because we've tried to provide as much background as we can on sort of the mathematical and the neurobiological side of things to try and complement the skill set of whoever's not in that intersection who comes to it, who may need a bit more sort of neurobiological grounding or who may need a bit more mathematical and technical grounding.

But I think ultimately,

Like with most textbooks, you don't necessarily need to come to it thinking, I'm going to understand everything in this book when I come away from it.

Some people may want to, but other people, depending upon what they want to get out of it, they might say, actually, what I really want to get out of this is an understanding of some of the kind of message passing as it manifests in the brain.

Whereas other people might come to it and say, actually, I already understand a bit about that.

And what I want to get out of this is to understand a bit more of the technical detail.

If you're a roboticist coming to this, it probably doesn't matter too much about how things are implemented in the brain.

If you're a neurobiologist coming to this,

you may not need to know the details of the implementation as long as you can understand it conceptually.

And I hope the organisation, particularly putting things like the appendices with the detailed information at the back, tries to keep most of the text a bit more accessible, the early chapters being relatively light on the technical material and building up the concepts before then moving into the more technical aspects.


SPEAKER_00:
about the uh chapters let's actually just take a quick look at the chapters um we're in the uh coda document that we use so perhaps you could just say one or a few sentences on each chapter what's the short of each chapter what is it doing in this 10 chapter work


SPEAKER_03:
You're testing my memory now.


SPEAKER_00:
The titles are there.

The cues are there.

Epistemic cues are there.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Well, the overview is what it says on the tin.

It's a description of what's to come in the subsequent chapters to try and orientate people.

And the low road and high road, I think, again, Giovanni has to take credit for this idea of saying, actually, there's quite a, it's often difficult to know where to begin when you're trying to understand active interference and the free energy principle and the Bayesian brain and all those sorts of things, because it seems like there are so many potential starting points, all of which ultimately, I think, get at the same thing.

But knowing where you begin is often really quite difficult.

And so these two chapters were designed to explicitly acknowledge that difficulty.

So the idea of the low road is to say, well, let's take a pragmatic perspective where we take ideas that have developed in neuroscience based upon our understanding of the brain and of psychology and models that have been developed to explain those things.

And let's take those to their conclusion, which is, in a sense, the free energy principle, which is active inference, the idea of using our internal models both to drive behavior and to understand what's going on in the world around us.

The High Road perspective was designed to take a different approach to that.

And instead of starting from what's already been developed in the sort of natural trajectory in the neurosciences, the High Road chapter was more saying, let's start from first principles as much as we can.

And here was a tricky balance to try and make sure that we didn't go too far in depth, that we put people off by the third chapter, but enough that people might get a bit of a conceptual sense of where you might go with this.

And here we sort of started from the kind of physics of self-organisation, the ideas that come underneath that, and how those ideas can then feed back into this same idea of active influence that the neuroscientists and psychology seem to have arrived at relatively naturally.

I suppose chapter four is when things start getting a bit more technical.

and starts dealing with the specifics that I think most people would want to know if they were implementing these models themselves.

So trying to understand exactly how you construct an internal model, how you specify it, write it down mathematically, how you perform inference with those, how you understand the message passing schemes.

chapter five then takes a step back and thinks, well, in the context of the brain, in the context of neurobiology, what do those things actually look like?

How do we understand those inferential processes with different kinds of generative models in terms of what we know about message passing and synaptic communication?

And those five chapters together really are the first part of the book.

And the subsequent five chapters really then take you through

the idea of actually applying those ideas in particular domains.

And so chapter six is sort of the overview chapter looking at the rest of it.

And it's really setting out if you wanted to sit down and design a model, either conceptually or computationally, these are the steps you would have to go through to construct that.

And then chapters seven and eight take you through that sort of recipe for several examples, building up different concepts.

both for models designed in discrete time, where you're formulating things as a sequence of events, and models formulated in continuous time, where we work with continuous dynamical systems and differential equations.

Chapter 9, as I mentioned before, one of my interests is in the clinical domain and trying to understand what sort of models people use to perform inference, how those can go wrong.

And part of the research on that is thinking, well, how do we then fit these models and use them to actually draw inferences about what's going on with particular individuals or groups of individuals?

And then chapter 10 takes the broadest perspective and looks at how that relates to a range of other theories and ideas, both in the neurosciences and beyond.

And then I'm sure the appendices speak for themselves.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome, great overview.

Let's come back to our questions.

So you laid out that the first half of the book is about learning and the second half of the book is about applying and it begins with that recipe.

so if chapter six is the recipe as a chef and sous chef yourself what else have you found was important in the restaurant what is your full stack active inference modeling look like and

Maybe summarizing in six or going beyond what was in six, like what have you found to be important as part of the modeling journey, especially with teams where people might have like different levels of domain specific knowledge or active knowledge?


SPEAKER_03:
I like the restaurant analogy, actually.

And I was thinking, I suppose the first thing that anybody needs to do if they're setting up a restaurant or a model is thinking about who their customers are and what they might want.

And so in the scientific domain, you're thinking, well, what sort of journal am I planning on submitting this to?

What sort of questions are the communities who read those journal articles interested in?

And I think that's a really important first step so that you know what I'm actually trying to do with this model.

What's not such a good idea often, although you can find interesting things by doing it, is to say, well, I'm going to develop a model and work out what it's for later on.

You can end up sort of tying yourself up a little bit by doing that.

Although there is value in exploring as I think we would all agree.

Then

I suppose in terms of ingredients, it's relatively straightforward and deliberately so.

The idea of these sorts of models is that they should be relatively accessible, relatively easy to construct without having to make use of large supercomputers or anything like that.

A lot of the models that I develop can be run on a laptop fairly straightforwardly.

So, you know, obviously just picking your computing language and how you're going to construct that, there are now a couple of different options out there.

MATLAB being the one that I think is most well developed, but now lots of people developing Python-based implementations of active inference schemes, and particularly in the Markov decision process realm.

So that gives you, I suppose, some of the key ingredients, but then it's really sitting down and thinking, well, how would I now actually construct this model?

And the key question I think often is, if you have a particular phenomena or a particular task in mind that you want the model to perform, it's thinking, well, how would I go about actually constructing the data that's presented to a participant performing that task or presented to an agent that's trying to perform this task?

And if you can explain how those data are generated, then you effectively have the generative model that implicitly your agent or your participant or whoever else should be using to be able to perform that task.

So really, all you need to be able to do is to work out how to create the experimental stimuli.

And once you've done that, you've almost already created your model.

And the rest comes from predefined, preexisting inversion schemes that actually minimize the free energy for that model.

So at that stage, it becomes relatively straightforward.

I say relatively because as anybody who has experience in coding knows, a lot of time is spent debugging and throwing up errors and spending a while trying to work out why, a little bit of Googling to work out a solution around that.

I think those are all important parts of the process.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Ali or Terry, on that recipe and modeling question, any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_01:
Actually, I also wanted to ask if you have a plan for extending the

codes or supplementary materials to include other languages such as IMDP packages or any other packages that might come up later and

would be widely used in Active Inference.

Because as far as I know, there isn't any specific GitHub repo or something dedicated for this book so far.

So do you have any plans in developing such a supplementary material for the book?


SPEAKER_03:
We don't at the moment.

It might be an interesting thing.

I mean, it might be a useful thing to be done by the active influence community as well as a way of sort of being engaged and involved in it.

I suppose one of the difficulties of doing that for a book is that often these things move on so quickly by the time it comes out in a book that those packages have moved on.

So I think it was useful for us to give a simple example of MATLAB implementation to demonstrate the principles in one of the packages that we've been involved in developing.

So as part of the SPM package where we've been involved in developing the active instance routines as part of that.

And I think it's certainly a good idea thinking about having other repositories out there with all sorts of demonstrations.

So the SPM package does have a range of different demonstrations for different sorts of

of implementations as well for different kinds of models, which is a really helpful resource.

And I often suggest to people that one of the first ways of getting a sense of how to build these models is to look at one that's already been built and do their best to break it and change things and make it behave in different ways.

And so I think you're absolutely right to say examples of the code and how it's implemented are vital in bringing people into this.

But yes, I think you're absolutely right to say that it would be really helpful to have both Python and Julia implementations and all sorts of different ways of doing it and examples so that people can pick those up.

I agree completely.

And of course, one of the advantages of Python and Julia is that they're open source and you don't necessarily need an academic license to use it, which again, I think increases the number of people who can access it.


SPEAKER_00:
Giving an overview to someone who might not have been following in the blow by blow of our little literature corner over the last few years, how would you say active inference modeling has evolved during your time in the space?

Where are we at?

just generally speaking, with applications?

What applications are developed or possible today that when you were starting your PhD seemed like they were just implausible?


SPEAKER_03:
So I think if we go back a bit, I suppose some of the earlier implementations were almost all in the continuous domain.

So they were all based upon...

things like the generalized filtering type algorithms that were initially developed as sort of filtering methods to perform time series inference.

Those things then

equipped with an active component then became some of the earlier active inference type simulations, and a lot of that focused on things in the movement domain, whether that be eye movements or control of limbs to the extent that you can develop handwriting and those sorts of things.

One of the interesting things that started to happen based upon that was to think about how you then get something that looks more sequential emerge from those continuous dynamics.

And handwriting was actually a really good example of that, where there were some simulations developed in which

in which the continuous model effectively had something a bit like a Lotka-Volterra dynamic in it.

So Lotka-Volterra dynamics are a kind of dynamical system often used for modeling things like predator-prey interactions, and the idea is that you get a peak in terms of a predator population

Sorry, prey population followed by a peak in the predators as they eat the prey, causing drop in the prey population.

But then as the predators die out, the prey come back and you get this sort of sequence of peaks from predator, prey, predator, prey.

And you can generalize that to then have multiple different populations, each preying on one another.

So you get this sequence of peaks over time.

And that sort of emergence of sequences from continuous dynamics, I think, was one of the key moves early on in terms of thinking about things through a bit more cognitive in terms of how do I do this and then this and this and start to plan and generate much more purposeful type of behavior.

So that went so far until things moved much more to an explicitly discrete or sequential style of modeling.

That's when things like Markov decision processes started to be employed in the active inference domain or partially observed Markov decision processes.

So those are models that say, I assume my world is a sequence of states over time

one after another, each of which generates some observations.

And from those observations, I can make inferences about the states.

You can then say, well, if I can act upon the world, I can change the sequence of states as they evolve over time.

And by selecting different actions or different ways I can change that sequence, I'm effectively planning and making decisions.

So that's, again, where you get into a much more cognitive sort of domain.

Some of the key advances sort of early on while I was doing my PhD were the emergence of things like deep hierarchical models of things like Markov decision processes.

So here the idea was that in the world around us, there are lots of things that evolve over different sorts of timescales.

And so one of the early examples of this was reading, the idea that when you move your eyes around the page, you're sort of looking at an individual word or the letters within that word, but that word is itself part of a sentence.

And the time it takes you to infer what the word is, is going to be much shorter than the time it takes you to work out what's going on in terms of the sentence.

and the sentence and the paragraph and the paragraph and the page and the page and the book and etc.

So there's a whole hierarchy of different time scales in the world around us.

And one way of accounting for that relatively simply in these sorts of models is to simply stack them on top of one another.

So the outcomes you're now predicting from one of the Markov decision process type models I was describing

now reflects a sequence of very fast states.

And each of those states, yes, exactly, is the graphic of this.

And then each of those outcomes predicts another sequence of very fast states.

So what you're left with is, at the very top level, a very slow progression of state after state after state.

For each of those states, which might be the sentence, you then have the words in that sentence beneath it.

And then for each of those words, you might have each of the letters in that sentence.

Sorry, each of the letters in that word.

And so that then sort of expanded the range of things that we can do in terms of how we give some sort of deep temporal structure to the kinds of models we develop.

Sometimes people refer to that as kind of breaking the Markov property.

So for those who aren't familiar with this, the Markov property is the idea that each step in time depends only upon the step immediately previous to it.

That all you need to know about the next time step is what's happening at the current time step.

Nothing else in the past is useful once you know that.

And people often suggest that means that these processes are effectively memoryless because it's only where I am now that matters.

It's not what was happening well into the past.

By having a hierarchical structure,

where you have a higher level state that is more slowly changing, that's contextualizing what's going on at the lower level, it means that the fast sequence of changes is actually dependent upon something much slower that's happening.

And that in itself is dependent upon something much slower.

And that gives you a sort of memory.

It allows for the Markov property to be broken.

So like I said, we're sort of starting off with continuous, the emergence of discrete from continuous, the explicit modeling of continuous models, decision-making, and the sort of exploration, exploitation type trade-offs that you get once you treat planning as being an inference process.

The idea that you can then stack these things hierarchically and have a range of different timescales that break the Markov process, allow us to think about things like memory and working memory.

And then I suppose one of the next stages was the combination or the reintroduction of the continuous models as the lowest level of one of these hierarchies.

The idea that

Actually, it's all very well being able to make decisions, but at some stage you need to implement those decisions in a world that's made up of physics and muscle lengths and continuous sensory inputs.

And so putting these sort of hybrid models together where you can use your decisions to then predict short sequences and trajectories defined in a continuous domain.

And I suppose since then, there have been a range of further developments in active inference in that setting and a range of developments in a number of other directions and sort of in parallel.

So some of those developments have been thinking about implementation in other languages.

Some of those developments have been thinking about combination with methods from deep learning and the introduction of variational autoencoders and function approximators and amortized inference, which a lot of people in the robotics community have been pioneering particularly.

So that would be one direction that things have been developed in.

And I suppose the other direction that's seen a lot of development recently has been the sort of underlying principles, the physics that underwrites active inference, the principles and how you justify the sort of dynamics and where free energy comes from as a concept and why it's useful in understanding how systems behave.

So that...

I hope that wasn't too much all at once, but there was a sort of run-through of some of the developments that spring to mind over the last few years.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Perry or Ali, any comments on that quick historical review?


SPEAKER_01:
Again, I had another question regarding... Actually, it's a question out of mere curiosity.

Did you have any specific reason for adopting this particular mathematical notation throughout the book?

Because it seems like...

somewhat diverges from the notations used in some of the well-known papers in the literature.

And I know active inference notation is not

consistently used across the literature, but even in the papers that came out after the publication of this book, written by Professor Friston or others, I don't see this specific notation used a lot in those papers.

So I just wanted to ask about the reasons behind this choice.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

I mean, I think you're absolutely right to say that it's not always been used consistently.

And it's worth saying that in some cases,

There are a couple of different tensions that affect this.

So one is the idea that in a lot of papers that are published, because it's only dealing with an aspect of active inference and not trying to put it all together, they can sort of use a notation that may be the same as notation you might use in another field without worry that people will get conflicted and misinterpret one variable for another because everything's just defined within that one domain.

Another aspect to it is that, depending upon the paper in question and the audience it's aimed at, sometimes the notation is designed to match what might be used in that broader field, whereas we've tried to make it as consistent as possible across different fields.

Were there any particular notations that you were thinking of or that I can help clarify?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, so for example, as just a very simple example, using eta for external states instead of x that's been used, or s and a for active states and sensory states, or other kinds of uses of lowercase matrices and uppercase matrices, which is used differently in a paper,

such as a step-by-step tutorial on active inference and these kinds of notational divergences.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, so yes, I mean, those are some quite nice illustrations.

So things like A and S, which, as you say, are often used in some of the more physics-orientated papers.

Unfortunately, if you use those in a Markov decision process paper, people will interpret those as being states and parameters of a likelihood matrix.

So unfortunately, we couldn't use those same letters without causing more confusion.

So what we try to do there is to focus more on the sort of practical inference side of things, of the actual implementations we tend to use of active inference in particular problem settings.

And there, when you're constructing a generative model,

particularly if it's in the continuous domain, will often use x as being the states that I have to infer, which from the perspective of the physics type papers are the external states, the things that are having an effect on my sensory states.

We've

I can't remember whether we used Y or O for the sensory states or the data in the book.

I think it's Y. I think it's Y, okay.

And that sort of fits with the idea of using it in the continuous domain, where in a lot of settings when you're trying to predict sensory data, often Y will end up being the variable that we end up using.

So I appreciate that it can be confusing, sort of jumping between different resources.

But what we strove for in this one was internal consistency as much as we could and trying not to overload specific variables or symbols.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Thanks.

figure 4.3 we bound ourselves coming back to again and again it four sages chapters seven and eight and it lays out discrete time on top and continuous time on the bottom in terms of their structural similarities but also they have some really important differences so could you just as you see it how do the discrete time and the continuous time models

have similarities and differences such that you can lay them out in a graphically or visually similar way, yet there's also some key differences, for example, in what each of the nodes mean.

So how are they similar and different?

And what did you hope to illustrate by laying out figure 4.3 this way?


SPEAKER_03:
So I suppose the reason that they can be seen as similar is that effectively what you're trying to do in both cases is to represent a trajectory.

We're trying to represent how something evolves in time.

And that something may be the states S in the discrete time, or they may be the trajectory of some hidden states X in the continuous domain.

And when you're trying to say, how do I actually

put together a set of numbers that tell me how something's evolved or evolving.

There are a couple of different ways you can do that.

One is to say, I'm going to tell you where it is at time one, and then I'm going to tell you where it is at time two, and then at time three, et cetera, et cetera.

And that's a perfectly legitimate and perfectly reasonable way of writing down a trajectory.

It obviously misses out all the times between time one and time two, which may or may not be significant depending upon what the problem is you're dealing with.

The second way that we would approach it is to say, well, you can use what's known as a Taylor series approximation or a Taylor series or a polynomial expression for that trajectory.

So essentially what we're saying there is that you just construct a function that follows the shape of that trajectory over time.

And you can construct that function by saying, well, let's look at where I am now at this point in time and my position.

How am I changing over time?

If you just took those two variables together, you'd just have a straight line telling you where you are and where you're going to be.

If you then take account of your acceleration, you may even have a curved line which says, if I'm here now, I'm going to be there then.

And as you add in more and more elements to this, so the rate of change of the velocity and the rate of change of the rate of change of the velocity, et cetera, and just add in more and more rates of change, you effectively get a more and more precise function telling you, at least locally around where you are now, where you're going to be at various other times.

So that difference, either using Taylor series coefficients, which are just successive rates of change,

or by using a sequence of states over time are what's illustrated in the lower and upper graphics here, respectively.

Each of those things has, as you said, they have a lot in common in terms of their structure, in terms of the number of numbers you need to be able to describe them.

but each has their advantages and disadvantages depending upon what you're trying to actually model.

And I think for me, I tend to think of the sequence of categorical states over time as being quite useful in thinking about anything to do with decision-making, deciding between alternatives, thinking about sequences like language and words and

or even sequences in terms of the eye movements you make, looking in one place, then the next, then the next, rather than continuously moving your eyes around space in a smooth fashion.

Whereas the process of interpreting sensory data that's coming in from your retina or from your stretch receptors or whatever else, or in terms of actually driving action that changes continuous variables in the world,

There I think it's much more useful to be able to describe things in terms of a continuous number and those sorts of continuous trajectories that you can get through using these Taylor series type approximations, which are often referred to in this context as generalized coordinates of motion.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Cool.

Well, another figure that we come back to again and again, tucked away in chapter 9, but giving a lot of context, is figure 9.1.

on what is termed meta bayesian inference so could you describe what is happening in this figure and is this exactly as every empirical ethologist is going to agree with is this controversial is this novel so what is it doing for active inference when we conceptualize our

empirical task structurally like this and do you think that that is exactly how ethologists have long seen this topic or is this something contentious


SPEAKER_03:
I think, so I'll talk through the figure, but then you can tell me if that's how ethologists traditionally look at it and whether it's contentious.

I'll be interested to hear.

So the idea behind this figure is to highlight that when dealing in psychology or neuroscience or fields where you're trying to understand how a particular system is behaving or how it's

essentially what's going on in the mind or the brain or the nervous system of some creature that is behaving in some way, there are two levels at which you can look at it.

One is saying, well, from my perspective as the experimenter,

What are the data I'm measuring?

And that may be behavioral measurements from that creature.

It may be taking electrophysiological measurements.

It may be asking it a question if it's a patient in a clinical setting.

And I'm essentially now trying to optimize my model of this system.

Now, in the neurosciences and in the settings outlined above, the kind of system we're interested in is the sort of system that has its own model of other sorts of system.

And so the kinds of questions we're interested in, the kind of parameters we're interested in, are things like the prior belief that this creature has about this thing, or how precise it thinks its data are.

And so the parameters I'm now asking a question about are the parameters of the beliefs of another system.

So the outside box here, the one that the parameters are going into, the experimental stimuli are going into, and the observed behavior are coming out of, is essentially my model of how this other system behaves.

Now the inside box here, the one in the dotted line or the dashed line, that now represents the model that that system has to understand the world around it.

And so when we construct our model, that contains another model inside it.

And by saying, if this creature believed this, this is how they would make inferences about their environment and generate behavior,

I can now predict the behaviour I would observe if this creature believed this thing.

So the subjective-objective idea is that the objective model is the experimenter and the experimenter's beliefs and the observations they make by measuring what the participant or experimental subject does.

And the subjective model is the participant's model of the world around them.

So that, I think, would be my summary of how this figure works and the idea it's trying to get across.

Now, you can tell me how ethologists may disagree with that or agree with it or what they'd find controversial.


SPEAKER_00:
I'll give a thought, and Ali or Terry, feel free to give a follow-up or a thought about

I don't think in principle it's contentious or dissentious.

However, there might be an explicit or an implicit belief, of course, ironically, that we can simply take some of these parameters coming into our experimental setup and even the selection of experimental stimuli, we can take those as simply given, which is a very frequentist perspective.

And then on the observed behavior, we can simply use descriptive statistics.

We'll characterize the predefined groups according to the one experiment we ran.

We'll do the t-test.

We'll do the ANOVA.

We'll come up with a p-value.

It's going to be frequentism all the way forward.

So even if we're doing frequentism about a generative model, there's a sense that if we just clamp down on our experiment and treat it as handed down without error, instead of being actually drawn from distributions of possible experiments we could have done,

if we clamp down upstream of the experiment, we'll just be able to describe and ultimately publish without needing to look at what else could have happened.

And I think this diagram and also the very subtle dashed line around even the bigger box

suggests that just like the active clinician engaging with a conversation or the active experimenter also engaging iteratively over their system of interest that itself is an adaptive epistemic process where

Yes, you could simplify it by treating the parameters and the stimuli sequences as simply given, but then you don't have access to the generative model that actually is the generative process for the subjective model.

So summarize in principle, uncontentious, however, sometimes discordant with the ways that behavioral experiments are conceptualized, planned, and analyzed.

One reason why it's helpful because during the book, we try to stay on the road, on the high road and the low road.

But when we're in discussions,

it's almost like there's a whole roadmap and people have their own backgrounds and questions and it kind of comes together with all these different um topics that people are curious about ultimately that bring them to active inference so going to this meta Bayesian figure

helps in some ways situate how the authors are seeing this entire process of experimental design, observation, and cognitive modeling.

And that was unpacked also in the recent map territory, fallacy, fallacy work.

Ali or Terry, any thoughts or questions in our last 10 minutes?


SPEAKER_01:
there a figure you want to look at or we can go to some other places uh maybe we can ask uh the missing figure in uh it was in i think it was in figure seven point yes yes or something 7.2 in the lower left


SPEAKER_03:
So this was actually corrected by, I don't know quite how it ended up vanishing, but it was corrected in one of the later print versions.

I'll see if it's in the version I've got in front of me now, and I can show you what it would have looked like.

But apologies for that.


SPEAKER_00:
Which figure is it?

7.2 on page 128.


SPEAKER_03:
Unfortunately, I picked up a copy of the book that doesn't have it.


SPEAKER_00:
So there have already been one and a half fractal dimensions of printing?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

Yeah, I think, unfortunately, I don't think that one's corrected yet in the online copy.

Essentially, what would have appeared in that figure or what did in some of the later printing versions is the errors that are driving the updates of the states in the plot above.

Now, because the... So the errors here are effectively the...

are the free energy gradients, or the negative free energy gradients.

So essentially, as you go down the free energy gradient, you're effectively minimizing your error.

So what that means in practice is that the errors would effectively be the rates of change of the states in the plot above.

So if you take the states in the plot above and you imagine what the rates of change of each of those lines are, that's what you would get in the plot below.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, on this same kind of topic, in Chapter 7 we're in the discrete time generative models.

And

little bit less so here but in the uh ladder models here in 7.13 and in what we just looked at in 7.2 where are these continuous interpolations coming from if it's a discrete time model


SPEAKER_03:
That's a good point.

So I suppose there's an important distinction to be made here.

There's the distinction between the things that are being inferred, which are happening over discrete steps in time.

And then there's the inference process itself, which deals in probabilities, which are themselves continuous.

They can vary, in this case, anywhere between zero and one.

And the time over which that inference happens.

So

To give you an example, if you imagine that the way you're analyzing this figure at the moment is by making a series of saccadic eye movements, you're not sort of continuously moving your eyes from one plot to the next.

You're making a series of rapid ballistic movements that take you from one to the next.

And effectively, every time your eyes stand still, you have a new data point that you're now trying to analyze.

You can imagine that between that, every time your eyes stay still, everything else in your brain doesn't just stop.

So once you've got that new data point, your brain now has some time to assimilate that data point, to draw inferences about what it's seeing there.

And those inferences happen through the continuous dynamics of what's happening in your neurons and various networks across your brain.

So you can think of the continuous changes that are happening for each state as not being changes in the world that we're trying to infer, not being changes in the data point I'm currently looking at, but the changes in my beliefs about it before I then sample the next data point.


SPEAKER_00:
Interesting.

I have a few more figure-based quick questions, but Terry, do you want to bring up anything or just give any remarks?

No worries if not.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I am very much just trying to understand these concepts, so I don't make any pretence of having any deep understanding.

But the key thing that interests me is how you jump from this sense of how we update our predictions

into the clinical realm.

I'm interested in pain medicine and I see neuroplastic pain as very much a mistaken prediction based on often misinterpretation by medical professionals and the information that they give to patients.

And I'm really intrigued by the potential for using these concepts to give patients an architecture in which they can start to understand that they have some agency in altering their future predictions and really changing their experience of their pain.

And as your clinician, I'd be really intrigued to see

get your sense of where this is going in that type of clinical realm?


SPEAKER_03:
I think that's a really nice example as well, thinking about attitudes towards pain and particular kinds of pain, particularly when there isn't a sort of obvious tissue damage that can be identified that's causing that pain, but that still is obviously a very real sensation to the people who are experiencing it.

And I think it generalizes to a number of other conditions.

And probably there's an overlap with things like functional neurological disorders, probably a number of medically unexplained symptoms and things where there is a huge amount of overlap in these sorts of processes where you can't necessarily directly identify a big structural lesion of any sort.

But clearly the way the nervous system is working, something isn't quite right.

Pain, I think, is an interesting example, particularly because pain is never a real thing out there in the world, is it?

I mean, it's always an inference.

And so I think that's one of the first things to say to anybody, you know, regardless of whether you've got pain because you've lost a leg or whatever else, there's no such thing as pain as an external state.

It is just your inference, your explanation for pain.

the signals that are coming in from your body.

Now, one of the important concepts that I think comes into all of these sorts of syndromes and probably many others as well,

is the idea of precision, the idea that the data I predict, sensory data coming in, I can, in addition to estimating what those data are going to look like, I also have to estimate how confident I am in what they're going to look like.

If I'm not very confident or I think I'm dealing in something that's very noisy, then I can actually discount a lot of that signal.

Whereas if I believe that it's all extremely reliable, very clean data that's coming in, then I want to put a lot of weight on that.

And another way of saying that is that there are some things I pay attention to and some things I don't.

And just saying it's reliable data is just a matter of saying I'm going to attend to it.

Now, it might be that in a number of these different syndromes,

What's going on is that our bodies have overestimated the precision, overestimated how clean the data are coming in from a particular body part.

And that's why we then over-interpret any signals that are coming in as if they are painful.

And the inferences we draw from those signals are just too confident and too driven by something that they shouldn't be.

An example I often like to use in clinical discussions is that if I told you to pay attention now to the feeling that your left sock is having on your left big toe, you can probably feel it, but you were completely unaware of it before.

But now if I say continue to pay attention to that and carry on paying attention to that and you're unable to pay attention away from it anymore,

If you felt that all the time, it would feel unusual, it would feel wrong.

And maybe a misestimation of precision in that way may be what's going on in a lot of these sorts of conditions.

Partly, I think it's often interesting that in some of these people, there was at some stage an injury or something that affected that body part.

And you can imagine that if you went through a period of illness where you did have tissue damage and were in pain for that reason, it might direct your attention to that and you may have a learned deployment of attention towards that area that might persist even after the insult and the damage has resolved.

And again, maybe it's that sort of persistent mislearning of how precise things are that leads to the continued experience of pain even when there's nothing sort of externally causing it anymore.

So I think just having a sense of inference and the idea that all our perceptions of the world around us are ultimately inferences

says that if we change our model in some way, if we're able to adapt and change and if plasticity in our brains and spinal cords can be exploited, then we can also correct those mislearned models and hopefully resolve those sorts of symptoms and syndromes.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

thank you well we are at the very close really appreciative thomas of how much we were able to cover what are your closing words or thoughts potentially to someone who has listened to this one hour discussion as their appetizer before joining the par at all restaurant service


SPEAKER_03:
Well, no, I've enjoyed the discussion.

Thank you for having me here.

I'll reiterate what I said earlier, that I think one of the key things in making this field more accessible to more people are these sort of reading groups, the ideas of

trying to create these educational resources and to unpack and discuss these things um and you know i'm impressed by all the infrastructure you've put together and um and by everything you've managed to achieve by doing this um so i'd certainly encourage anyone who's interested to join up to your reading groups um and i hope they they get something out of it and out of the book thanks ali


SPEAKER_01:
Well, yes.

Actually, since the beginning of the first cohort, this book has practically become a part of our life that we love and cherish.

And it's amazing to see how with each iteration of our reading group, it gives rise to a whole different set of questions and discussions.

Actually, I'm a firm believer in this famous quote, I don't know by whom, which says that the sign of a great book is not how many answers it provides, but rather how many thought-provoking questions it engenders.

So based on that criterion and judging by the variety of questions brought up during our live discussions,

as a kind of empirical evidence for that, I think it's probably safe to say that this is truly a great book.

So congratulations on that, and thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you very much.


SPEAKER_00:
Great closing thoughts.

So Thomas, thank you again.

You're welcome back anytime.

Thanks, Ali and Terry, for all the great participation.

And until next time, bye.
