## cOo4juE_zcI

SPEAKER_00:
Hello and welcome everyone.

It's Actinth Lab live stream number 38.0, February 10th, 2022.

We're going to be discussing the paper, The Evolution of Brain Architectures for Predictive Coding and Active Inference.

welcome to the active inference lab we are a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at some of the links here on the slide this is a recorded and archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so we can improve on our work all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams it's going to be a solo stream though

Go to ActiveInference.org if you want to learn more about how to participate or contribute or get involved with any ActiveInfLab project and check out this Coda link to see past and upcoming live streams.

The page looks like this.

So you can see events that haven't happened yet, like 39, 40.

And then also you can look back and you can see who is participating and read the papers and all of that.

So check it out.

Today in ActiveStream,

Number 38, the goal is to learn and discuss this cool paper, the evolution of brain architectures for predictive coding and active inference.

the papers by Giovanni Pizzulo, Thomas Parr, and Carl Fristen from December, 2021.

And just like all videos, it's just an introduction to some of the ideas.

It's not a review or a final word.

So go check out the paper to learn more.

And there's going to be an overview with first names and claims, abstract and roadmap.

All right, I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California.

The big question that this paper is getting at is what is the evolutionary neurophysiological basis of cognition and how do complex cognitive phenotypes arise?

So how do things develop and evolve

how they think, and how does that change over evolutionary time.

And shown here are three images representing three scales of analysis of looking at ant cognition.

So on the left is a representation of the synapse with the glia wrapped around it and the molecules and some of the mechanisms because changes in those mechanisms can influence cognition.

Then in the middle is a 3D representation of an ant brain with the different brain regions like the central complex and the

optic and the olfactory lobes.

And this represents the level of regional or micro or meso-anatomical variation.

And that definitely changes over evolutionary time, just like the synaptic level.

And then there's this behavioral ecological level.

And that's where the ants are engaging in collective behavior and stigmergy.

And so how does this all work?

How does this all work in today's ants and how has it evolved?

And then expand that to other species and other questions.

The paper was published right at the end of 2021 in December in the Royal Society of Publishing.

And just to go over the aims and claims of the paper, this is in the author's words.

There's growing consensus that the brains of humans and other phylogenetically derived or advanced organisms operate in a predictive manner

across perception and action control , yet the ways in which our advanced predictive abilities may have arisen during evolution remain unclear.

The goal of this article is to sketch an evolutionary history of brain architectures for predictive processing.

central tenet of our proposal is that although prediction is often characterized as a complex cognitive function it is not a late evolutionary addition of advanced animals like us rather in distinction to a late stage cognitive argument like saying language is what makes us an advanced cognizer or semantic language with certain types of syntax rather our complex predictive abilities e.g planning and imagination

emerged gradually, e.g.

via phyletic gradualism, smooth changes through evolutionary time, or punctuated equilibrium, sharp changes through evolutionary time, but punctuated at one scale is smooth at another, from simpler predictive and error correction loops, e.g.

motor and autonomic reflexes, that were already part of the brains of our earlier evolutionary ancestors and were key to solving adaptive regulation problems.

So just like Mike Levin's paper was addressing the question of basal cognition from the bioelectric perspective, here is going to be more of a predictive processing and action inference perspective on the functional aspects, not on the mechanistic.

So the bioelectric was down here at the level of cells.

This is going to be approaching it from a little bit of a different perspective, but we'll find out.

Here's the abstract.

This article considers the evolution of brain architectures for predictive processing.

We argue that brain mechanisms for predictive perception and action are not late evolutionary additions of advanced creatures like us.

Rather, they emerged gradually from simpler predictive loops, for example, autonomic and motor reflexes that were a legacy from our earlier evolutionary ancestors and were key to solving their fundamental problems of adaptive regulation.

We characterize simpler to more complex brains formally in terms of generative models that include predictive loops of increasing hierarchical breadth and depth.

These may start from a simple homeostatic motif and be elaborated during evolution in four main ways.

These include the multimodal expansion of predictive control into an allostatic loop, its duplication to form multiple sensory motor loops that expand an animal's behavioral repertoire,

and the gradual endowment of generative models with hierarchical depth to deal with aspects of the world that unfold at different spatial scales, and temporal depth to select plans in a future-oriented manner.

In turn, these elaborations underwrite the solution to biological regulation problems faced by increasingly sophisticated animals.

Our proposal aligns neuroscientific theorizing about predictive processing with evolutionary and comparative data on brain architectures in different animal species.

And just looking ahead, here's a figure that we're going to get to.

Here's the ancestral state.

It has this structure.

It's a model.

And then it's going to undergo a set of different types of discrete operations that change it structurally.

And that's structure learning, and it's going to happen over evolutionary timescale, and it's going to be tied to functional architectures for predictive processing.

Okay, how do they go from here to there?

This is the roadmap.

After the introduction, they introduce predictive regulation and control, perception, cognition, and control, action, as basic design principles of the brain.

So kind of taking that embodied approach, but making it very operational and functional so that it can be studied from an evolutionary function perspective.

Introducing the brain as doing structure learning in generative models over evolutionary and also other timescales.

They then give three examples of simple predictive motifs in ancestral brains, which is the homeostatic control, the allostatic control, and the simple behavioral learning.

Then they introduce that figure that we just looked at, and that's the evolutionary algebra of structure learning.

Just like you can multiply and add, these are kind of like operations on evolutionary spaces.

They then discuss a few finer points related to behavioral switching, temporal depth, hierarchical depth, and then take a phylogenetic perspective at the end, giving an example, and there's a discussion.

Okay, so to go into section two and just sort of deal with the keywords and themes as they are needed, here's figure one.

In Figure 1, the reason why we can even jump in here without going to any keywords is it's biology we're talking about, and we can jump in, why not, as good a place as any to go in at the action-perception loop and then connect it to some of the analytical or mathematical formalisms of active inference and the free energy principle.

So this is Figure 1 in the paper in Section 2, the action-perception cycle and predictive regulation.

So here's our entity, our agent on the left, and here is our world state on the right.

The entity is engaged in prediction

while they're making observations that are being emitted from the world.

That's resulting in some discrepancy.

Either things are exactly as expected or not.

So an example would be in the visual field, the brain is generating a prediction of what is in the blind spot of the retina.

And then if the eyes were to move there to use action, changing the world in terms of the stimuli coming in through ocular motor action,

that would result in a different perception that could either confirm or deny, confirm with a low discrepancy or be very surprising with a high discrepancy, what was expected about what was in the blind spot, which would confirm accuracy in a visual model.

So in this partitioning of action and perception, which is just very descriptive, it's not quite the Bayesian graph that we're going to get to later.

It's kind of like a flow model.

And there's probably other flow models that could be used as well.

But it turns out that this partitioning or this way of thinking about flow, at least conceptually, leads to in the active inference proposal,

this idea of using a free energy minimizing function over some math that we'll get to a little bit more formally in the next figure, and using a kind of combined metric that has two parts, the red and the blue, to make decisions about perception as well as action, because it turns out that perception and action and cognition and metacognition are all part of the entity's model that it's doing

inference on in certain cases so just to kind of throw back to not so long ago here we have the f of q that's the distribution that's under the entity's control and y and so it's as a function of beliefs and data there's going to be some term and so just looking back to 37 we looked at the variational free energy and how that relates to perceptual inference

where there's a penalty for overfitting as well as a penalty for failing to explain the data so it's kind of making a visual model or a perceptual model that in that snapshot given the priors and precision and all that is not overfitting but it is fitting the data and it's kind of existing on that frontier and then it's using variational inference to solve that in a really tractable way

And then when action comes into play, a few things happen.

First, the agent has to incorporate their own preferences because why care about action if you don't even care why it's gonna happen?

So they have to incorporate their preferences, which is a non-arbitrary in a sense for action selection, but it's arbitrary in a higher level.

as well as incorporating the fact that there's uncertainty over the consequences of action or just future states of the world, not just like sensor measurement as in other cases.

So we have to take this variational free energy calculation that was just like snapshot perception and expand it a little bit to the expected free energy.

So here's F in the background, and now there's this expected free energy term G,

which is over also an action selection policy z and now there's kind of similar like resonating or rhyming terms but rather than overfitting the imperative on the left side is to satisfy preferences

On the right side, the penalty for failing to explain the data is kind of transposed into this failing to minimize expected surprise of future data.

So this is like fitting the expectations well on the right side in blue, and then living up to your preferences and expectations in an optimistic way on the left.

So it's kind of like realism on the right and optimism on the left.

that is what we talked about in 37 and that's the partitioning that's being done basically here the authors are setting that up as the action perception cycle and predictive regulation just wanted to kind of view 37 really quick because it was a fun discussion that we had it also really sets the stage for how is that similar or different than other action perception partitionings or models does evolutionary psychology or evolutionary cognitive studies do they have

fundamental action perception model at the root is that a good thing is it a bad thing section three goes into section two again was just about how this single slide and represented in figure one about this predictive so anticipatory but also embedded etc infinity loop cycle

is the basic principle of the brain.

We can't take the basic principle of the brain to be some lower level, like just information transmission amongst cells, nor do the authors jump in at a higher level, like the fundamental unit of cognition is linguistic tokens that are being modified, not discrepancies with multiple different kinds of things that are being predicted.

From this functional description of cognition,

They move to section three, formalizing brain design as structured learning in generative models.

So what is the structure of this model?

And then what does it look like to do structured learning in that model?

And why is it generative?

And then how is that formalized?

So here's figure two, the generative model and the generative process.

So the first word's the same, second word's different, so they're different words.

And the figure on the left side has the entity, and the figure on the right side has the world state.

So it's the same action perception loop we saw in figure one.

And now this sort of conceptual flow, single edge model, like just only one arrow here, no extra anything, just sort of first pass,

It's compatible with this, which is actually a Bayesian graph.

But how do they describe it and what are all the variables?

We still have the same things happening.

We have the observations coming in to the cognizing entity.

That's the observations coming in.

The entity is going to infer some action policy

based upon the observations coming in, which is going to result in some change to the actual underlying system, which is the generative process.

So that's like the actual birds and the bees and the sun and stuff, allegedly.

It does get into a little bit of a gray area with the realism, instrumentalism, and the structural realism, but we're not even gonna go there in this discussion right now.

The generative process is the one that's handing out the observations as modeled.

The generative model, to close the loop, is the entity's inference.

And so here is x, the entity's prediction on hidden state.

And then here is x star, which is like the actual hidden state that is being alleged in the world.

And we've had some other discussions about how that's the sigma function that's like mapping between the two x's.

That's what's being minimized if the discrepancy is low.

There's other notation.

How did the authors describe it?

the difference between the generative model and the generative process.

Nodes correspond to probability distributions and edges to their statistical dependencies.

So this is like a Bayes graph.

Mathematically, a generative model may be formulated as the joint probability density P of Y and X of observations Y and hidden states X of the world that generate those observations.

I think it was just a copy error.

The latter are referred to as hidden or latent states as they cannot be observed directly.

The joint probability distribution can be decomposed in two parts.

The first is a prior, P , which denotes the organism's knowledge about hidden states of the world prior to seeing sensory data.

The second is the likelihood, P , which denotes the organism's knowledge of how observations are generated from states.

So that's the perceptual model.

And then they go on to describe how there's a difference between the entity's inference on hidden state and the actual hidden state, which is the generative process versus the generative model distinction.

And then they introduce action and say action U, that's this node that influences the hidden state, even if zero effect, is generated based upon the inferences made under a generative model.

Action is shown here as part of the generative model,

Sorry.

Action is shown here as part of the generative process making changes to the world despite being selected from the inference drawn under the model.

So action is actually making influence.

Again, the edge could be zero in some respect, but it's making actual influence in the world.

It's like the active states interpreted in this statistical way.

So what does that have to do with structured learning?

So the entity is going to either, whether you're a realist and saying the entity is doing structured learning or you're instrumentalist, it is possible for us as researchers today to model that entity as doing structured learning because it's computationally efficient or elucidative

Or you go full utilitarian.

You just say, disregard that whole realism, instrumentalism.

It's a useful approach and I'll follow utility wherever it goes.

For any number of those reasons, you might want to model the cognition of different entities without going into just the philosophy of what its cognitive process actually is.

And so one approach that's going to get taken is using inference, either from the outside, describing instrumentally or realism as if it were happening, maybe with anatomical evidence, as if the hidden state could include not just parameters that were continuous about the world, but also structures of models.

However, it's difficult to imagine that that type of cognitive or even extremely metacognitive thought or action selection could happen, for example, in some early proto cell, however simple it may have been.

And so how do we get from that flagella changing bacterium to all the other kinds of cognition that we see today?

Or should I say bacterium-like entity?

relative or ancestor of today's bacteria.

So how can we think about this model, which is often described in the context of parameter learning, and then approach this as if it were maybe about parameter learning sometimes, but also could be about structure in terms of the good regulator and the requisite diversity, that kind of requisite variety, those kinds of models.

Okay, the next several sections are where they get to the specifics and some of the contributions of the paper that I think will be really cool to continue the discussion on.

Section four is just short, and it's saying we're about to go into three examples of simple predictive motifs in ancestral brains, because one of the main claims of the paper is that these motifs are very...

ancestral they're old motifs they're not johnny come lately to the cognitive scene these are features that one can think of as who knows how far back or how simple these cognitive mechanisms have existed but we'll evaluate that maybe when we get to talk together but first we'll just kind of go through how they define them and use them

The three predictive motifs are homeostasis, allostasis, and simple behavioral control.

So first five, generative models for the homeostatic control of interoceptive variables.

They write, the generative models shown in figure three, which we'll look at after this slide, afford the homeostatic regulation of a single interoceptive variable, which we call here body temperature for illustrative purposes.

Much like a thermostat, this model maintains the requisite body temperature by reporting the discrepancy between predicted and sensed thermoreceptor activation, given Bayesian beliefs about temperature, triggering an autonomic reflex, U, resulting in, for example, vasodilation, which resolves the prediction error.

So if the life of the organism were just to hang out on the beach and vasodilate to off heat when it needed to, and then to constrict and to save more heat when it needed to, that's the physiological task that this is going to be describing.

which is just one facet of an organism's biology, but there are experiments that sometimes only measure temperature.

And so thinking instrumentally, this single factor model, this single variable model on body temperature may be sufficient for some experiments, or it may be useful in certain cases.

So just because it's a simple model doesn't mean that it's not going to be very educational and provocative, but also even be sufficient in a lot of cases.

but no one's even claiming it's realism.

That's why it's written this way.

They say, see citation 20 for a fully specified example.

And that is a citation to chance at all in March, 2022.

So still in the future.

And they write, we start from the presence premise.

And this is in the paper that again is from the future.

We start from the premise that the goal of interoceptive control is to minimize discrepancy between expected and actual interoceptive sensations, i.e.

a prediction error or free energy.

Importantly, living organisms can achieve this goal by using various forms of interoceptive control, homeostatic, allostatic, and goal-directed.

So there's more details in this paper, but here in figure three is where they're going to show it.

So keep in mind this generative model structure, and now these are going to be in a different form.

And here in the caption, I'll describe what they say.

This is that homeostatic, the first, most ancestral, or just the simplest possible just

Go make it darker if it's too bright and make it brighter if it's too dark.

Make it warmer if it's too cold, make it colder if it's too warm.

That kind of first-order cybernetic loop.

This generative model includes an interoceptive thermoreceptor, Y, observations, and a belief about body temperature, X.

So that's the beliefs about how the body should be.

And that's again, the beliefs playing that dual function that the paper 37 drew out, which is that on the left side of this equation,

Failure to satisfy the preferences is dealing with this P distribution as a preference.

But then on the right side, P has to do with expectations that are being either fit well or poorly.

And so this is where active inference has a slightly different architecture perhaps than some other theories.

The beliefs are about body temperature.

It's not an estimate merely of the external body temperature.

Crucially, the prior over x is kept fixed, and hence it acts as a cybernetic setpoint.

Well, you can't just expect what's going to be best for you.

You'll die.

Right.

If you die, you die.

But if you enact policy such that your expectations are realized, then you persist.

That's why we're studying things that are persistent.

Any discrepancy between the predicted thermoreceptor activity given beliefs about X and the measured Y is registered as a prediction error that is cancelled out by an autonomic response.

For example, a thermoregulatory response.

This is shown as an illustrative plot of the expectations of prior and posterior observation and autonomic actions over time.

So here is like the action policy, which is like...

be at the baseline level of thermoregulation, and then kick in some sweating or cooling mechanism.

And then here it describes how the observations start at about 37.1, and then they steadily start climbing, and then the belief, which is initially like, things should be 37,

the posterior, the after evidence estimate starts creeping up and then it hits a certain value and it engages a critical threshold that turns on this thermoregulatory response and then that cools the temperature back down.

So this is a basic architecture for doing first order cybernetics and that kind of first order logic.

Here in this figure, the red circles represent the expected values of X, which are used to make predictions about Y.

These are subtracted from the measured y to form a prediction error , which is used to update the expectation and drive action .

That changes y such that the prediction error is resolved.

if it doesn't do it well then the system dies so we're talking about evolution where we've had like for the ants 120 million years allegedly for that to get pruned out and even longer at the cellular level note the lateral modulatory connections in the allostatic network which we'll get to in a second so just to take one little discourse they say c 24 for details what is pape 24

It is Friston, Parr, and DeVries, 2017, The Graphical Brain, Belief Propagation, and Active Inference.

Let's just look at a few parts of this awesome paper.

So first they have a table with definitions of the technical terms.

So just to kind of read a few, but it's kind of awesome to see the authors do this, and this is a great paper as well.

So how do they define generative model?

Generative model or forward model

probabilistic mapping from causes to observed consequences data so from hyper parameter to the parameter it is usually specified in terms of the likelihood of getting some data given their causes parameters of a model and priors on the parameters so it's all relative in nested models but this is generating data like kind of cranking out like a music box

possible or plausible data sets with similar summary statistics, like similar mean and variance of some distribution or similar parameters if there's a whole vector that describe it.

And then the recognition model

is related to learning where new data are coming in and discrepancy is being minimized if the generative is outputting the exact same mean and variance that incoming data are having the discrepancy is low the predictions which are about preferences are being realized successfully action policy is working well or better than expected

flip everything and you have the opposite situation.

And then just to give one more definition here, because the next slide will feature it, though the others are also good to read, factor graph.

A factor graph is a bipartite graph where two distinct sets of nodes are connected by edges, representing the factorization of a function, usually a probability distribution function.

Formulating a Bayesian network or model as a factor graph enables the efficient computation of marginal distributions through the sum product algorithm.

What does a factor graph look like and how does it relate to the kinds of Bayesian graphs that we've been looking at?

So on the top is not the Bayes graph that's distributed across this slide, but another variant that we've seen a bunch of times, which is the partially observable

Markov decision process.

So G, expected free energy minimization.

Pi, policy selection is influencing B, which is how S, the latent state in the world, is changing through time.

There's D, the prior on the hidden state.

And then A, the mapping of how the state is related to the observation.

And so depending on how the model's framed, those can be learned or not.

But it turns out that because of how this is relatively sparsely connected within a timeframe, as well as across timeframes, there's a way to use this bipartite construction called a factor graph that splits up those unlabeled edges, which are statistical dependencies, and kind of interweaves

functions which have a slightly different representation and it turns out that by interleaving these functions into the variables it's possible to make what's called a factor graph and that gives an order of operations to arbitrary or within a certain set

any kind of bayes graph but it includes this one importantly and so here is the one two three time points and two policies are being selected and that's what this graph represents the organism comes in with a prior time step one two three there's two actions and then here's another figure from the paper where at each of those three time steps one two and three a little bigger

At time steps 1, 2, and 3, there's the inference happening on time steps 1, 2, and 3.

So at time step 1, that's like anticipation and planning.

At time step 2, it's like short-term anticipation as well as memory.

At time step 3, it's like memory.

And it's always now casting as well.

And so one can imagine that this is a really useful format because it's extremely composable on one hand.

So just like they said, okay, well, we kind of have this motif with the three time steps and the connectedness.

What if D from the top level came down and was S at a lower level?

And we've seen that taken to a really elaborated extent as well as interpreted in, for example, the paper on mental action in Livestream 25.

And so factor graphs are awesome because they're basically needing to only be specified in the Bayes graph format.

But then it provides not just a mesh connectivity, but a process algorithm and a heuristic and an approach that's actually tractable.

So we get the composable analytical and graphical component, but it's an attractable algorithm.

next section is generative models for the allostatic control of interoceptive variables so this is going to be the first real modification of the homeostat that's introduced in three this is going to be the base case but it could be something else other than body temperature the homeostat is simple but limited as they write it can counter sensed changes of body temperature but cannot anticipate predictable changes of body temperature or other variables

In nature, there are several regularities that can be easily incorporated to extend the above generative model as, technically speaking, empirical priors.

The obvious advantage of predicting how our bodily and interoceptive variables will change

is being able to exert some anticipatory or allostatic control.

And so this is kind of getting into the second order or anticipatory cybernetics, also related to Rosen's anticipatory ecology.

So here's figure 3C.

In A and B, there was just the homeostat returning us to a set point after something got triggered.

And now there's going to be the affordance for anticipatory control.

This generative model,

sketched out with the same scheme as the previous slide.

This generative model extends the homeostat by including a second set of exteroceptive variables that correspond to light intensity Y2

and a belief about sunrise, x2.

That's the sun visual side on the right.

Furthermore, like the visual system, and the left side is still the temperature interoceptive system, furthermore, the model includes a predictive relationship between sunrise, x2, and body temperature, y. This edge isn't saying that the sun warms the body, it's saying that in this model there's an edge reflecting a statistical dependency.

and that's where there's the degree of freedom with respect to the realism and instrumentalism, etc.

In this way, inferring a sunrise can trigger the autonomic response U of thermoregulation in an anticipatory manner, that is, before the sunlight actually increases body temperature.

The upper part of A and C are Bayesian networks, highlighting that Y is conditionally dependent upon X with the directed arrow between the nodes, with more than one X and Y in the model for the allostat.

The lower parts show the form of neuronal message passing that could be used to solve these generative models.

So the Bayes graph is represented on the top, and then there's the message passing with respect to the neural population.

So that's kind of the second

aspect of figure three which is just bringing in multi-sensory integration or even it could be like two pixels for example with beliefs about each other or something like that but that's what allostasis is going to be enabled by is just by this duplication of a column and then this connection in a different way and then here's the third section of four seven generative models for simple behavioral control and so they write

The homeostat and the allostat permit the control of simple forms of swimming, locomotion, reaching, and other movements.

One biological example is provided by the zebrafish virtual reality study 30, which identified the neuronal underpinnings of error correction during escape behavior in the animal's telencephalon.

It's a brain region.

An evolutionary conserved set of brain circuits involved in action selection in other vertebrates, including mammals, such as the corticobasal ganglia circuit.

that's about the evolutionary homology of the brain region and then here's just some pictures from the paper um by uh tori go at all 21 zebrafish capable of generating future state prediction error show improved active avoidance behavior in virtual reality so

They did a learning task that involved the fish being able to differentiate a signal, and then they studied the role of anticipation in that.

And the authors in this paper use that as an example.

Maybe we could talk about that or other examples in the dot one and the dot two.

Section eight.

Here's where we get to the very interesting

operations that are going to bring this sort of descriptive model of different kinds of homeostatic, allostatic, and intermodal, and then behavioral regulatory elements into the evolutionary context.

So, our central argument is that evolution proceeded via gradual elaborations of the predictive motifs illustrated above, under genetic constraints and opportunities, and the selective pressure of novel problems to be solved.

such as the control of more sophisticated bodies in the presence of richer ecological niches, e.g.

when vertebrates began to establish life on land some 400 million years ago.

Over successive generations, generative models can remain stable or be elaborated along four key dimensions, strongly limiting the space of what is evolvable.

So what are the four kinds of dimensions that are going to be changed?

That is going to be discussed in terms of the changes that can happen to the specifics of the generative model.

We have introduced the first kind of elaboration.

from the unimodal homeostat to the multimodal allostat.

So they kind of secretly introduced this transformation between figure 3ab and figure 3c.

So that was secretly like one of the transformations.

A second kind of elaboration is the duplication of predictive motifs, which enlarges the animal's behavioral repertoire.

The third and fourth dimensions equip the generative model with temporal and or hierarchical depth, respectively.

These two expansions enable richer predictive motifs that endow a cognitive sophistication

such as the possibility to plan or consider events that change on multiple time scales.

So it's the evolutionary algebra on structure learning, because we're outputting a structure, this graph G, which is gonna be like as if the species over evolutionary time is going to be implementing some graph in terms of the structure of its model, like,

there's a case where the ant is not integrating the polarization of light with the olfactory system and then there's some change in the model that actually integrates them and then some relationship is learned whatever that means from a realist or instrumentalist perspective and that is going to be like an evolutionary algebra so it's not going to be like 2x minus 3x but it's going to be more like that than not because there's going to be operations and they're going to happen in order

So here's figure four, where they represent their evolutionary algebra.

Figure four, the five main dimensions of elaboration of generative models introduced in the paper.

So it was, you know, four dimensions, then it's five dimensions.

There's evolution in 4D by Cheblonka and Lamb.

That would have been good to add to.

the five main dimensions of elaboration of generative models introduced in the paper illustrated as operations of an evolutionary algebra so here's the five operations and so we're starting with on the left side that homeostat that simple corrective calibrative first order cybernetic model either what the system is actually doing or model of

Then there's going to be five transformations that can happen.

And then it's showing there's a second round.

Like once you go H, you can go H, T, A, I plus I or I. So you have five discrete options at the first time step, but one of them is no change.

So it's kind of like no change or four different layers of excitement of the electron, like four quanta.

but they're for discrete operations, like a deletion or an insertion in genomics.

And then from there, it's just the state for the next time step of the model, and then something else happens.

So what are the operations?

The bottom is I, which is the identity operation.

That leaves the generative model as is.

So that can be interpreted as like a non-mutation or just a conservative mode, which is how most inheritance works.

Then the second one is the duplication operation, I plus I. So it's like identity remains the same, but then there's a duplication.

Literally, it's like a genomic duplication, but in this functional space.

Replicates existing predictive motifs to form parallel sensory motor loops.

A is the operation that was described in figure 3C, the allostatic operation, endows the generative model with horizontal predictive relations between different modalities.

And so the duplication would be like going from 1...

sensilla like one antenna to two antenna or going from one photoreceptor to two photoreceptors but the actual architecture of the column of the photosensory transduction cascade would basically be computationally or statistically unchanged and then the allostat is actually bringing in this horizontal aspect it's not just two

duplicated systems next to each other, now there's actually connections between them, and of the possible kinds of connections across columns, one of them is like this classic allostatic motif.

Then there's the ones that we haven't gone into as much, which are T, the temporal depth operation, extends the generative model with separate variables for past, present, and future states.

So it's kind of, from a graphical perspective, what we looked at in the difference between the first factor graph

which did take action at three time steps, three time steps, like the thermostat does to the one that actually has either prospectively looking anticipation about future time steps or retrospectively looking memory.

But that's how the factor graph comes into play.

That's temporal depth.

Then,

The hierarchical depth, operation H, extends the generative model with separate variables for states of affairs that change at different time scales.

faster timescales at the bottom levels and slower timescales at the higher levels, hence modeling narratives such as music and language where nested timescales are relevant.

So to kind of split that idea of temporal depth into two pieces, there's incrementing the number of steps you're looking in the model, that's increasing the time horizon on policy selection and increasing the temporal depth within a level.

And then there's this notion of nesting

levels within each other that's the nested generative model and therefore nested Markov blanket

discussion that we've been having and that is going to be connected to cognitive activities like narrative and the reason why they're very similar is that the time scales can kind of blur into each other and so it's all about the model's structure as stated like this one is hierarchical and it has a depth of three it's a two-layer model and it has a depth of three three time steps are included

And it could be different.

If there was always looking 2 ahead and always looking 2 in the back, then the model in the computer would need a minimum of five time steps.

But the entity's model could still be restricted to s minus 2, s minus 1, and then s plus 1, s plus 2.

So...

Those are the two ways that it can expand in these two temporal and hierarchical ways, which is to nest.

hierarchically, or to become temporally deeper with a longer horizon given the nesting structure.

So these are all structural changes.

That's why there was the whole piece about structure learning, because it's as if, or actually, like over evolutionary time, there's this structure learning happen.

And then if we use this partitioning and Bayes graph approach, then hypothetically, any kind of evolutionary starting point, if we go back far enough, and then

final state, if we have all the transitions, could be modeled within a native active inference framework.

Section 9, they're going to go into a little more detail about duplicating predictive motifs and enabling multiple behaviors.

So they're writing on how does this duplication of the model, looking at it from the outside, it's like as if they're acting as if there's two models.

Looking at it from the realism in the inside, it's kind of like thinking about the real duplication of a cognitive function, that's functionalism, or like even a neuroanatomical region, like the earlier examples with the retinal cells, and that's like an anatomical realism.

So generative models can expand by duplicating simple predictive motifs to form a larger repertoire of species-specific behaviors, such as approach avoidance, the control of the vibrase, and visually guided grasping.

The operator I plus I in figure four illustrates a generative model in which the same predictive motifs are duplicated and specialized to form a behavior-based architecture composed of multiple parallel sensory motor loops.

So they're suggesting that because these are your affordances, your operations in your evolutionary algebra, you can go from this starting point, it's kind of like Gödel, Escher, Bach, starting point and then doing operations to it,

Because you have the starting point and the operations to it, it allows you to get to even relatively advanced motifs like approach avoidance, etc.

But a key piece is duplication.

Because duplication of something without changing it is how you are able to build more land to experiment in, so to speak.

Build more space and...

I copied some images from genetics, specifically in the relationship of how gene duplication and divergence in the early evolution of vertebrates, this paper.

And there's a huge amount of genetics and genomics works on the duplication and divergence and the neo-functionalization, the sub-functionalization, because if you have like an enzyme or a essential gene A, not to go into the whole gene thing, totally another time though.

um you could have the function of the second copy in the genome be lost and then there is still like a continuous line of function so if you only needed one copy of a then this would be sufficient and then other times when you have a and it's dual functional like it binds to two different not exactly similar molecules

then when there's a paralogy when there's this duplication it allows sub-functionalization or new functions to arise so that's how people talk about it and link it to realism in genomics and this is kind of approaching that from a cognitive perspective um there's probably more to say but we'll talk more about the duplicating of predictive motifs so how is duplicating predictive motifs enabling of multiple behaviors

Okay, they write, from a structure learning perspective, duplication is an efficient way of building generative models, and that's what it's all about, in the sense that the dynamics are conserved over different sensory motor domains.

This conservation is mathematically akin to factorizing probability distributions on the generative model that has been discussed in terms of modular architectures and functional segregation as a principle of functional brain architectures.

In Bayesian statistics and physics, this kind of factorization is ubiquitous and known as a mean field approximation.

Indeed, the free energy bound on model evidence is defined in terms of a mean field approximation.

that affords an accurate and minimally complex explanation for sensory data.

And so what are some of these citations?

44, modular architectures for factorization of probability distributions in the generative model.

Parr, Sajid, and Friston, 2020, entropy.

So here's kind of a cool figure.

Nice graph.

And then there's the message passing.

And then citation 48, the mean field approximation.

What is it?

Here's a paper from 2001, and they wrote, algorithms that must deal with complicated global functions of many variables often exploit the manner in which the given functions factor as a product of local interactions, each of which depends on a subset of the variables.

Such a factorization can be visualized with a bipartite graph that we call a factor graph.

A wide variety of algorithms developed in artificial intelligence, signal processing, and digital communications can be derived as specific instances of the sum-product algorithm, including the forward-backward algorithm, the Viterbi algorithm, the iterative turbo-decoding algorithm, Perl's 1988 belief propagation algorithm for Bayesian networks ,

the Kalman filter, and certain fast Fourier transforms, FFT algorithms.

So it was 21 years ago when this was happening, and now we're here.

Okay, section 10.

Endowing generative models with temporal depth supports perspective and retrospective inference.

So just like we looked at with that factor graph,

giving this operation over evolutionary time enables that factor graph to arise from something with a lower time horizon.

generative models discussed so far only consider present states and observations however they can be expanded into temporally deep models whose variables explicitly represent future and past states and observations so this is what the operation looks like it takes xt and then at x t plus one or tau depending on how it's written and then now there's another time step appended to the end of this model either actually or as if

Here's something cool that they wrote.

They wrote, various researchers have speculated that a major driving force for the development of deep temporal models was foraging.

So why would this happen functionally?

Which is to say, why does the mutational spectra

which does allow for this as an affordance, end up selecting for and retaining and enriching for temporally deep models.

Otherwise we wouldn't observe it to exist.

And they're connecting that to forging.

Intriguingly, this is a vertebrate example, the same hippocampal circuits that support spatial navigation and forging are also involved in prospection and imagination.

This has led Busaki and Mosser to propose that prospective functions have leveraged cognitive and predictive maps in the hippocampal entorhinal system, and hence mechanisms of memory and planning have evolved from mechanisms of navigation in the physical world.

So what are the cognitive demands of foraging?

How about information foraging?

How about mental foraging?

Here's some awesome papers by Hills and Cousine and others, Foraging in Mind and Foraging in Semantic Fields, How We Search Through Memory.

So what about mental foraging?

What about individual and collective foraging?

This is an awesome paper by Finerman and Corman in 2017.

And they talk about the continuum and the complementarity of individual and collective approaches to cognition, and so implicitly like foraging as a phenomena.

Some of the affordances and the neurophysiology of foraging in ants, it's the same materials and mechanism that any other insect that's not eusocial has.

So the detection of light,

the intensity, the wavelength, the polarization sometimes, the ability to do chemo sensation, like taste and smell, mechanoreception, et cetera, and the same action affordances too, like movement.

And so there definitely is nestmate level cognition in ants, but also there's things that are of a few different interesting types.

One of them is

mesoscale like small group dynamic stochastic teams and larger scale like colony and even colony niche stigmergy and ecological scale cognitive processes like these two ants are interacting and modifying each other's foraging behavior

mechanistically and statistically, but also it wouldn't happen unless the niche were exactly this way, which they have also in their extended selves established for themselves.

So how do we think about individual and collective foraging and stigmergy and complex systems and mental foraging and cognitive demands and cognitive security?

What about section 11?

Endowing generative models with hierarchical depth affords multiscale inference.

So now we get to the hierarchical operation that is going to give that multiscale inference.

So far, we have described generative models that can deal with aspects of the world that unfold at single timescale.

So plus one, plus one, plus one timescale is temporal depth, but you're getting still only one extra per transformation.

However, they can be expanded into hierarchically deep models.

whose variables at different hierarchical levels encode latent states that unfold at different timescales.

One example is a song.

The melody remains the same even though the notes we hear or sing change rapidly.

And speech.

Similarly, a movie or narrative remains the same for several minutes, scenes remain the same for several seconds, but visual stimuli can change over hundreds of milliseconds.

Such models permit hierarchical models, permit modeling of narratives,

songs, movies, and other events that change at different temporal scales, by encoding variables that change more slowly, e.g.

melodies or movies, at higher hierarchical levels, and variables that change more rapidly, e.g.

notes or visual scenes, at lower hierarchical levels.

Two neurobiological examples of hierarchical organization are visual areas in mammals and areas that control vocal gestures in birdsong, which has been studied in active inference several times.

And so here's another quote from the authors.

In more advanced animals, the hierarchical control of action may have expanded into sophisticated forms of cognitive control and executive function.

Layer one scare quotes.

which help prioritize distal goals while inhibiting immediate affordances.

So it's not just about seeing deeper within a timescale, but it's about being able to pull up to a higher timescale.

And then from there, after the H operation,

it can be followed up with a T operation.

So here's the minute scale.

And then there's a hierarchical duplication that allows for the hour scale.

And then that can go into two hours and now two minutes.

So now there's a two hour and two minute long model instead of a one minute.

And it was just two mutations.

But if the two mutations had been, or the three mutations had been just going deeper within the minutes,

it would be a different outcome.

How is that functional?

So what is the function and the cost of temporal depth?

Just instrumentally, when we're studying diverse cognitive systems, how can we detect temporal depth and slash versus hierarchical nesting?

Then what is the meaning and the role of narrative in cognition?

How does this relate to narrative information management?

All right, section 12, getting towards the end.

In the above, which was, again, the description of the simple motifs in 4, 5, 6, 7, and then the evolutionary algebra in 8, and then several of these finer scale discussions on 9 and 10 and 11, we then get to 12.

In the above, we formalize brain designs in terms of generative models that include predictive loops of various complexity.

Read.

and then discuss the five main ways in which generative model designs can be elaborated, green, or the five main operations of an algebra of evolutionary structure learning, figure four.

This means that one can describe the evolutionary trajectory of brain designs in terms of a limited number of mutational operations over generative models, blue.

So here is a phylogenetic tree on the right side with a tree of life, one of the tree of lives.

What are alternative, complementary, or traditional ways to think about phylogenetic trees?

In evolutionary biology, are phylogenetic trees interpreted instrumentally?

Are they interpreted under a realism framework?

Is that what really happened to those species?

Or is it our model inference about?

What is the relationship between active inference and the free energy principle and evolution?

Okay.

They have figure five, which gets at their phylogenetic model.

So this is a phylogenetic tree of generative model designs and putative correspondences with animal brains.

So here's the implied ancestral state.

And then I is going to be the identity operator.

So here the orange species has not mutated at all.

Now, sometimes this is conflated with simply being an outgroup.

Just because it is that way doesn't mean they're making the conflation, but sometimes people will make the conflation that because a species is an outgroup to some other clade that has been included in the analysis, that it is the basal or primitive form.

And so it does happen to be that way in this example, that the basal is the so-called least derived or most primitive or basal form, but...

My personal thought is that it should not be described, and Tim Linksfayer and others have awesome writing on that evolutionary fallacy.

So in the rest of the tree, which is being focused on,

different kinds of operations happen so here's that i plus i duplication and then there's no change after that and then this one has a and so on so just like you could trace the phenotype changing through time on a tree inferred from trait or genomic data which is just another trait this maps up to certain changes that are seen neuro anatomically over vertebrate evolution

And it reminded me of this paper, which was Chakraborty and Jarvis 2015.

And so that is the paper Brain Evolution by Brain Pathway Duplication.

So they don't connect it to, in the exact same way, the neurocognitive and the functional and the active inference and all that.

But this paper does get at some of the very similar ideas about the functional duplication arising as a result of pathway duplication.

they have a section on brain complexity and pathway evolution they talk about some alternative hypotheses and then talk about distributed and duplicated morphological structures so it's a kind of interesting paper from about seven years ago another paper that's very related to this idea of doing like an evolutionary algebra with combinatorics but also a path dependence is this paper

pretty recently, just a couple days ago, by Ryan Smith, Maxwell Ramstad, and Alex Kiefer.

The paper is Why Bayesian Brains Perform Poorly on Explicit Probabilistic Reasoning Problems.

So look at this tree that they have.

The starting point, and then three actions.

So here it's like divide, divide, multiply.

Divide, add, divide.

and then they study that in the context of bayesian brains and doing calculations why is it hard to multiply numbers together sometimes so then the authors of the paper 38 right interestingly the mutational operators are commutative the same generative model design can be obtained by executing the same operations but in a different order um the commutative property of mutational operators potentially sheds light on the convergent evolution

and the process by which unrelated organisms evolve similar traits independently and via different evolutionary histories when they need to adapt to similar ecological niches that's pretty cool all right so just the discussion and then a few last points so discussion and the authors summarize it in this article we suggest that brain structure or design could be formalized as generative models agree disagree

that the brain generative models of our evolutionary ancestors included simple predictive motifs.

Agree?

Disagree?

And that the evolution proceeded via successive elaborations of these predictive motifs into more complex architectures that we observe in advanced animals.

They then talked about the ways that that can change through time functionally.

And then they write, while the evolutionary trajectory of designs for predictive processing proposed here is certainly tentative and incomplete, we consider it a first step towards the alignment of predictive brains and evolutionary studies of neuroanatomy in different species.

So if this is the first step, where are we headed?

And why do we prefer and expect ourselves to be there or go there?

Just a few more topics that we could talk about, like in the dot one and then the dot two.

First would be, they write that the error correction mechanisms in their view encompass the simple and the complex forms of adaptive behavior.

Hashtag integrative theory.

And they're gonna argue that that differs significantly from prevalent perspectives in psychology and neuroscience, which tend to separate sets of mechanism for sensory motor processing and simple cognition.

So how is active inference similar and different to other frameworks for behavior?

What are the building blocks of adaptive behavior?

What are the basal blocks of just any kind of behavior?

Where does sensory motor integration come into play?

How about mental functions and cognitive functions like memory, anticipation, counterfactuals, et cetera?

Okay, another point to kind of think about or write your questions down and reflect on is the perspective, which is still speculative and not unchallenged,

suggests that the complexity of the ecological niche determines the level of complexity that the brain needs to have in order to be Bayes optimal.

In other words, brains only increase their complexity with sufficient ecological demands.

So not necessarily just that mutational direction and intensity will go towards increasing brain complexity from ecological demands.

so-called anticipatory evolution that cognitive entities can have through self-modification and niche modification but even for those that aren't actually doing anticipation still it could be the case that when the ecological demands are such that a behavioral model increase in complexity is selected for and retained then evolution will go that way this is because having a more complicated brain does not help if you live in a simple niche

So that's like a very costly model that's not giving you any more return on investment.

They then talk about how the social brain hypothesis states that the necessity to predict and deal with sophisticated social dynamics was a main driver of the evolution of large brains and sophisticated cognitive abilities in our species, people.

In short, the gradualism expressed as a progressive increase in complexity rests on the circular causality implicit in the modeling of an eco-niche that is in itself constituted and constructed by increasingly complicated phenotypes.

So,

Because it's so important to think through other minds, first, just how you're going to materially avoid a spatial collision, but then so the social brain hypothesis goes, includes increasingly recursive levels of game theory, market theory, and all this kind of stuff, and related indirect cognitive phenotypes required like memory and recognition, narrative understanding, rhetorical understanding, governance, etc.,

That is being posited as compatible with the models the authors have written and a hypothesis that others have written about, not from an active inference perspective, though, in most cases.

So what is the cognitive niche for social entities?

Our material niche and our social cognitive niche.

What is the social brain?

What is the eusocial brain?

How are they related?

So for example, the social brain...

is saying that the more social things are, the more sophisticated the brain has to be.

We need more narrative understanding and more memory.

But what if in the eusocial case, the brain is simpler on board?

For example, it's more role-based or temporal polyethism has allowed more reduction in each phase of the life cycles brain.

So does social lead to eusocial?

How does eusociality arise and how does it elaborate?

how do different kinds of sociality arise and elaborate, and how is that associated with the different kinds of models structurally changing that we've been discussing in this paper, and then just genomics, all the other stuff, gene expression, and then just one last point, which is the closing piece of their paper too.

Finally, it is important to acknowledge that brains, design, bodies, ecological and cultural niches co-evolved independently.

Not sure if that was what they meant.

It's kind of like they are codependent in their coevolution.

But they co-evolved.

They were alone together.

Given that here we were interested in the evolution of brain designs, we assumed a brain-centric perspective and conveniently focused on generative models in the animal's brain.

Hashtag realism.

in the brain not modeled as in the brain however cognition does not need to be confined in the skull to be it can be extended outside it to cover for example tools and social dimensions epistemic niche niche modification

digital stigmacy.

Furthermore, the body design and not just brain design plays an important role in solving control problems.

Acknowledging that cognition can be extended and embodied and encultured, et cetera, all the E's, all the other letters, suggests that not all aspects of control need to be solved by or represented in a central generative model.

tale of two densities, all the discussions we've been having about representation.

And so it was x and x star in the simple version that was presented in this paper, where it was actually trying to track x star in the world with the internal inference.

But this is the discussion that we've been having.

do those representations have to structurally resemble the world?

And there's other papers that we've discussed in the last several weeks that really touch on that point.

So how do we think about generative models and factor graphs for extended cognitive processes?

So a couple of books to check out about extended mind and embodied cognition.

And then here's a nice figure from touch points with the brain, the organs and the body

The world, and the tools, and the epistemic niche, and the computers, like a calculator, and time, chronos, and food, and then other people, social.

So that's like cognition.

It's like a holistic integration of all these features.

What does embodiment, this perspective, have to do with realism and instrumentalism, and utilitarianism, and other philosophical positions?

Are people really taking those positions or is it just as if they're taking those positions?

And then what else are you really curious about and motivated to explore?

And how will you modify and improve your epistemic niche?

So hope you enjoyed this kind of

solo dot zero video i think it's been a little bit since the solo dot zeros but just want to close as always with what might a good understanding enable what are the unique predictions and implications what are the next steps for free energy principle and active inference research and application

are the goals of this research and what are you still curious about we're going to be talking about this paper in the coming weeks on february 16th and february 23rd and so if you'd like to participate in those

discussions through live chat or by joining the discussions live just get in contact with us hope you read this paper because it's very thought provocative and interesting so enjoy the pape and working through it i hope to see you in other active lab activities thanks for listening and your regime of attention goodbye

## azwqMjgfY8Y

SPEAKER_03:
All right.

Hello and welcome everyone to ACT-INF Lab live stream number 38.1.

It's February 16th, 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for live stream just release an unending torrent of emojis if you have to speak or just raise your hand i'm sure that we'll get to it if you're watching live please feel free to write questions in the live chat and we'll have enough time to hang out and discuss during this dot one where we'll be opening into the paper

Check out ActiveInference.org for updated information on participating in any of the lab's activities.

I hope you'll find something that resonates with you.

Today in ACT-INF,

Livestream number 38.1.

We're going to be learning and discussing this cool paper, The Evolution of Brain Architectures for Predictive Coding and Active Inference by Pizzulo, Parr, and Friston from December of 2021.

And we're just going to enjoy discussing it and opening up any ideas or questions that us here on the panel have or those who are live chatting us.

And we have some ideas and thoughts prepared, a few things that we know that we can go into.

And also, I hope that everyone has brought some other prepared seeds and also, of course, spontaneously feeling like new things are arising.

So we'll just start with some introduction and warmup.

We can each say hi, and then maybe it'd be cool to just also mention like what got you excited about the paper or what made you want to discuss this paper?

What's something that stayed with you?

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and I was very excited by the evolutionary focus.

A lot of my research over the last years has been in evolution and ecology.

So it's always awesome to see how people are thinking about how active inference, free energy principle, and evolutionary studies can all be learning from one another.

And I'll pass to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Stephen Sillett.

I'm in Toronto.

I'm really interested in how this paper connects to my work with spatial meaning making and social topographies.

Because this paper talks about a more biological, nascent stage of development, rather than some higher order meaning that often people think about.

And I'm really

interested in how this sort of grounded, bottom-up, inactive ecological approaches can be thought about as something where we can actually ground a lot of our meaning making.

So I'm interested in how this might match with some of that thinking.

And I will pass this over to Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm in Calgary.

What I found interesting about the paper is that given that I've worked with a lot of young learners for a lot of my life, I

It was really interesting to see how this affirmed a lot of the thinking that I was doing when I was trying to get people past the idea that science is only about the biology and the chemistry and the physics, that there is a statistical and predictive component to this.

And those relationships in that realm can build certain sense of what the underlying architecture is.

So as I said,

A lot of this is affirmations, and it's kind of seen as being not part of what is typically addressed as core learning, but I think it should be.

Back to you, Dan.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Nice intro.

Let's just start with a big question, and then...

Either of you have any reflections on the big question, or we'll go over to blank slide and just bring up some questions we have.

And also it might be good to go over just some of the key points in the paper, like what did they actually do in terms of their contribution?

So the big question, or at least one way to phrase something that might bring someone to approach this paper,

What is the evolutionary neurophysiological basis of cognition?

And how do complex cognitive phenotypes arise?

Like you don't go from zero to colony in one time step.

How does it happen that evolution arises from precursor, sometimes simpler, but also sometimes more complicated, precursors?

Stephen mentioned like, what is the basis for sense-making and cognition and sense-making are very related.

And what's been fun over these last weeks and months is we've explored basic

or simple or reduced or basal cognition from a variety of perspectives.

Like we talked about the bioelectric components of thinking about basal cognition with Mike Levin.

Now we're thinking about a slightly different approach to understanding basal cognition, which we'll be discussing here.

And then also we've looked at some of these more complex cognitive phenotypes like mental action, counterfactuals, deep

temporal inference all the abductive logic which we'll get into probably later um how can we use integrative models of perception cognition action and impact like active inference to study this whole continuum and diversity of relatively simpler in our perspective cognition and also relatively more complex cognitive phenotypes

and everything in between.

So yes, Stephen, and then on with it.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Daniel.

Yeah, I mean, I suppose also what some of the paradigm impacts of that, of taking that

all the way through.

And one question that might come up, which you may or may not have an answer to or thoughts on, but, you know, Mike Levin's work with the teleological cones at the different nested levels, and how this sort of could be thinking about what kind of action control potential

you know, in these different nested levels might exist.

I would be interested to think about how this may either be able to connect to that.

I can see it connecting philosophically or whether there's another bridge needed between this modeling and that type of modeling.

So just something I've mentioned.


SPEAKER_03:
Great.

Dean, anything to add?


SPEAKER_01:
I'm going to wait until you get to figure one.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

So we won't go through all of the finer points in the paper.

That's for the reading of the paper itself.

Nor will we even go over all of the overview, which is what the .0 video, 38.0, is for.

So, you know, turn back time and watch that one if you haven't, or pause the video if you're not watching it live.

But

What this paper does, as evidenced by their roadmap, is introduce a few basic principles of cognition, predictive regulation and control, and then also structure learning in generative models.

That's not how every neurophysiology text is gonna begin

building blocks of cognition it's not how every evolutionary neurophysiology text is going to be framing cognition but that's what they do here and that will play into how it's similar and different than other approaches then with those building blocks in hand or on the floor they provide three examples of motifs that ancestral brains may be modeled as having or may have actually had

With those three examples in hand, it's then possible for them to state a more general way of thinking about the transitions amongst different structures.

These structures represent brain design as structure learning in generative models.

That is called an evolutionary algebra, and they introduce five operators that can basically either leave unchanged or change

the structure of brain design with respect to generative models.

And each of those are explored in terms of what are the architectural changes that that evolutionary transition is?

And then what are the functional consequences of that kind of an evolutionary transition?

Then they have some discussions about how sequences or patterns of application of this evolutionary algebra could lead to different evolutionary phenomena.

So, for example, increasing temporal depth in the future means that models are increasingly prospective.

Increasing temporal depth in the past is like memory, etc.

And then they close with mapping to a phylogenetic tree and thinking about that evolutionary algebra of state transitions being mapped onto the bifurcating tree structure that's called a phylogenetic tree, which shows the relatedness of different life forms.

That's the roadmap.

Let's go to the long awaited figure one.

and talk about the action perception cycle and predictive regulation.

And so they're, again, discussing this in the context of predictive regulation, anticipatory regulation, cybernetics, and control as a basic design principle for the brain.

So Dean, what do you see here or what would be cool to think about?


SPEAKER_01:
So what this follows, I think, is the usual pattern when we're trying to explain where we're going to go.

And so you just had a roadmap up.

And I think a roadmap is a way for the people who are reading the roadmap to find their way.

But I think what this diagram shows is that in the middle of there, there's something called a discrepancy.

And that discrepancy is later going to be given a label Y. And

What I think is really interesting here is there's a flip potentially that can happen here.

That discrepancy is where what I would describe as a rule factory and rule in the sense that we find pattern.

That's kind of our place where, as it says, the prediction and the observation come together.

And I believe that that's different than a roadmap, which is find your way.

I believe that that discrepancy or that rule factory is wayfinding.

And I think...

What we have the potential to do with this paper because of the way that they have sort of presented the information is the words eventually become explicated rules, which then become action in the phenomenological space.

That's where it gets really, really interesting because I think most of the time when people look at things as a subject, they've taken the world and they've collapsed down to words and diagrams and models.

What this potentially allows us to do is flip that and move from the words back out into the space with a little bit more confidence.

So yeah, that's why I wanted to kind of start here because I think the word discrepancy, it's the first time I've seen it in this kind of figure


SPEAKER_03:
model and i really like it cool yeah it makes me think about uh setting off on the road trip on the mental actions that

reflect the paper and there's the roadmap which is super informative but it is like instructionalism it's saying you're going to go two streets and then take a left turn at the stop sign and then when this happens then you'll do that and if you've seen this then you've gone too far kind of classic instruction type sequences

Here we have a figuring out because it's visually arranged with some local connectivity that's suggestive of a causal connection through time.

But by no means is there only one way to read this simultaneous figure.

And so that allows potentially for more of a figuring out, including a figuring out of rules.

Yes, it is indeed a little different with discrepancy at the intersection here.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so this ties in with the lower bound evidence control approach of action.

So, you know, the idea is that action is what we can tractably approximate and perception is...

something that we can access but can't, and we can try to make more sense of, but is a harder piece of the equation to get a handle on.

So I'm wondering if that's... I mean, how do you feel about that declaration in terms of its use across other areas of applied active inference?

I think it's a...

it could make things a little bit more digestible for a number of contexts.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Thinking about this in the context of recognizing that it's different than other action perception loops that we've seen, which is just really important to keep in mind that we're not perceiving something that we're projecting too much because other times the outgoing arrow from the entity is what?

If this were a Markov blanket type diagram, which they often are, the outgoing arrow would reflect active states and then the statistical dependencies that are outgoing.

But where is action?

It's on the bottom right.

So let's really try to understand why the pieces are placed this way.

The outgoing feature of the cognitive entity is the prediction.

And here's observation coming in.

If this were a Markov blanket diagram, we'd have the world and then the incoming statistical arrow would be the observation.

That would be the sensory states.

So here it's the outgoing prediction of the entity and the incoming sensory data or observation.

Those two are being differentiated to form a discrepancy.

which is just a qualitative term, but it could be then brought a little bit more formally into a prediction error or a little bit even beyond that into like a free energy differential.

This discrepancy has two arrows coming out of it.

From the discrepancy is arising perception and the changing of beliefs.

Does perception always involve changing beliefs?

And discrepancy is also giving rise to action.

So what kind of a thing is discrepancy such that the inputs are prediction and observation and the outputs are perception and action?

So at the very least, this is not the Bayesian graph representations that we've seen before or that we'll see

in just a few slides with a more traditional interpretation of nodes as random variables and edges as statistical dependencies.

This is a little bit more like a thought map

that then connects to the variational free energy equation which we talked about in number 37 a lot more but just to recall there's the red and the blue lines these two different components of the variational free energy and those are shown again here so check out 37 to learn more about the red and the blue and about

variational and expected free energy but for here we're starting with this action prediction discrepancy motif and then connecting it to perception and action as variational free energy minimization steven i think one thing that's useful with this um more nascent


SPEAKER_00:
representation is discrepancy can go in different directions.

So it can be discrepancy in terms of temporal occurrence.

When was the prediction predicted to happen?

When was it observed?

But it could also be what kind of prediction

and what kind of observation, or whereabouts was the prediction, whereabouts was the observation.

There's many different, and at different scales.

So there may be that at the kind of lower levels, there's quite a big jump between when I predict the baseball coming to my hand, when that prediction was made, when that observation occurs,

And also when that is chained up at different, slower, bigger steps of the nested Markov blanket sort of sequence.

So this idea of discrepancy is, I suppose, is probably the biggest bucket they could find, I would imagine, at that spot.

And that may be partly why it's there.


SPEAKER_01:
i just add to that stephen i think one of the things that's interesting is especially after just doing the 37 paper where we were talking about guides to me the timing of this was absolutely immaculate because now all of a sudden we've gone from guiding to almost taking potentially a referee's position

on the world, which is a whole different thing than taking up the position of being a guide.

And that was, I mean, that's not nuanced.

That's not subtle.

That's quite an identity shift.

And we're going to actually get into identity when we look at some of the evolutionary steps later on.

But I wanted to slow down on this because I thought that's not a minor change.

That's a whole different perspective shift.

And I think we need to really make note of that because I think it colors a lot of what's to follow.


SPEAKER_03:
What makes you say that we're a referee in this situation?


SPEAKER_01:
Discrepancy.

There's a difference between what the world is telling us and then how we rule on that.

So think of any game where you get into an argument with the refs.

Are they wrong?

Are you wrong?

It doesn't really matter.

The point is that there's a difference.

That's when you said differential graphing is maybe one of the ways to be able to make that explicit.

But that's not how it's typically framed out when we're talking about Bayesian or Markovian stuff.

So I think this is a big move.

I know it might seem like a tiny one, but I think as we go, again, as we go deeper into this paper, it affirms a lot of the stuff that I actually saw when you're trying to go out there and forage and figure.

So I'm excited to keep going.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, it could be like the observation, the baseball player is running towards the base and the coach is observing and there's this ongoing prediction and observation with no discrepancy because part of the generative model includes the person moving through time.

And then,

Given the observation and the generative model, the coach predicts slash expects and prefers, which we'll come to again later with the three Ps, that the baseball player is safe.

You rarely see super animated refusals when a call has gone towards somebody, but it's when it has gone against, it's violated their fitness, that there's a discrepancy.

with what the referee has called and what the interested coach has called, and that is going to lead to some consequences.

And again, we're still not at the Bayesian graph level, but that's going to be the next figure.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
This can then build on...

the idea of what's cognitive, what can you have a perspective on?

So I think what you're saying there with this referee position is as well as the kind of the swarming dynamics and the kind of inactive processes, much of which is beyond our ability to sense or integrate,

what is it once it starts to hit what's the big bucket at the kind of cognition level that still isn't too much of a of an inflation so in this case here discrepancy there is a sense of being able to distinguish perception and action at some level and find a discrepancy which in some ways

I would imagine covers a lot of what cognition would require to be thought of in a cognition way.

Other types of action, for instance, how we heal or grow, maybe action and perception won't be so separated, but this is trying to come at the idea of cognition.

So maybe that also informs this process.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool, so section two, again, was just about the two concepts of predictive regulation and control.

That's what we saw here, predictive and control.

So it's just conceptually laid out.

In figure two, they formalized brain design as structured learning in generative models.

So here we have a different figure.

We still have the cognitive entity and the world.

We add in one layer of absolutely essential active terms, which is generative model, generative process.

The generative model is the cognitive entity's model of.

generative process is the underlying phenomena that gives rise to observations it's the difference between the cognitive model of vision a generative model of vision and the generative process of visual input which is like photons and the sun and all of that so these are very different they're complementary

but just so that we're really clear going forward that we're going to be using those in their specific sense, not using them like, oh, well, it's a generative model because this is a model of cognition that makes me excited and think of ideas.

That's not how we're using generative model here.

So just to be clear on that.

Now we see action as changing the world represented by you, and the cognition involves partially action selection, policy selection, planning as inference, but not going to all those details yet, which can have some influence on actual unobserved hidden states of the world, X star.

x is the cognitive model of that hidden state of the world that is being inferred and y is the observation that then feeds back into the cognitive model so that's what these nodes mean it's about partitioning the cognitive model

from the generative process.

Separating the generative model from the generative process, and we're starting to see the traditional blanket form with observations having incoming statistical dependencies and actions having outgoing statistical dependencies.

What else do either of you see in this model?

Yeah, Dean?

Let's see.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's go back to being a referee for a second.

The assumption is that you're already attending.

And most of these models that we have taken up in the past, especially in 37, what they try to focus on is getting from A to B.

what this is essentially saying is, let's add something to that translation, right, from A to B. Whatever we're trying to incorporate in this representation, let's maybe look at the interpretation part of it now and the recitation part of it.

So if I'm the umpire, and we can all be umpires, we don't have to do that just in a baseball game, this is incorporating now a certain critical process

I was attending and I saw this, but then there were 60,000 other people also paying attention and they saw that.

That's where I think this is getting really interesting now.

This is actually bringing it back to sort of, I still think it's an instrumental piece, but I think now we're going to incorporate some of the reality.

And were the 60,000 wrong?

Or is the one person who yelled out safe wrong?

That's what I see in this, because that you is definitely embedded in the generative process, not the generative model.

Okay, thanks, Dean.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
So the question that comes into mind is where the body is in all of this.

And I sense that

The generative process is the bigger process with the world.

The generative model gives a way to access those priors and to give away the hidden states.

And the cognitive model, generally speaking, cognition is thought of more in terms of deductive and inductive reasoning and logic.

And it could be that there's elements of the abductive that could be held within the kind of body.

And I suppose there's a question there to how and where that is.

I don't think anyone quite knows the answer to that, but that's my thought.


SPEAKER_03:
So let's remember that this partitioning

is specific to a given instantiation of model-based science, just like Majeed was talking about.

So we're not going around and assigning aspects or phenomena of the world into either generative model or generative process.

So where does the body fit in?

Well, with respect to a model of the body being a structurally real thing that gives rise to observations, it's a generative process.

looking at the coin from the other side and thinking of the body as a generative model of its niche doing inference on certain things or acting as if in that sense it's generative model so different kinds of entities are not going to be just assigned simply to one side or the other it's going to come down to what is specifically being discussed

There's a few other, not complexifiers, but first off, just note that the notation here is not the same that's used elsewhere.

So we will move towards better and cleaner or reformatable notation, but like X star as an external state and X as an internal state might be clearer for some people.

It also carries a little bit of a baggage that the hidden state is exactly what is being inferred about the external world.

Like there's a temperature parameter in the brain and then there's a temperature parameter outside in the world.

as we explored in the representations paper, it doesn't necessarily have to be that way.

There could be a hidden state internally having to do with movement left or right, and then there's a temperature variable outside, and then the model, the generative model of the cognizer is about movement conditioned on temperature observations, but not necessarily simply a thermometer being instantiated in the head.

It's like good to look at this graphically and think about what is being connected to what without worrying too much about all of these side questions, but this is what they're setting up as the basis of their further discussion, which is it's about prediction and control.

And we can use Bayesian graphical approaches to represent that.

Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
And that inferred state, as you mentioned, in some ways that's always slightly hidden from us.

What does that mean to be an inferred state in terms of is that the cognition that's coming out of that in some sort of deductive, or can it be an effective sense of how well something's going?

So again, it's not directly asked here, but

Accessing that is one of the big problems that happens is how do you access what has been inferred when it's not necessarily something you can access through sort of direct reporting from a subject matter or from a participant.


SPEAKER_03:
Another example of that might be somebody who has skilled action with respect to investing, but they may not be able to give an estimate for a number that a certain asset is expected to be at.

Because it's not like they're doing the asset price prediction and then doing a strategy.

The cognitive model may have a very different structure.

So we explored it in the representations paper, but like there would be ways in which therefore that investment decision is not a representation of the actual stock market because it's not the same variable, but then the aboutness of the investment decision would be

representation with respect to what was happening in the generative process so those are some of the like side avenues that we've looked at previously but they're all in play at once and so the question is just how to linearly structure to respect the specific contributions that are made here and the insight that can be gleaned without every single time

pulling back to some of these questions but it's great that we have like specific papers and memes and core terms that we can refer to and then carry on with what they actually contribute okay any thoughts on one or two before we get into the structure of the um allostat or the homeostat first i guess

Let's go.

Let's begin.

So we're going to go from this black and white, you know, Dorothy still in Kansas mode to some predictive motifs of ancestral brains.

And the three motifs, the red, green, and blue, are homeostasis, so returning to a set point, allostasis,

anticipating or approaching a set point in the future, which could be a fixed or changing one, and then implementing behavioral control, not just scalar homeostasis or allostasis on an interoceptive variable.

Okay.

Citation 20 in the paper, Chance et al.

from the future, March 22, is where to look for more details on the homeostatic formulation that they're using here.

But we can see it in terms of their figure three.

Okay, so the left side, just for reference, there's figure two, so that we can remember the structure of perception, cognition, action, impact that the authors are working with here.

And we're going to connect this black and white figure two to figure 3A.

This is a graphical model, graphical in both senses, meaning visual, like we're perceiving it through computer graphics, and graphical meaning like a network, so nodes and edges, because there's computer graphics that aren't network topologies.

But this happens to be a computer graphic that we're perceiving visually that also is reflecting a graph in terms of nodes and connected edges.

It's a generative model for the regulation of a single interoceptive variable.

So here's A and B with the homeostat and C we split out to talk about later, but first A and B. This generative model includes an interoceptive thermoreceptor and a belief about body temperature.

The prior over X, which is body temperature, is kept fixed, and hence it acts as a cybernetic set point.

Any discrepancy between the predictive thermoreceptor activity given beliefs about X, so Y conditioned on X, and the measured Y is registered as a prediction error that is canceled out by an autonomic response U, for example, a thermoregulatory response.

So hidden state,

On temperature, beliefs about temperature.

Why?

The thermometer.

Perception.

And then there's the selection of action.

So some sort of like vasodilation or thermoregulatory response.

And then that's going to change the underlying unobserved true temperature.

But that's not...

needing to be shown so any comments on that first part we're looking just at the top half of 3a and connecting x y to um you action can you still hear me because i think i've


SPEAKER_01:
Can you take the cursor now and just reinforce the feedback and the feed forward part of this?

Because the authors spent a bit, I don't want it sort of unpacked like they have at the figure three unpacking that we have in the bottom of the slide.

Can you just run the cursor over all the examples of feedback and feed forward going on concurrently?

Because I think that's really important to see that it's happening in both directions at once.


SPEAKER_03:
Let's label everything and then definitely can do that.


SPEAKER_01:
Perfect.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

So light blue is action.

These are subtracted, so red circles represent expected values of x, the red circles, which are used to make predictions about y. These are subtracted to form a prediction error.


SPEAKER_01:
Because those lines with the arrows on the end of them are just dependencies.

They don't really show both the feedback and the feed forward.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, agreed.

Like having some rounded...

edges and other um directed edges let's see whether it's whether they're like kind or not um let's start with action action influences the state of the world which an edge can be drawn

to how that changes the state of the thermoreceptor.


SPEAKER_01:
I thought Y here was the observation.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

That's the state of the thermoreceptor is the observation.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So action changes the observation, the state of the thermoreceptor, which is being contrasted with the belief about temperature.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.


SPEAKER_03:
From there, a prediction error

is generated.

It could be zero if there's no difference, or it could be higher.


SPEAKER_01:
Can you just show with a green, some colored line that has an arrow on each end, a connection that demonstrates within that diagram, the feedback and the feed forward at once.

Is that possible using this diagram?


SPEAKER_03:
Let's see.


SPEAKER_01:
This representation, so a single arrow or a single line that has an arrow at both ends is a different color, so we've superimposed it over this, but that it shows that there's a feed-back, feed-forward loop going off at the same time.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, so here's the temperature information measurement flowing in to contrast with the beliefs.

And this is, it is in general really important to label the edges, not just use color coding.

We'll let it roll for now.

The information is flowing from the measurement to the belief.

And then that gives us the prediction error.

Then the prediction error is used in the selection of action, which then influences future observations.

Now the red circles represent expected values of X. I'm actually not sure what exactly the red bottom larger circle is meaning because the prediction error.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, there has to be some way of representing that discrepancy, right?

So they needed the second ball on the bottom to show difference.

Between prediction error and expectation, I think that's all that's trying to show.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, or another possibility might be that the prior is staying fixed.


SPEAKER_01:
Correct.

That's X to the prior.

Yeah, yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Priors can also... They can be flexible, but in this case, it's a fixed prior.

That's because we're talking about homeostasis.


UNKNOWN:
Yep.


SPEAKER_03:
Then...

the observations are diverging from the prior and the posterior is kind of like the realized perception, which is a compromise between the sensory data coming in and the prior.

And so, yes, there's a lot of degrees of freedom depending on how parameters are weighted.

This green line might approximate the red a lot more sharply.

We'd call that a weaker prior.

because sensory data updates the posterior to be more like it.

Or it could be the case that having a lot of observations different from your prior don't change it.

That's a strong prior where sensory data do not change it as much.

But then here is the prediction error in relationship to X. I don't know, we can look at the paper, but is mu

shown in an equation i don't have it copied out if it is let me look here while you're doing that yeah but that is the perhaps here okay um stephen anything yeah i'm just noting how the effectively the belief on temperature it's it flows through the thermosector


SPEAKER_00:
down into the to get the expectations prediction error so it's you know it's it's it's like you've shown there there is a a dynamic going down from the belief through to prediction error being mediated it's like the thermoceptor is kind of like a mediator between belief and prediction error on what to do for action


SPEAKER_01:
And another point, the reason why you can't find the Mew is because it's not actually pointed to in the description.


SPEAKER_03:
It's not in the caption.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and I remember reading and looking and looking and looking and not being able to find it and then looping back up paper to go, okay, so how about feedback feed forward?


SPEAKER_03:
Now, there are cases where Mew is used to describe internal states.

That may be implicitly how it's being used, but it's super important that all variables are defined in a paper.

I wish they all had a table for every single variable and expression that were used.

Yeah, it would make the dot zeros easier, but also it would reduce uncertainty.

For example, is this epsilon even described?

Okay, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
mean I suppose in a thermostat in some ways the the internal states of the bioelectric strip and in some ways it's kind of it holds the kind of the the way that the expectations of action can happen because it in some ways it dictates the way that

thermostat will behave it's uh in some sort of ways even if it's kind of a uh an analog uh process so i'm i'm thinking like where where would the kind of in a thermostat where would um i know this is a homeostat so it's a bit more sophisticated now but extrapolating that out you've you've kind of got a belief

And there's a belief of what something is, and then there's an expectation of what you can do about it.

For instance, my beliefs can go bigger than what I can do in my actions.

I could have beliefs about temperature, which exceeds where I could even exist or where I am able to change it.

It depends on the scenario.

So it's sort of held in both scenarios, in both the body


SPEAKER_03:
and the context and the kind of the the probabilities available okay so for a non-living thermostat it doesn't have a cognitive belief on temperature but there could be something that's computationally like that reflected by like just a digital prior on temperature and again these aren't cognitive personal affective experienced beliefs

Bayesian belief, this is just saying random variable reflecting in a model variable on temperature.

So even a sincerely held incorrect psychological belief is not the Bayesian belief.

They might coincide at times if it were a parameter, but the belief here being the prior,

It must be adaptive.

That's the evolutionary twist that actually helps resolve a lot of this because otherwise, right, the design space of all edges by all nodes and then any variable, I mean, it's just like saying, here's all the words in the dictionary.

And so evolution helps restrict the discussion to cases that actually do manage to achieve adaptive control.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
And this is where that translation from the silhouette of a head to a statistical density is assumed that the person who's following along with this just sees that.

But you can also see how easy it is to slip into the idea that, oh, wait a second, we've gone from the physical space and we just held on to the physical space when really now we're talking about a statistical density space.

And again, if you're not really, really careful,

You can see how people can carry forward something, but the actual thing that they're talking about has changed.

That's why the word discrepancy was such a big deal to me because I normally gloss over things, but this time it actually, I went, oh, okay, so there's going to be some moments here where we're actually talking about different things, even though in the continuum, we kind of think that they're talking about the same thing.

No, we're not.


SPEAKER_03:
yep it's um the travails of realism and instrumentalism for biological active inference episode 55 because are these terms are they an example or is this an example of a model being used to discuss a real system but this suffice to say is the architecture of the homeostat it undertakes action

to reduce discrepancy relative to a prior held belief, fixed in this case, about what temperatures are expected slash preferred.

The dialectic of the first two Ps from livestream number 37.

This is an expectation and a preference because expectations having to do with survival are as good as preferences for survival over evolutionary time.

Okay.

This is going to be contrasted with figure 3b, which is the Allostat.

And so we see the same stack of X1, Y1, light blue, dark blue, red, except there's now a second column next to it, and there's some cross connectivity.

So again, the Xs are going to be beliefs about, so priors on.

then these are observations and so they're saying this generative model extends the homeostat by including a second set of exteroceptive variables that correspond to light intensity y2 observations of light and beliefs about sunrise so like beliefs about the generative process so generative model of the generative process

Furthermore, the model includes a predictive relationship between sunrise and body temperature .

So, again, I wish we could label every edge because the edges are meaning different things even at different times.

Like, this is a predictive relationship, so it's an anticipatory one.

then the one about light intensity and the belief about sunrise there would be ways to make that an anticipatory or an anticip or an instantaneous relationship um but the result of this sketched architecture is that inferring a sunrise which will only happen with high posterior confidence if the visual observations are consistent so low prediction error

Inferring a sunrise, not quote, seeing a sunrise, that is not what is happening in the model.

Inferring a sunrise and finding that visual observations are compatible with it can trigger the autonomic response, the behavior, you,

of thermoregulation in an anticipatory manner that is before sunlight actually increases body temperature well how would the parameter be set that way because if that were adaptive then other parameter combinations have been weeded out already by evolution so that is where we tuck the thread back into the ball of yarn which is the parameter combinations that are non-adaptive die

They dissipate.

They fail to exist.

They're not going to be measured as things in the future, empirically, however you want to take it.

So the quote, like, how does it work?

It's the same as it was 50 years ago, which is it has to do with survival of the persistent.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
And these graphs, what they're used for as well is they do show beliefs tied to...

the observation space, the space available around the observation, you know, whatever the sensorium that is available, that's what gives the beliefs its scope.

And then the expectations are tied in here more clearly to action.

So the errors, the errors or the

What's important, the actual dynamic that's driving action to change something is coming out of the prediction error that's feeding into action.

I think that's quite important because this is like the proto-animal.

This is like the proto kind of piece here that ties into a lot of how

we think about knowledge and meaning.

And I'm not saying that, I'm just extrapolating a lot, but I think it does show how beliefs are tied to the type of sensorium that is being used to shape the observation space.

And I think that's quite useful.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, and these are just, yeah, Dean, first go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
I just want to get both your guys' opinions about that orange barbell at the bottom of the diagram.

Because we're talking identity, but we're also still talking about dependency.

We're talking about duplication.

We're talking about anticipation.

So that's a lot of stuff packed in one orange barbell.

What do you think?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I'm going back to the full caption.

the red circles represent the expected values of x so if we're interpreting these as the posteriors on x because the expectations the priors are the top blue ones so it wouldn't have to be the red circles and they don't mention the word orange

Note the lateral... It's there, and it's identity.

Note the lateral modulatory connections in the allostatic network C24 for details.

And 24 is the graphical brain with Frist and Parr and DeVries.

So yeah, again, this is just a sketch model.

They're not using it to fit any data or even simulate any data.

And it does relate to what Steven said about the intersensory or the intermodal inference, which is one could imagine a cognitive model where if there's noises that are associated with sunrise,

Then beliefs about sunrise can be a variable with edges coming from different sensory modalities.

So it gives us a separation of the organs of sense and internal cognitive modeling.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it gives a sense of when would something be important to act upon.

So there's many, many things that I could believe I'm seeing or being perceived in terms of this is a sunrise or this is the type of light coming in.

This is the nature of the light.

This is where the light's coming from.

There's all sorts of stuff.

The stuff that's really filtering down is what is...

important and this is where the affordance is coming what affords me to make some action

If it was expanding out, there can be lots of things I notice.

I might notice that there's a line there, and I may notice and believe it's orange, but I may not act upon it until I take my attention to it and think it's useful, as there's many things going on on the page.

So when we have beliefs, but then there's what's being acted upon out of all of that to then create some sort of change.

So I think that...

is also quite useful in this architecture.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Can I add to this?

Because I think it's really important.

So we're talking about in the context of a sun coming up.

But let's see whether it still is true, and I think it is, just to prove a point, whether that orange barbell still makes sense if we're talking about Daniel anticipating 61-year-old Daniel and Stephen anticipating 61-year-old Stephen and Dean anticipating 61-year-old Dean.

Now, I'm much closer to 61 than the two of you, but do I need the Monte Carlo?

Do I need the play out?

to be able to make that anticipation as long as I have the identity and the parallelism and the backwards and forwards looking dependency that we see between X1 and X2 and Y1 and Y2.

That's what I think makes this a very interesting way of being able to sort of build on the previous homeostatic example.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Stephen?

Yeah, I think also this speaks to traditionally we think about the meaning.

What does this mean?

What's all the meaning out there?

As you mentioned, all the data, the stuff that it could mean to relate all these variables.

But ultimately, and the bit that is actually what active inference gives us is that barbell is where the meaning comes in.

It's like the way to know...

how being 61 is for you, Dean, is for you to imagine what it would be like to make choices and to act in the world as a 61-year-old Dean, not necessarily to go out and look at all the

the data, so to speak, all the beliefs and the things we think about the world, but to actually bring that in.

And of course, you've got a better chance to do that because you're closer to being that kind of dean.

So I think that's quite interesting, that barbell at the bottom in terms of pairing together the kind of beliefs about what actions and prediction areas are available.

And it's more into that meaningful action, meaningfulness,

realm, rather than what does it mean?

What's the data tell us?


SPEAKER_01:
We might get there, and I'm not pushing back on what you're saying, Stephen.

We might get there.

But I think for now, what we're saying is that in order to get there, we have to have more than a single stack of dependencies.

We have to have a double stack in order to be able to extend the homeostatic nature of how we've evolved to where we are.

I don't know.

Again, I'm not pushing back on you.

I'm just saying I don't want to jump that

I don't want to jump that firing pistol just yet because I think that orange barbell is going to turn into a green arrow and then all hell is going to break loose anyway.

So we should carry on.

I don't want to take Stephen's stuff away, but I think I want to park it because we're going to go somewhere in a minute.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm hesitant to ascribe too much specificity to something that wasn't labeled in the caption, doesn't have a clear labeling in the figure either, but I think it is already demonstrated that using graphical frameworks and partitionings like we have in Active Inference, we can start to approach some of these questions, like how would different kinds of variables be connected

How does that relate to future inference on action, counterfactuals, et cetera?

Okay, so these sections four, five, six, seven, were just laying out the relationship between an evolutionary or a physiological function like homeostasis, allostasis, or simple behavioral control, models of things that are core evolutionary features and functions,

connecting them to the kinds of graphical representations, which are like a little bit of a hybrid of a Bayesian graph and a factor graph, because there's some kind of computations being implied here.

Whereas in a Bayesian graph, the edges only reflect statistical dependencies.

Whereas we're bringing in a little bit more of like a nuanced type relationship that one could imagine

could be unpacked a bit more were it to be specified.

But it's just to show how different graphical models relate to different functions.

Architectural underpinnings, whether you think this is the actual architecture or whether it's just an instrumental architecture, like a model structure on a given phenomena,

how do model architectures relate to evolutionary functions where is evolutionary time in this model we started out by asking like how do cognitive phenotypes arise specifically over evolutionary but also over developmental time and that's where we get to one of the main pieces and contributions of the paper which is figure four

the five main dimensions of elaboration of generative models introduced in this paper.

So there's other kinds of changes and ways that this structure could evolve, but they're going to focus on these five.

There's starting with the homeostat.

Does it have to be our starting point?

Maybe not.

starting with a homeostat there's the i operation which is identity unchanged there's i plus i which is just a parallel isolated duplication that's like from one photoreceptor to going to two photoreceptors so to speak there's the allostat which is a duplication as well as a cross-linking

So these are just sketches.

One could also probably write that one as like a duplication followed by a linking, and there's no like change in linking, for example, here.

So this is like a few of a taxonomy of operations.

There's increases in temporal depth within a level of the hierarchy.

So looking one more unit further in time,

at a given time scale.

And then there's hierarchical nesting with an H. And the figure is shown like this because these are like the things that can happen to the homeostat.

And then they can have a second round and so on and so on.

there's so many other ones that could happen.

Like where is reduction?

Where's loss?

Where's deduplication?

Where's the uncoupling of the allostat?

Reduction of temporal depth, reduction of hierarchy.

So there's a broad space, but one of the main contributions of this paper is to connect functionally oriented graphical models of homeostatic and physiological function to

operations that result in the elaboration of simpler model architectures into different architectures.


SPEAKER_01:
This is an interesting part.

I know Stephen wants to say something too, but really quickly, there's no plus minus multiply and divide.

There's an operation, but there, there's no symbolism for that.

And again, again,

that keeps it safe on a statistical level.

I think that's a nice tell there.

And I want to, again, for somebody who's just sort of looking at this for the first time, pointing that out, it's not there.

And because it's not present, that tells us something.

To your point about maybe how do we get deduplication?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, it's... Well, I plus I, it is like... It's a...

suggestive use of the addition operator, but we're not adding these just like integers.

So yes, they're kind of like categorical operations that constitute this evolutionary algebra.

Okay, Steven, anything on figure four?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I was just saying that they've set a kind of a paradigm from the homeostat and they've taken that through and they've shown that it plausibly can

carry through to cognition.

And then, like you say, there can be other ways, but what they've now given is they've given some legs another way to think of the legs that can be attached to that paradigm.

Because this modeling approach, while they could have chosen a lot of others, by taking it, there are certain things which are hard-baked into that early stage choice-making, which then makes other paradigms wouldn't fit with it, right?

You know, even if you go instrumental or realist,


SPEAKER_03:
know your instrumental models your realist models don't make sense unless you with this unless you take in some of the paradigms that this structuring creates yeah agreed thanks so just maybe think like is this functional model realism like the function of the model is what is being tracked through time and so that

there's many other alterations that could occur.

And then there's the even more granular, like parametric changes or changes in connectivity or edge types.

And then I think, as you said, Dean, when all hell breaks loose.

So then it just, what's interesting here, let's look at the Allostat in a little bit closer detail.

Okay, so previously we looked at the allostat and we were like, okay, there's an orange bar.

Now, the allostat has a green bar.


SPEAKER_01:
It's a green arrow and it's a unidirectional one.


SPEAKER_03:
This one... The dependency.

The allostat...

has the green bar.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, okay.

Well, those are my bad eyes.

Cause I saw, I saw the little arrow from the blue actually turning.

I didn't actually see that there was two circles.

Thank you.

There's my 60 year old eyes for you.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

okay cool um and so each of these are in quite a different domain um or at least like a different aspect of cognition and these are the transitions that it can engage in so like duplication retains the exact same function but it's a very important step and that's a little bit what i explored in the dot zero with genetic duplications like on the left side here at the screen

having a region of the genome duplicate, yes, one of the duplicate copies can just degenerate.

That may be like opening up space or creating motifs for other kinds of later evolutionary steps.

So even this is not like a failure, it's just a change.

There's neo-functionalization where then those two models can start to subspecify.

Like if you only have one photoreceptor, it has to be doing what it's doing.

But duplicating it,

then allows one to focus on a different wavelength than the other, for example.

And then there's sub-functionalization, which is where initially a composite function, AB, becomes two, like enzymes start to sub-specialize on one of the two functions of the ancestral.

So this is kind of like a role duplication.

Okay, so duplication is an important event.

then there's the allostat and multiple things happen with a but we're seeing it as there is a duplication occurring and there's also cross-linking occurring between beliefs in one modality or beliefs about one type of thing influencing observations um or in about another kind of thing as well as this lateral modulatory uh green orange

bar um we have and then we have two kinds of expansions into temporal depth a sort of local expansion with the t operation just pushing the model one step deeper and then the h hierarchical nesting operation which brings it to another time scale of analysis dean


SPEAKER_01:
And this is where I really struggled.

And that is when they were at Alistat, it wasn't just comparative.

I felt like you had to build in time, especially if we're talking about identity.

But then it was like, no, we're just going to leave it comparative.

And then we're going to introduce the when-ness of this.

Now, I mean, I understand why they're doing that to try to make it tractable.

But I don't know how they can say it can be comparative, meaning it's

I know the difference between A and B right now, but not sort of address the fact that in order to differentiate into A and B, some amount of time had to have been applied to that split.

So I was saying you have to go back in time in order to just be able to do a comparison.

So it's temporal only going forward in time.

I don't mean all hell broke loose, but I mean, I did ask this question.


SPEAKER_03:
you're right like here there's um there's the triggering in an anticipatory manner and so in one view it's like but this is a single time step model so how could that occur because it doesn't have a temporal depth

on the other hand again like kind of that those two senses of representation in the structural sense if the model is a single time step model it cannot have a representation through deep time ergo it cannot be anticipatory functionally right the other side of the coin would be if it's enough at this time step such that beliefs about sunrise trigger and a response

the model can be functionally anticipatory without a temporal depth representation.

Which is why the representation discussion was very important leading up to this one, because we're all over those eight quadrants here.

Because in evolution, and this is something that like cognitive psych people talk about and is like,

our cognition being shaped towards effective which is to say productive reproductive success not towards like ultimate truth discovery and so should we be too surprised that our instrumentation which has had a certain objective function is then susceptible to

being convinced about things that are not true.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I don't socialize with those people, so I don't know.

I just knew that when I was looking at it, I was thinking in real practical terms, what is built into this in order for it to still make sense?

And that wasn't necessarily parsed out in the diagram.

You kind of had to fill that in through your own interpretation of what was going on.

So thus, back to discrepancy.

That discrepancy thing is going to come up again and again.

And I'm really glad that they inserted it at the beginning.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Steven.

I think it's useful here to hear this temporal depth and hierarchical depth being sort of spelt out.

because I think sometimes it's a little confusing in other papers quite where it fits.

So if temporal depth, and this again might be where some of this ontology work can be useful, just to sort of see if that can be kind of consistent.

But if temporal depth is, you know, you've got variables for past, present, and future states, but they're operating maybe within the same kind of dynamics,

And then if you've got different temporal rates operating simultaneously, then you get that hierarchical depth.

And I thought in the past, I'd sometimes thought temporal depth would have covered that more hierarchical depth.

So this is interesting to think about whether this might be actually the way that that differentiation is best made.


SPEAKER_03:
Differentiation is probably best made with reference to a specific model.

And this gives us the design language and the grammar and the motifs.

So if we want to predict 100 years in the future, should we have a decade model with 10 year models?

That's a times depth of 10 decades, and then a nested model with a depth of 10 years.

Or will we have a one-layer model with 100?

They're very different.

And it's not to say that one is more accurate or less.

And depending on how the exact situation is set up, maybe the computational requirements of one are higher or different than the other.

But that's the discussion to have.

Do we want to have a B transition matrix?

Let's look at a nested model with temporal depth.

So here...

we have on the top level of the model s state two this is temporal depth happening at the upper level of the model three discrete time points in an upper level that is temporal depth there's also nesting within each um time step

there's a cognitive rollout on three time steps this is one type of nested model but there's other nestings that can exist so here we see a depth of two and then at each level of the nesting there's three temporal depth but they're totally different in architecture and in function so it is the interesting discussion like

especially when we have to do multi-scale prediction, like Fermi estimation.

So if the prediction is within one timescale,

there isn't necessarily a need to nest.

But once we get into larger timescales or where there's recurrence over multiple timescales, it makes sense to have a nesting model.

Like if we wanted to predict someone's activity over the next seven days, it might make sense to have a day model with a nested model inside of that.

because then within each day there could be parameter setting versus just trying to fit one time series and find the parameters that make that one time series oscillate in a circadian way instead we just need a day model with a very specific kind of simple transition and then a transition at a nested level

with a depth that's measured at the hourly or the minute time scale rather than the days.

And that becomes especially important when doing family-based model fitting like variational inference.

So we're not just getting all the data points and fitting a spline through them, but we actually need to have appropriate model structure.

Otherwise, free energy minimization will drive right off a cliff, just like we talked about with Axles bacterium.

So if we want to do free energy minimization and model selection on model structures, we can find the best model relatively easily given the families that we've specified.

But there's no guarantees once we step outside of that spotlight that we're even in the right category structurally.

And so that's why humans having these design motifs in mind and many, many, many more

helps us not get into what seems to be a global optimization based upon free energy minimization, but actually is a very relatively local optimization based upon unimaginative model structure learning.

Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, thanks.

That's really helpful.

And it also ties into something I've been really thinking about in terms of the model in itself is these scales, these steps, you know, you're talking about the multi-year, decades,

When we're modeling, it's like, what do we have access to?

So we tend to ascribe that in terms of what can we externalize and what can we use to put something into a model if it's instrumental.

And then, of course, there's a question of, well, what is the realist perspective on that?

And what is there that's within our conscious awareness of being in the world, something that can be reported as an event, a story,

And what time scales are present there?

When you get into 100 years, it's beyond that.

So then you're saying, okay, what are you going to extrapolate?

What sort of temporal structure?

But on the other scale, if I'm asking what do I think I expect you to do next or Dean to do next, and it might seem intuitive, I can have a whole series of temporal and nested scales going on, which is not even available to me today.

in a cognitive conscious way.

I might have a sense, have a feel for what I think is going on, but a lot of my predictive processing will be happening at rates unavailable to my conscious awareness.

So that also ties in, I suppose, I'm not saying it's an answer, it sort of adds to the challenge, I suppose, but it is the challenge of, you know, how much ends up being what we can get a measure on to put into our model as much as what it is.

And that's the same challenge in a way that comes even from the realist perspective, at some level, as an organism, what is it that I even can access in some realistic way?

Not saying we can model it or no,

could be put into something like this.

Sorry, Dean, you were going to say something?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, all I was going to add is that, I mean, so the paper's talking about how do we use certain math to be able to understand maybe the evolution of cognition, right?

That's essentially what the paper's trying to give us, you know, point us in that direction.

So...

Again, in order to make this accessible, in order to lower the barrier for people who actually want to have this make sense, because they don't necessarily spend sums and sums of hours on trying to figure this stuff out, like the authors or maybe even us, I want to point out something that I think is obvious to us, but maybe not so obvious to people who are looking at this and going, I have no idea what they're saying.

I think first of all is that there's a chronology which we keep going back to, not just at the temporal depth level.

So that's relativity math.

There's an evolutionary aspect to this, so that's algebraic math.

And there's a dependency, so there's a statistical math.

Do we have to be polymath in order to be able to feel our way through this?

And I'm gonna go back to what I said at the end of the 37,

Carl Friston said, you don't have to be a polymath, but you better be at least somewhat comfortable, feeling comfortable with the math, because there's no one math that's going to get you here.

It's a blending of all of them, and then it's how you feel about that that's probably going to be the thing that lowers your

the impediment to really being able to use this now in real practical terms going forward.

So what's the next evolutionary step, right?

It's how you're able to turn this into something.

So I think that's one of the great gifts of this paper.

If you're not afraid of being, if you don't consider, if you don't identify now, or you don't duplicate now, or you don't allostat now as a polymath,

Maybe that's something we owe people that want to get into this.


SPEAKER_03:
Maybe the British pronunciation of maths helps reflect that there's already a plurality of maths.

And Kirby Erner, coming more from the synergetic side, talks a lot about this actually, like how the discourse around math as universal language makes it sound like math is a singular language when actually math is a pluriverse.

And so math reflects that a little better.

It's not like these are just sort of slopes on one mountain and that's Mount Math and it's so high and only a few people get to the top and scale every side.

This is just like we're using maths.

Yes.

Of all different kinds.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
And often you see a lot of this in the papers that are published around active inference.

There's often a team of people, a group of people, where maybe one member has that higher level understanding of the math.

But the other question is to understand what would it mean to make an observation?

Now, the mathematician may not be the one.

Some of the work with Ryan Smith's work on the gut, it was like, well, they're going to do gut inference.

Well, how do you get some tractable source

on what's the gut doing.

So they created some electrode, I'm not quite sure how they did it, but they had some way of getting sensory information, effectively sensory information, or effectively some sort of information to put into their model.

And so knowing how action and observations

can flow in and the implications of that i think is also kind of a a big part of of this right and um in some cases it may be a trivial part because it's fairly obvious in other parts that may be the biggest barrier

And that may be the biggest barrier as well, often in organisms, right?

How do you even access, plausibly, the approximation science, which isn't so approximate that it's just chaos, that it's tractable?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, the rate-limiting step for impact and improvement in the real world is unlikely to be any single individual's conceptualization of math on a team.

if it's structured appropriately.

And for those pushing the frontiers of math, their understanding of math is quite literally a rate limiting step for them.

Or maybe it might be something very mundane like time availability.

But when it comes to thinking about real model-based science and translational applications of active inference,

I think that we're working towards new ways of combining skills and having shared knowledge resources that help make that make sense and using shared language and ontologies, narratives, formal documents, tools, ONFT, because we're doing it on Teams and we're online.

Let's just, in the last 20, 30 minutes,

go through the final pieces of the paper so that this dot one will have been like a first sweep, initial pheromone deposition, and then we can return and take some cul-de-sacs, et cetera.

So section nine explores a little bit how the duplication operation allows for multiple behaviors to arise.

And that's sort of by analogy to the genomic duplications and specializations and all those different routes that can occur.

Here, they connected duplication a little bit more directly to the factor graph models.

in the sense that duplicated motifs have dynamics that are conserved over different sensory motor domains.

So let's just say that we just had a visual model with the column of visual, and then we duplicated it.

So now we have two photoreceptors with parallel columns.

And now the photoreceptor in the second one changes into a chemoreceptor because instead of expressing rhodopsin protein, it's expressing an olfactory receptor protein.

can be a conservation of the dynamics of inference even when the observation has changed but it was a slot for observation and so we went from having like monocular vision to binocular vision to monocular vision and olfactory perception but you can't get there in one jump to just like duplicate and transpose

It's not likely to happen in an evolutionary context.

And we can see the structure of these graphical models as equivalent to being factorized probability distributions, which is to say that the sparse connectivity of variables

means that we can make parts of the model that can be like fine-tuned independently in a way that can be fit very tractably.

That's the factor graph, that's factorized Bayesian inference.

And we've talked about that in other places, but just to here, all we need to say is duplication enables like a control C, control V, copy, paste, and then let's edit the other version.

But that can now happen with evolutionary features and functions, Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
Real quick, your hand gestures in this section point to the orthogonal mesh beginning.

And then point two, I'd like to pull that apart a little bit, but let's carry on.

But that's what I took away from this.

The mesh began.

And in the beginning, there was a mesh.


SPEAKER_03:
Begins.

We'll return to that for dot two.


UNKNOWN:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Section 10.

talks about temporal depth, it's about time, and about the endowing of generative models with temporal depth and the way that that supports prospective inference, anticipation, or retrospective inference, which is like memory.

So here's what the operator looks like.

We have X sub tau, X at a time point, and then now there's X tau plus one, the next time point.

or T plus one could be now, and then T could be the last moment.

So memory and expectation- Like figure five now?


SPEAKER_01:
Because I still see figure four.


SPEAKER_03:
Slide 29.

Okay.

Yeah.

So the structure of anticipation and of memory are very similar.

It just depends whether one has the stream of observations happening on the left side and a prospection or the stream of observations are on the right side and in which case it's retrospection.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, it sort of ties in.

They talk about what the police do.

It's very hard for someone to lie backwards.

So you always get them to tell their story backwards because it's a...

It's very hard for them to do that because, as you say, if we're creating things retrospectively but sort of playing them forward, so to speak, it would kind of tie in with that.


SPEAKER_01:
I want to emancipate that.


SPEAKER_03:
I looked up police in the paper.

I see policies.

is that polices um it's a great opportunity for my favorite joke but i won't um this section talks about temporal depth okay from whence temporal depth various researchers have speculated that a major driving force for the development of deep temporal models was foraging

And there's a lot of interesting empirical and conceptual reasons to think about foraging in terms of temporal and spatial depth of model.

And that's true in the vertebrates where they're discussing mainly like hippocampus and entorhinal system and in the invertebrates.

don't have a hippocampus entorhinal system but it's one reason why comparative neuroscience is so important because it prevents us from getting fixed on specific anatomical realizations of given functional attributes of evolutionary systems like if the story of memory is just about some brain region in humans

it may be a useful model it's not even to say that it's inaccurate it's not even to say that it's a partial model it just is a model of that whereas if we want to understand a given cognitive function in a broader context we have to pull back somewhere a little bit beyond or in complement to the anatomy because we need the empirical anatomy to have anything specific to be talking about but

It isn't just the case that vertebrate anatomy is the way to do active inference.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
I think this is really helpful because it shows that the traps you were just mentioning there that people fall into is like

Humans have the frontal cortex.

It's all about this new, what's the new parts of the brain that are there?

But we don't say that with a Formula One car.

We say, well, it's just got a primitive engine thing in there and the rest of it's evolved.

It's like, well, that's itself different.

And the same with the Mark Soames conversation.

The evolution of what's often dismissed as the primitive parts of the brain,

They, they themselves can have been more sophisticated.

I know they're doing more things, but that they, they, they, they may be helped to be doing more than they were, as opposed to this, something else, um, that is doing all the heavy lifting, which I think is certainly common, a common misconception, I think in psychology anyway.


SPEAKER_01:
Can I read quickly from the paper?

Sure.

The evolution of temporally deep models from simpler models could have been realized during evolution via the progressive, keyword here, parcellization,

of an initially undifferentiated model, so a relative sense of an invariance, i.e.

a model that does not distinguish present from past and future, into a model that features separate latent states for the past, present, and future.

This is the part I loved.

A key drive for this factorization or parcellation may have been the observation and progressive internalization of the sensory motor sequences sequentially

that the animal creates and experiences while acting, while acting.

In other words, the self-modeling of one's own sequential behavior patterns.

See 53 for a computational example.

I didn't open up 53, but again, if we want to talk about the polymath piece of this and the fact that our hex cells

have to do some parcelization, it's right there in terms of sort of the next layer on top of this as we move up through that evolutionary cycle.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, 53 is Stoyanov et al., the hippocampal formation as a hierarchical generative model supporting generative replay and continual learning.

There's a ton that could be said about that from like a computational and a neuro anatomical perspective.

The internalization of the sensory motor sequences relates to the sensory motor detachment that we talked about in the representation paper.

So if some motor region in the brain

if it's like a marionette and the fingers and then the motor plant.

So that motor region has to be coupled to the activity of that motor region, like either in a one directional way or maybe even in a bi-directional way, let's just say.

So that system, like as it thinks, so it does and vice versa.

It cannot engage in counterfactuals because any,

direction that the neural system turns, the motor system is just simply doing that.

So it is not able to engage over evolutionary time in maladaptive action.

ones that do no longer persist it's just it's always what ties it back to reality and to like the finite amount of entities on the finite spaceship earth like darwin's famous calculation like if the number of elephants slowly reproducing like they'll cover the earth unless their population levels are kept in check and so um

once there's sensory motor detachment so there's some brain region either a motor region or some supplemental area or some ancillary area that's able to intervene in that process or somehow play a role that's detached from the motor activity now there can be like a motor planning occurring that opens up the affordance of temporal depth or of counterfactuals all these other cognitive functions arising

via the sensory motor detachment and so um foraging is an awesome place to look at that for a lot of reasons in different life forms and computational foraging and so like just a few of the notes were like what are the real cognitive demands of foraging for different creatures and

What about internal foraging, like mental foraging?

And these papers are very good.

Foraging in mind and foraging in semantic fields, both very useful because they have to do with the way that, and they have some nice maths too, but they have to do with how actions that are spatial can have conserved dynamics structurally

just like we explored here to mental actions.

And then we see them come together like with a memory palace or something like that.

So forging is cool, it's good to study.

11, endowing generative models with hierarchical depth affords multi-scale inference.

We kind of addressed that earlier with like the decades and years.

Nested temporal modeling is not the same as just deep temporal modeling.

then um and another way to look at that is like how many operations you would need to get to 100 years well if you're going to do only temporal depth it's going to take plus 100 or 99 time steps versus if it's one nesting and then 10 on the higher order than 10 on the lower order it was 21 operations and so then there's shorter


SPEAKER_00:
sequence of events to achieve a higher performance model assuming that they're appropriate um section 12 uh yeah go ahead just one thing just on that model and it's also interesting thinking about how we think of time because like indigenous approaches tends to be well as a cyclical time right so things in the future will be a repeat of the cycle

So the times of a thought in a cyclic motion of this sort of passing of the day, passing of the... And of course we have this assumption of time stretching out, you know?

So is it that we will, over time, is it thought of, well, what will things be like in four generations?

And, um, and if my world or my ecology follows certain cyclical patterns and it's fairly stable, maybe that's quite a good way to think about, um, you know, it's like say plant, plant the tree now to help the people in 150 years, you know?

So, um, it sort of comes back to there's different ways to construct how we think about time.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.


SPEAKER_03:
so 12 looks into a phylogenetic tree of the evolution of generative model so what is a phylogenetic tree and what's the relationship between active inference fep and evolution well we'll have more to share in the coming papers as always but how do they address it specifically here in figure five

they map on, we'll root the tree.

So technically as shown right here, it's an unrooted tree.

There is an implicit rooting here, but it's a very interesting feature of phylogenetics that few outside of the field know about that computationally, the tree is often inferred in unrooted fashion, like by clustering the ones that are close and finding the relationships, et cetera.

However,

that is leaving an ambiguity as to where the root of the tree is.

So like, for example, if this is the overall connectivity of the, based upon the phylogenetic inference, this is what the tree topology has been inferred to look like.

And somebody might say, well, it looks like this one, the red one, and then the green one below it, they're clearly very closely related.

But actually if the root comes in here,

then that's not necessarily the case so the rooting of a phylogenetic tree is very important and a tree that's rooted inappropriately or has an inappropriate outgroup selection is just it's worse than illegible because it's highly legible and it can have a high statistical confidence but it can have an absolutely non-biological topology but assuming that they meant the tree to be rooted here

Here, the branches are where there's going to be different operators occurring, including the eye identity, unchanging one.

And then the edges reflect like bifurcations, speciation events.

So here there's an ancestral homeostat.

And then the lineage leading to orange did not undergo any changes that were non-conservative.

on the branch leading to these sister species there was a duplication and then it stayed the same and stayed the same and then the purple node is going to have two duplicated homeostats and so they're just overlying evolutionary algebra the steps that they gave onto the topology of speciation and so that um as they discuss

opens up a way to think from this sort of graphical functional perspective, which is compatible with ACT-INF, to think about how, for example, from the species today, we could infer some of the schema of the early vertebrate brain or the early primate brain.

Or push it back further.

What about the common ancestors of the vertebrates and the invertebrates?

And all these other questions.

But that's kind of what they lay out here.

And so these are familiar models to evolutionary biologists, like phylogenetic ancestral state reconstructions of phenotype, which are often even done in a Bayesian way.

Like there's an algorithm beast, Bayesian estimation of ancestral states.

This is also a Bayesian model.

model that allows us to do reconstruction of ancestral states but it's in a very very different way than it's been approached outside of the active world but that's figure five and that's where we see the evolutionary algebra the design patterns or the um pattern language for structural changes in generative model superimposed on species relatedness in a phylogenetic tree

Any thoughts on five?


SPEAKER_01:
I tried to convert this and reapply it to my picking of teams in the March Madness table, and I wasn't able to take phylogenetic trees and convert them into winning thousands of dollars on betting on college basketball.

So despite my best efforts, it's kind of contained for what it represents.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, not to foreshadow too hard, but I think live stream number 39 and 40 might constitute March Madness.

And then also here's another, you know, for those who watch.

Okay, here, now we have a little bit of a March Madness bracket going, don't we?

Here's bracketology.


SPEAKER_01:
That is so fantastic.


SPEAKER_03:
So here we go.

Yeah, so now we have, now here, the root could have been here.

And then here's like two big species clades, like two, like this is like vertebrates and invertebrates, and then there's some rooted clade.

So that's like why it's important to root the tree because here it looks like all of these are sister to each other at the exclusion of this one.

But then if we were to have rooted that tree like here, then actually this is a small sister out group to all of these.

And so the rooting and the contextualizing

is really important.

It's just like, it's super interesting because it seems like you put in so much data into these phylogenetic models and it seems like literally how could this not converge on a super obvious answer?

I mean, isn't it clear how these answer related to each other phylogenetically?

But then there's a little bit of nuance that enters the picture.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I was curious that the allostatic can recombine with the homeostatic

to give a base level temporal.

So it doesn't deflate back to just staying allostatic.

I suppose they would be, they just don't show that.

If it did that, I suppose you just wouldn't talk about it.

You know, it's got A. When it goes A, then it goes A, I, goes to HT.

So, yeah, it's a TH.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so we have a homeostat here.

We have two homeostats.

Two homeostats.

And now here we have one homeostat and one allostat in this blue node.

And so that...

but they're just kind of giving general examples like it would have been cool to see this is where we're talking about mammals and here's non-mammal vertebrates like here is a specific brain region and also that is in this Chakraborty and Jarvis 2015 paper this paper gets more into the nuances of neuroanatomy and neurogenetics

and how duplication in brain regions can be underpinned by developmental neurogenetic changes.

And they do link that a little bit more closely to studying the bird brain and the song and motor system in parrots, which is also cool because birdsong has been studied with Act-Inf.

So there could be a nice...

building upon this work and connecting it to some of the structure fitting in figure five.


SPEAKER_00:
So it could almost be like you got parts of the brain which are more allostatic orientated or homeostatic orientated and

So in a way, by the structuring of that gives some sort of differentiation in terms of how information and control would be carried out.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, totally.

And extending temporal depth within a model, it's like a brain region getting a little bigger, let's just say.

Not that size is correlated with function in that specific way, but then duplicating brain regions is like duplicating...

laterally or nesting a brain region that's hierarchical.

Think about how the eyes developed, the insect eye.

It has a relatively simple module, but then insect eyes can change in size over evolutionary time very radically from like taking up, you know, half of the head to being just one photoreceptor or even being lost.

because they're existing in more of a duplicable motif.

Whereas the binocular eye system that mammals have, it's not as amenable to like just doubling into four eyes or splitting into two in the middles or something like that.

Whereas the insect compound eye has like some of those evolutionary affordances.

So then understanding like parameter change within a model

then structure learning on populations of models and what are the mutational adjacencies there's so many awesome areas and it's like truly just beginning for evolutionary bio and active steven yeah it was really helpful like having someone like yourself who's got that background to go through that's quite helpful because it's a


SPEAKER_00:
It's a little bit intimidating, actually, at first sight, seeing this for me.

And I see the logic, what you're saying.

It's quite exciting actually seeing that.

Again, one of the things this paper does is it's tying threads together, which seem very distant, almost in traditional terms like,

well, I don't like using the word kamikaze, but it's a little bit like, yeah, it's a bit overwhelming often.

So I think it's, but of course that's the beauty of Act-Inf is it has that unifying potential.

So thanks.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Yeah, thank you.

I agree, like there's some labelling

This is rarely included, unless it's a time-calibrated phylogenetic tree, but we're looking at the passage of time.

But that's not even always shown.

And so, yes, Dean, we'll have our final thoughts.


SPEAKER_01:
Can you just go back to that?

Because I didn't prompt you to put that up there, but I really like that because...

At some point, we're going to have to, in point two, talk about that sort of basal gating part of this.

And most things are organized as if-then causality, but you just said it.

It's then-if.

Go or don't go is very dependent on then before we choose to go or don't go, right?

Go or don't go is still held open until one of the others decided.

So

Another thank you for that.

Cause that again, that in the point two, we should maybe talk a little bit about that.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.

Yeah.

There's so many ways to think about like this garden of forking paths, branching paths.

how that relates to parameter updating, Bayesian belief updating and structure learning.

What about when the structure of a model is a parameter in a nested model?

So then that sort of blurs the line from the bottom looking up, it looks like structure learning, but then from the top looking down, it looks like parameter fitting.

And if only we had like some mathematics to describe that.

Okay, any final thoughts or what are we excited about for The Dot 2 next week?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, my last thought is, yeah, I'm excited to keep this going because I think it's got a lot of legs to it.

I think one thing that comes to mind as well with all this progressively increased tempo and hierarchical depth

is is maybe where some of the more basic uh elements still have a really useful part to play is is what mark mike levin said about when do we stop like so we've got all these ways where we can start to okay so we've got all these ways that we can think how do we know when to stop and to sit down i mean maybe in the ultimate ways when our tummy maybe that's where the gut is so useful like at the end of the day the brain can go running off and maybe the gut and the heart need to say okay

sit down get some food so which i might well i'm going to get a drink of honey now but uh i'll bid you farewell and thank you for a great dark time but i'll i'll hear your last thoughts as well dean


SPEAKER_01:
Uh, I hate having the last word, so don't worry.

You'll have it.

And I just appreciate what Steven just said.

Cause I, I think that that's a big part in this ability to go from word back into the phenomenological space.

And, and I think there are other, other brains that we know of now that play a significant role in that, not just the one that turns everything into symbols.


SPEAKER_03:
Great.

My last thought is there's no better drink after a foraging trip than honey.

All right.

Thank you.

And talk to you later.

Bye.


SPEAKER_00:
Bye.

## 0OQx04x8-zA

SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome everyone to ACT-INF Lab live stream number 38.2.

It's February 23rd, 2022.

Welcome to ACT-INF Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow good video etiquette for live streams.

Go to ActiveInference.org to learn more about how to participate in any of these live streams, which are part of the comms communications organizational unit, or just any other part of the lab.

All right, today in ACT-INF stream number 38.2, we're going to be having our third discussion.

There is the dot zero, the dot one, and now the dot two on this paper, the evolution of brain architectures for predictive coding and active inference.

And, uh,

Maybe each of us have a few ideas in mind, and I'm sure we'll come up with a few other things.

Plus, if anyone's watching live, they can write a comment in the chat.

So we'll start with just introduction, saying anything if we want about the paper before just jumping in somewhere or somewhere else.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and I will pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, I'm Dean.

I'm up here in Calgary, and I'm not doing very much except trying to keep up with all the papers that we're looking at in active inference, and I'll pass it down to Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm Blue.

I'm a research consultant in New Mexico, and I really enjoyed this paper for many reasons.

My background in neuroscience, not particularly

being a priority, but yeah, it is.

So I'm excited to get into it and to discuss some of the points that I picked up with you guys.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Well, blue joining us today, what figure can we start with or start with a blank sheet and just any of the points that you'd like to raise or we can do something else.


SPEAKER_00:
Uh, man,

like figure four for me was like awesome um so maybe that was my favorite figure maybe that's the one we should start with okay all right so what was your just perspective on what figure four was and then what did it mean or why was it interesting for you so i was interested in this figure and maybe like even in how this figure could be expanded in terms of

hierarchical depth and temporal depth.

And temporal depth like has more than one potential scale, which isn't really like mentioned here.

Like temporal depth can be thought of as like

small time steps, like what am I going to do next?

What's my next action?

But also like in bigger time steps, like what is the next iteration of me and how like these hierarchical depths, like, cause that's obviously like a larger level hierarchy, like the next iteration of me as a species or the human species, right?

Like what is the next iteration of the species versus what is the next action I'm going to perform as part of the species?

So that was kind of an interesting, like,

perspectival dance that they took and just really like the, yeah, multidimensionality of this and how to kind of think about it in like a

maybe like a, is this like a multidimensional space, right?

Like, is it like in terms of like my cells, what are my cells going to do next?

My tissues, my organs, me, my active inference lab, like what are all these things going to do next?

And also like on that level, is that like a short timeframe or is it like a large timeframe?

And do the timeframes differ or can like the same hierarchical level have more than one timeframe or not?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, nice questions.

Dean, what do you think about any of that as we start to look at figure four as a starting point for talking more about what Blue just mentioned?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think

One of the things we touched on in the point one was the idea that within a frame, there's also an orthogonal mesh.

So as we push through this representation from the bottom up, are we going from what might be described as an architectural existence to at the top, what we might describe as architectural learning?

Now, of course,

If we take that position, we have to be careful that we're not reinforcing the idea that it's all about constructivism all the time versus being creative.

I think you need to be a little bit of both.

And I'm not being creationist, like not one story that carries forward all the way through time, as Blue kind of reffed there.

But the idea that the updating

matters throughout the time scale that you choose to look at.

And so now the question is, is architecture the lens that we should be using to talk about how we advance from mere existence to a place that we would describe as learning?

I mean, that's what was chosen here, but is that the one way now, right?

It's a way.

It's a good way.

It certainly makes something super, super complex into something that's just complicated.

But is it the only way?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one question of clarification.

When you said this is the only way, what were you referring to?

This figure four or what?


SPEAKER_03:
Through architecture, the idea of an architecture.

the architectural lens, as opposed to other ways that we might build out this idea of going from homeostatic existence to going from unknowing to knowing, and whatever that means.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Thanks for sharing it.

Just to kind of maybe connect this, you mentioned architectural distance, which is within the metered space.

Whatever the metric is or the measure or the grids that you draw, there's a distance within a map.

And that's like the ecological transect, that's the blueprint, that's the forensic analysis, and then that's like parametric learning, because it's a distortion of parameters in a given space, and then fully defined.

not just like space for openness whereas the architectural learning is at the structural level architectural and then that was kind of like what you related to not just the homeostatic or even the allostatic perhaps but something that's like the sort of unknown unknown open-endedness biological open evolutionary trajectories


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so not just sustaining it, but actually realizing it.


SPEAKER_01:
So we'll just get a few notes on each of these transformations, then see what other ones or what are some situations that might model, then also return to the questions that were asked.

raised early by blue like with a multi-level self and like where are the where's mental action or thought in this model the examples were provided of like um for example the allostat that took the temperature homeostat and then added in in their example like the sunrise visual detector and modeler column and so that gave the anticipatory change in body temperature when the sun was viewed

then is there a um similar structure for cognition is it just like linking together senses in more and more combinatoric way it's a very sense oriented perspective which from an evolutionary perspective which is what this paper is exploring that's the one to ground further elaborations and changes on

rather than trying to reverse from something like engaging counterfactuals.

So just using an active inference model, sometimes for a counterfactual agent, if the model says that, that's okay, or doing the bacteria without implying that it's doing the counterfactual explicitly, that might be possible too.


SPEAKER_03:
So we have thermal regulation in the paper, but then the question is, does that equate to feelings in a human being, right?

Like, does all that feelings cover necessarily collapse down to the example of thermal regulation?

And at what point are we aware of the fact that there might be a difference between the example and the concept?

Like, where in this figure four is that blurry line that we cross?

It's a good question.

I don't know where it is.


SPEAKER_00:
So Dean, are you talking about feelings like emotions or feelings like sensations or both?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, all of that, right?

So feelings tends to take on a big sort of, it's more detached from the example of thermal regulation.

And yet that's just the fact that you can ask that question proves out that maybe the one example doesn't cover all of the different aspects of the higher concept, right?

Yeah.

And that's where the scaling part comes in.

So it's not just temporal depth that allows for that.

You have to have the temporal depth and the hierarchical depth.

What kind of feelings are you talking about?

Implies that there's more than one way that has to exist for you to come at that, to ask that question.

Where do we draw the partition?

Right?

So in here, they show duplication.

But it kind of, I'm not going to say it misleads, but it could potentially mislead if you think that there's a linearity to this.

But in fact,

A couple of times Daniel talked in the point one about the fact that there is a step function moment.

There is a jump.

It's not a jump.

I forget the example of one example where we can't say you just go from one eye to two just because.

I think that was one of the examples you gave, Daniel.

But at some over evolutionary time, there is these little progressions where if you look back on it,

it seems like a rather large jump took place, right?


SPEAKER_01:
Let me give a few.

So when you said like the big jumps, and so in one sense, that's related to the kind of discussion around complex patterns of evolution and some phenotypes or genotype regions that are very stable through long periods of time over many generations, like the ultra conserved elements in the genome.

that have very low mutation rates versus regions that have high mutation rates etc and then same as phenotypes like phenotypes that are very constant like the coelacanth fish or phenotypes that are very plastic or dynamic or ones that we just don't have the records of um

then how to connect what is happening or the models that we want to make in humans especially with computer enabled and language enabled humans technology enabled humans with the continuum of cognitive processes and then you said like it's not linear and then that kind of

made me think like there's like feelings which um was still it's still a rich qualitative area like you brought out like sensations but also experiences and emotions and then how

quickly slash securely or unambiguously can we map just that cloud of concepts just to be like, it's a policy selection on attention.

It's an uncertainty on valence.

It's valence.

Like we're doing the parametric cognitive model with this, but it's still even a little bit open what this represents.

Is this the evolutionary biologists

doing model testing on a phylogenetic tree?

Or is this talking about the genomic or the neurophysiological components that have to be connected just anatomically for a certain function to arise?

And that is the rich area that there's so much to explore in too.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think the one thing we can agree on is, because we're talking about evolution, we're talking about history.

So it is backwards looking, and backwards looking is easier than looking into the future, right?

So I think that's one thing we can agree on.

What this is trying to do is explain, perhaps, how the history came about.


SPEAKER_00:
So one thing that the authors mentioned as well, and that's kind of linked to the idea of feelings, this was a discussion about the evolution of brain architecture, but there's also the fact that brains are in bodies.

They don't just exist in jars.

And for me, at least, I feel like

feel like emotions not necessarily sensations but i feel like emotions are driven in a large part by the body like we've we've made a huge kind of connection between like the gut and the brain um and like there's probably more connections to be

because I feel feelings like emotions deeply in my body.

Like I feel them in my heart or I feel them in my stomach or I feel them in my pinky toe.

So I really think that the idea of like emotions can't be separated from embodiment.

But prediction, I think it's a mental activity or at least like I feel it in my brain.

So I don't know if that's the same kind of...

sensation that everyone has, but like prediction is in my mind, a brain thing, but I know that it's also that's overridable.

Like if someone throws a ball at me, like I put my hand up, like that's a reflex.

So, but that's, is that like my brain driving my body?

I'm not sure really, but I know that there's, um, you know, some, some prediction that's maybe not mental, that's more like physical or that's more embodied is probably the right word.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

And you kind of move into that intuitive space as well, right?

Like if you think about going to the beach, I can't tell whether you're going to think about the wetness aspect of that, the warmness part of that, the smell of the sunscreen part of that.

But that prediction is going to also generate embodied emotions, even though you may not articulate them, right?

You're still intuiting them.

you're still anticipating them.

And so I'm not sure how the architecture pulls that out, especially to Daniel's point where our form has adapted evolutionarily to the phenotypical situation that we find ourselves in.

And going forward, let's say that sea levels rise and suddenly you have beachfront property where

For millions of years, you did not.

How does that affect now your emotions?

Right?

So I like the architectural idea of being able to take something and look at the historicity of it and be able to try to explain it out with a little bit more confidence.

I'm not sure, though.

I'm still struggling with being able to figure out how, if we want to look ahead, we can necessarily set it up the layered way it was set up here.

And I really like figure four.

But I just have to categorize it and keep it where it's most useful, which is in the backwards-facing part of this.

That's all.


SPEAKER_01:
OK.

Let's return to how to use this.

That sounds like a good question, but we'll get there.

Lou brought up the brain and complement with the body, and this was just the quote from the very final lines of the paper, or near the end, where they acknowledge that

partial perspective that they present in the paper partial meaning just a portion of but also partial like partial to a certain view because they're with a neuroscience regime of attention and that's the contribution that was made that helps apply to other systems and then there's another synthesis to be made and this is kind of like the opening where they just

uh acknowledge that cognition can be extended and embodied and it suggests that not all aspects of control need to be solved by or represented a central generative model so it's this point that we've come to from many different angles from like the ecological and the cognitive and then here from more of a structure learning perspective that like the representation

whether just in the model of a system or in the system's own self-representation, it doesn't have to be the exact same thing as some latent variable in the outside world.

So it's possible to have an effective model of climate action without a perfectly accurate model.

But that has to be understood within, like was brought up, a space of counterfactuals of what could happen from the outside world where we really never can eradicate the total distribution and also the introduction of like unknown unknowns.

And so that's the fundamental openness of the external states and the modeler's view.

And then there's...

still a lot to explore with the counterfactuals of the models that the system that like the agent is can implement but i think that gets a little bit to how to start to use it in a certain area but um yeah any thoughts or what


SPEAKER_03:
I've got a question for you, Dan.

So when you studied ants, for example, and their foraging, and I think it's section eight or I forget what section that they say foraging really, really matters.

I think if we're point two-ing this now, I think that the sort of the go forward piece of this is now when you started looking at ants, did you start from a position, I don't know what your background is, but did you start from a position of sort of pulling apart the historicity

of why that thing is now sort of laid out the way it is.

I know there's a piece of that that's there, but is that the place where most people that begin a study start?

Which is kind of interesting about this paper, because to me,

going from existence to learning implies a certain history.

And so I'm wondering how you sort of come at things when you see them foraging, where history fits in terms of that, you gaining some understanding of what's happening here, as opposed to then what happens.


SPEAKER_01:
Great question.

The topic is historiosity and foraging for 400 from Dean.

Lou, what would you say on the topic first?

How would you bring that together?

What would be some important points?


SPEAKER_00:
So I really liked this idea also, and I have like a completely unrelated point and then an unrelated question.

So it says mechanisms of memory and planning have evolved from mechanisms of navigation in the physical world.

And some super interesting that I thought side point was, if you've ever read the book, Deep Work by Cal Newport,

he talks about memorizing a deck of cards.

And if you haven't read the book, read the book.

But it's interesting because he goes through a very elaborate way to memorize the deck of cards, and it's through building a memory palace.

And so in this memory palace,

you have a place that you know very well, like your own house.

You can imagine walking through your door.

You imagine the porch, the doorstep, how it looks.

You imagine the doorway, all the rooms, all the closets.

Imagine going through your house, taking a tour, and exploring each room in a very systematic way.

So it's very easy to memorize a route you would take through your house.

Say you're looking for a ghost in your closet or something hiding in your house.

How would you look?

So you go through your house and you, so you have this palace, right?

That you have in your mind.

And then he talks about making every card a character, right?

Like, like, so, you know, the queen of hearts is, you know, queen Elizabeth or, or something like who is each character in the card deck.

So each character,

character in the card deck becomes a character that you memorize.

So you've memorized these 52 cards as people that you know.

And then, and so this is an interesting play also on the socio dynamics as well as the spatial

dynamics.

So each character in the deck is the person that you know well.

You memorize that 52 people correspond to these 52 cards and you know the layout of your house.

So then when you can go through the order of the deck, anybody can do it.

You can repeat back the order right away.

So like you go through the cards and you say, okay, you know, you can go through it three or four times and then you know the entire order of the deck of cards.

So this is how to repeat back the order of a deck of cards in like just you memorize the order.

Like, oh, there's the queen of hearts.

She's in my closet and

you know, like all these, or who's standing in the doorway is like the first part.

Right.

And so, you know, the tour through the house and you place these people in this spatial orientation in your house.

And so, and this is like a proven solid way, like the people that do these kinds of memory trips use by constructing this memory house.

And I thought that that was super interesting in relation to this paper, that memory and planning have evolved from mechanisms of navigation.

in the physical world.

And I also wonder if there is like a social role that also contributes to memory and could that social role be this kind of higher level allostat, right?

Like we talked about the homeostat and that's like, there's no other, like you've got one time step, right?

And then in the allostat, there's other ways to kind of modify, but how many, like in a social component,

you know, to succeed and function and to actively have memory and prediction.

Like, does a tissue have memory because there's other cells in the tissue?

Does an ant have memory because it can spatially navigate for food?

And also, it knows its friends.

You know, like, I'm sure, like, ants have ways to distinguish one ant from another ant.

Like, they're very social creatures.

Like, I don't think that they all think they're all the same.

Like, my cats don't, definitely don't.

Like my cats know each other, but like if you showed them like a stray cat, like they'd be really upset at the stray cat, I'm sure.

So, you know, animals know each other.

I'm sure ants know each other also.

And so what component of memory is also social?

And that just, yeah, Cal Newport spoke reminded me of that or brought that to light.

Sorry, sorry if I remember.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

it brings up a lot of the aspects that i could add to now just from a specifically anti perspective so you mentioned the evolutionary aspect it's one of the themes of the paper that perhaps from forging but other processes too as key cognitive demands those early challenges or like

ancestral challenges giving rise to current life were faced in and met in this way so that was the evolutionary aspect you mentioned and then um thinking about the history at multiple nested scales so like there's the history of the ant colony as

a genuine modelable entity where the colony year after year kind of develops in its foraging territory as its colony personality or basically phenotype at the colony level um evolve and then asterisk one

Then at the nestmate level, it's the recent interactions of a nestmate that induce it to forage, locally meaning retrieving a seed.

So like there might be an ant whose current neural or hormonal state is such that a lot of interactions with incoming foragers

don't stimulate more foraging.

But then there might be another ant whose status is such that a certain reduced rate of interactions with other foragers, maybe even no interactions with other foragers in the entry chamber, cause it to go on a foraging trip.

That foraging biology is specific to this ant shown here, the harvester ant, but maybe other ants too.

Okay, that's asterisk two.

Then there's the ant tissue.

And like each of the ant tissues, the brain, the different glands, the gut, they're all undergoing kind of stereotyped transitions that are called temporal polyethism, or they're going through like recent changes, like a leg was lost and then the rest of the body like adapts.

So that's like the history of each nestmate tissue.

The asterisks kind of combine for me personally, but also just more conceptually with thinking about the relational view on modeling the ants, like not taking too strong a view on where phenomena should be located in terms of nestmate versus collective cognitive behavior.

And then also the place-based and the field and the long-term experiments.

So my advisor, Professor Deborah Gordon has done like a 30 year plus field study in Arizona.

And so I was doing five years of field work there

But it was like year, I don't know, 20 something or 30 something to some other number five years later in this space where there was a lot known about this ant with a long lived colony, but with turnover of the foragers.

And so the sort of.

ecological and the place-based nature, and then also the specific biology of this ant, where the forager was just so clearly an expendable part of the process of the colony, like sloughed off, and some other features of the foraging biology of these ants.

pretty interesting system and it reveals a lot on like different cognitive demands and different foraging environments so that's not even getting into the whole mental foraging or affective component but just at the ant foraging level i think you brought up an important point though daniel and i'm not sure if people associate architecture with abduction but


SPEAKER_03:
your advisor, supervisor, whatever her title was, her 30-year window, and then where you stepped in for your five-year window as nested, right?

You were the one now nested within a larger timeframe.

So back to Blue's earlier point, but you weren't historically looking back

from the perspective, oh, okay, here's the evolutionary nature, you are now seeing yourself as relative to something that had a greater timestamp, right?

So you walked into the party, and you had to ask yourself, did these ants come from this colony?

So back to Peirce's

big question of, right?

So it's when I come into the situation that matters as much as if I can induce a skyscraper or deduce how much structural rigidity that requires, right?

So I think this is kind of interesting now because

I'm not sure if we should assume, like when you were talking about the phylogenetic trees, sometimes we just assume where we're stepping in on the branching, but I'm not sure we should make that assumption.

I think we have to be careful to be, as you said, very explicit, not just assumptive of where we come in in this history.

Because if we don't, we can end up thinking that this is sort of a linear layering


SPEAKER_01:
that figure four when when maybe it's more like identity it's it's both stable and dynamic so it's definitely related to almost the very first comments of blue of like where's multi-scale identity and multi-scale systems in this hierarchical depth

It may be related in some way to multi-scale systems.

We could draw that out.

But where is that nesting that we're describing, the real physical enclosure sense, and this way that mental systems can almost be modeled as nested?

Just like we saw mental action as a nesting of a cognitive model with an action model inside of it.

It's like the mental is enclosing and even modeling through inclusion of the peripersonal space.

But then with like a drop off going further out, then what is that modeling space and

Is there another operation here?

Again, what are these graphs?

What are we seeing here?

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, my question is, to answer Blue's question, do we get closer to a satisfactory answer by looking at the mechanics of this, or do we get a better sense of it by seeing the relationship?

Like when you were explaining the ant part, you spent a lot of time talking about relationship.

And I think maybe...

one of the things we try to do is we try to apply the operation to it when in fact what we should be doing is seeing the relationship in its entirety.

I don't want to say zoom out because you can still zoom out and still get bogged down in the sequencing because that's kind of what this does.

It says this layer of sequencing can now build out, fractal out into these other layers of sequencing.

And I'm suggesting rather than seeing the layers,

Maybe it's the totality of the relationships.

I don't know.

Because Blue also pointed to the social piece, which is all relationship all the time, right?

So I'm just wondering if we help ourselves, if we collapse to, oh, well, this is now explainable because we have some way of showing the sequence, right?

Sometimes that helps, but maybe in this case, from an evolutionary standpoint, it doesn't matter whether we're talking about 100,000 years ago and today as much as the relationship of what 100,000 years ago and today represents.

I don't know.

Just throwing it out there.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks for sharing it.

Just one thought on that, and then we'll continue here.

phylogenetic trees with genomic data are usually based upon sequence alignment followed by the fitting of a tree on the aligned sections of the sequences.

And so there's a lot of ways and approaches of modeling from the sequence alignment itself, from unaligned to aligned sequences, a lot of ways you could do it.

And then from the aligned sequence matrix to the tree model, there's a lot of ways to do that.

It could be a bifurcating tree.

It could be like a different kind of tree, different algorithms, Bayesian, et cetera.

One interesting point that...

many have raised, but it's very challenging to deal with is that depending on how stringently you align the sequences,

different sites with different histories or different information content, partially or in totality, are being filtered out in a different way.

So if you have a mode of evolution where short chunks get interchanged so that locally the sequences are not changed, like domains of a protein aren't changed, but then they're swapped in order,

those might become non-alignable sequences.

And so the hope is that those kinds of genomic changes are silent with respect to the long-term evolutionary history of a species.

But in the short term, other methods might be needed.

But in the long term, it's the hope that by pulling back to like the alignable sections, you can get a good signal.

And so that's a pretty satisfactory approach when multiple converging threads do exist.

overwhelmingly agree but it really shows that when there's like a signal processing filtering and then a model fitting this the information in the data can be extremely powerfully misleading

because you're getting exactly the same post-normalized data, whether it was total noise in, total bias out, or whether your correction process over-normalized for one thing or another, those are kind of in that gray zone, unknown, unknown space, coming into the searchlight.

And so there's the whole looking out of the searchlight story.

So maybe...

Where do we situate active inference with respect to that?

Looking where the light is, searching for one's keys, et cetera, et cetera.


SPEAKER_03:
So can I just say real quick, I'm not advocating for don't show your work.

I believe that showing your work really matters.

And then when you're trying to explain what's happening at a certain point, don't get stuck in, well, this was the order of the steps that I took when I showed my work.

Try and zoom out and try and understand what the relationship was well.

That's all I'm, what I'm asking is that, does that help being able to toggle back and forth?


SPEAKER_00:
So can I just jump in here for a second and point out that we have phylogenetic trees or we had, yeah, I guess,

They weren't called phylogenetic trees at the time, but we've had speciation trees long before we had genetics, right?

And so we can construct them based on morphometric analysis.

And something that I liked in this paper is that it really drew out the importance of the niche environment with respect to duplication, because we saw many instances of

species because we did these trees when we didn't have genetic information.

And so we had all of these morphometric characteristics that we thought were similar.

And so we lumped these species together because they must be related because they share this morphometric feature.

But in many circumstances, that was not the case.

And so because of the similarity of the niche environment or even existing in the same niche,

You know, we had evolution converge on this feature that was successful in that environment.

And so I think here, like the idea of duplication and the authors got into that, which I thought was really cool.

So, so the same mechanism can evolve more than one time in parallel, just because of the fitting to the niche.


SPEAKER_01:
Totally agree, Blue.

So when I said multiple conversion lines of evidence, like what I was totally thinking of was how genomics, the patterns that we get from those aligned sequences, do recapitulate and even discover unexpected but later verified relationships.

And so that's sort of like a measure of the unique explanations and predictions.

But this tree

could have been fit with phenotypic characters, as you mentioned, as it was for a long time.

And then it was just a few sites in proteins.

And that was sort of like the 1960s and 70s was fitting with very reduced data sets.

And now the amount of genomic data is rapidly increasing.

But out of the genomics analysis, the action state of phylogenetics is really just this tree.

Topology fit from a family of trees

hopefully with an uncertainty associated whether they show it like with a bootstrap uncertainty or some other way but then that is an artifact now there's a few cases where like this is in and itself interesting like when people have resolved some deep relationships within insects or other groups and then it helps structure thinking that can later be brought out about different traits and ecologies but it's like

this is just a starting point for thinking about evolutionary histories.

And like you said, similar ecological or generative processes dynamics might beget increased likelihood for a certain generative model to arise.

And that's like kind of what ecosystem is, like a desert seed harvesting ant, whether it's in the Mediterranean or the Southwest U.S.,

like Pogonomyrmex in the US and then Cataglyphus in the Mediterranean regions, there's some similarities there.

But then there's other species that are more closely related that have a different foraging ecology.

So then how does the foraging strategy sometimes have extreme fidelity with the group?

Like leafcutter ants, where once they're committed to being a full leafcutter ant,

so to speak, evolutionarily, they don't, or they haven't been observed to revert back to some other mode versus other like foraging strategies at the group level, at the colony level, but it's the individual in the other sense.

That's like very interesting.

Like thinking about foraging phenotypes on this tree and why not?

just like any other trait that you could study, like the evolution of first spatial foraging, and then the evolution of cognitive foraging, and then applying that to different search spaces, which was also explored a little in the citations here, the foraging in mind and foraging in semantic fields papers.

What would you say, Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, so it's cool that you brought that up, Daniel.

And just because in our past conversations, you've brought up that the same species of ant can have different foraging patterns based upon the colony that they live in.

I think that that's super interesting.

And I wonder how could you map

foraging patterns like can you put foraging patterns into a phylogenetic tree right like is there a tree structure that we could use to describe foraging patterns and would that relate to or map on to this brain structure tree in some way like is there I mean even I mean there's a lot of diversity within the same brain structure also like the ants have the same brain structure but you know even humans have like some of us go to the grocery store some some humans out there are still like

hunting and gathering, you know, to make their food, so.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Oh yeah, Dean, go for it first.


SPEAKER_03:
So you guys can learn me, school me on something here.

So is there any evidence that ants all gather in the morning and the queen ant or whatever, the organizing ant, the principal ant pulls the map out and says, now I want you to take this thing that you've mapped and carry it out today.

And I'm not being a smart aleck.

I'm asking, is there some sort of analogous evidence that they do that?


SPEAKER_01:
okay so to the um uh team huddle uh monday morning stand up no i hope that's not over generalizing because ants are also of course very diverse in their foraging strategies and a lot is unknown but just speaking to the first approximation the queen is not a central decision maker in information router hormonally and at a slower time scale for sure but at the behavioral regulation level

Now, in the morning for the Pogonomyrmex, they would like chill and some would slowly come out and like their walking speed is temperature dependent, like all insects and it just assessing maybe the humidity or...

damage around the nest entrance so there's no reason why those archetypes like convergence before planning or rupture repair which of course cannot have a planning component directly different algorithms are going to have different levels there but because the ant

symbolic behavioral communication is pretty low bandwidth, probably.

So unlike the waggle dance, which is conveying like quite a lot from an information theory perspective, using symbolic means like the direction and the distance and also chemical information like about the flowers, there's ants that like physically pull another of their nest mate to a foraging location.

So using memory or pheromone or like tandem run.

And there's probably some limited examples of being able to do some like a little bit higher order signaling.

And also, of course, the smell of the food and the pheromone.

And so a lot of the extended features.

But they don't do a powwow with the queen.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, so let me take what you just said and sort of feed it back and maybe build on it a bit.

So you described a situation, it's morning.

If morning, then ant behaves differently.

like so and in the last slide of this deck and the phylogenetic tree you had then to now or then if so what i'm wondering is

Can we exist in a sequential world of if-then?

As a homeostatic representation, is if-then all we need?

But if we want to include temporal depth and hierarchical depth, we actually incorporate the inversion of that.

We incorporate the then-if, right?

So that's my question.

So to Blue's point earlier, where is

Where is this shift or this sense of what's going on?

The relationship might be the discrepancy, the first representation, figure one, the discrepancy might be those people that are looking at things from an if-then perspective.

If this, then we should expect that from a predictive standpoint versus the then if perspective.

Then the critical call had to be made as the base runner was foraging for second base.

And a call was made now if.

Now a whole bunch of people chime in about what their interpretation of what just happened is.

Right?

So again, I'm not sure if only looking at it frontwards and backwards as a sequence is enough.

I think we also have to be able to see the relationship of if-then and then-if from the historical view.

And I think when we do that, we go from architectural existence to architectural learning.


SPEAKER_01:
okay let me try to restate that but i've not lost the forging trail so yeah if the um outcome is like um the end point then that's the uh if then uh that's the if that if the person committed the crime you do the time and then um

the sort of then-if takes, it precludes if-then in multiple sequences of if-then and uncertainties on if-thens.

And then it says, okay, then, or it's like if-then-if.

So we're kind of downplaying if.

And then that's where the outcome is a starting point.

And so that is, in one sense, it's teleological because it's end-directed.

Like, where is this project going to go?

Do we really expect and prefer to publish this paper on February 28th?

And then also it includes the next steps.

So it creates a world model where there is a possible, which is say selectable set of policies that the team will achieve like that expected and preferred outcome.

And then it sets it up for what would be the obvious next loop of policy selection.

And so if it's like, if things are this good or bad with the environment in 2030, then this is how much damage will go to this or this way.

even if you were right, it wouldn't involve the policy selection element.

And so that's probably a complex situation with the partitioning of estimation and world policy selection, which is clearly a separate discussion that's not only being invoked here as an example, but it just points to how those are different components of inference.

And then foraging, an example of if-then and then the as-if or then-if was like,

Sometimes the colonies would pack their nest entrance with pebbles and then there'd be a thunderstorm in the afternoon.

I don't think a study has ever... I mean, it's a totally widely observed behavior with many animals and there's no exception with harvester ants.

Now, maybe there's thunderstorms where they fail to make pebbles or it's not enough.

And there's probably some false positives too.

So we don't really know the exact success ratio.

Maybe it's better than the previous day's forecast.

Maybe it's worse, but...

it's very clear to see that the nestmate doesn't need to have been inheriting from its evolutionary history and its niche

rain cloud modeling software it's just picking up pebbles with a proclivity to interactions and humidity etc that help colonies that have that proclivity succeed in that niche which doesn't even mean that it was a popular phenotype like 20 years ago as things change in a region so that's like super interesting um

Let's return to foraging and the foraging variation question.

But first let's see if we've completed the figure four discussion.

And just like, is there anything else we want to add about like the main, because this is kind of what the paper works towards.

And then there's like a little downhill roll is like, we could do this algebra on the tree, but this is sort of where things get led up to.

through demonstration of the motifs and the connection between cognition and structures and structure learning and then like parameter learning at a behavioral or developmental time scale and then structure changes over evolutionary time scales so we have hierarchical depth temporal depth which we're also just kind of adding in a spatial component allostat which was used in the paper with the intermodality but

Maybe it could be other modalities or same.

There's duplication, which is kind of like parallelization.

That's like adding another nestmate or another unit to the compound I of an insect developmentally.

And then I is homeostasis, which is being used here as sort of the base or root or ancestral case, which is referring at the behavioral timescale to return to a stable point.

And then also at the more evolutionary timescale, the I operator on the homeostat, it's like the homeostasis on homeostasis.

It's keeping the structure of that model fixed.

And then when the homeostasis at the evolutionary timescale is open, then the structural transformations here are like the affordances from that base case, which is what's being shown like with the main one on the left being broken into these.

And then each of these become the prior for each of these next ones.

Anything to add or we go to foraging?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
so great relevant question blue measuring foraging so one paper though there's a bunch that are really relevant but um michelle lenon 2014 did a lot of literature review and visualizations of foraging strategies in different ant species so um these are like some of the foraging approaches like foraging archetypes um and then

uh categorized those into different traits on a tree and um so that's an awesome work and something that could and should be extended and integrated with like modern databases so that somebody could submit we just saw this one going in a trail and then that kind of reduces our uncertainty about a broader model of

ant foraging because it's like oh that's a surprising observation about this given what we already knew about that species for example but how do you actually measure foraging variation within or across a species so in this case these um in figure one these are like kind of like the structure

at one level.

They're like archetypes of structure.

Now, sometimes they probably blur within each other.

Like if it's two and it's tandem running, but if it's three, is it a group or is it still like pseudo tandem running?

So it could be a little blurriness and also there could be different modes.

even within the same species or like a continuum between a foraging column with like a trunk and a spread versus like just a spread.

So this is sort of like, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
I've got to like just jump in and say like how these look like neurons, like just with like differing axons and like dendritic arbors.

Like I'm like, these are like different brain structures.

So I just had to like point that out.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

The bottom one definitely does.


SPEAKER_00:
Even both of these and even this top one too, the trunk trails.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And let's just say that these are sort of archetypes within a broader space.

And then within a given mode...

then the behavioral ecologist will tend to make like a more specific measure so let's just say it's a 100 a trail forager then having the counts to and from on the trail is a good measure so like in the harvester ants they most basically do this trunk trail on the top

So there would be like one or two or three main avenues that they were leaving the colony in for that day.

And then sometimes it'd be the same day to day.

Other times it would be slightly different.

But then what happens when one wanders off, not on a trail?

Is it still a forager?

And a lot of that space is really interesting.

But suffice to say that once a foraging definition has been selected, like not just the class that it's going to be, but also how it's going to be measured in that study, then there can be like quantitative parameter comparisons like this colony foraged at this rate.

in terms of number of outgoing foragers per minute.

And then its neighboring colony of the same species was doing at this rate.

So you can do like parameter comparisons within the species kind of at the population level.

And then there might be another ant species whose activity it doesn't really make to compare.

because it's like a different number of nest mates, it has a different foraging ecology.

So that's kind of where like the structure learning would come into play with comparing the ants that are tending the scale insects versus foraging for seeds versus doing whatever else they do.

And then within a species, or perhaps across a few species that have a similar foraging ecology, it's possible to do parametric comparisons.


SPEAKER_03:
So I have a question for you, Daniel.

How does forging fit architecture?


SPEAKER_01:
What do you think?


SPEAKER_03:
No, I mean, I'm not trying to be a smart aleck here.

I'm really curious because most architectural analogies result in some sort of an outcome that's static.

Like there's a lot of processing that went into the outcome.

but the outcome is static.

And I don't think that any of the representations in the frame that you're moving right now, although the differences appear as static, they're supposed to be representing something that's quite dynamic.

So that's where the question of the architecture piece, blended with evolution, might be helpful or it might be oxymoronic, depending upon

how you interpret it, right?


SPEAKER_00:
So having architecture implies there's an architect.

I don't know.

In an evolutionary sense, I'm not sure architecture is the right word.

It's weird.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

And I'm not saying it's wrong.

I'm just saying you have to be really, really careful.

And then what assumptions you come in with based on what you think architecture is.

Yeah, maybe you're thinking it the way I am.

I'm not saying it's wrong.

I'm just saying, what baggage does that carry when we're talking about something that's actually quite dynamic?

Those ants, I mean, you can see the ants and the anthill as an architecture, yes?

You can take a snapshot of it.

But is that what we're really talking about when we're talking about foraging?


SPEAKER_00:
So what's the difference between a structure and an architecture?

I wonder that.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Is it just words?

It's just semantics?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think it's more than that.

But we just have to be careful that we don't insert one for the other, thinking that they're the same thing.

That's what the whole ontology exercise is about.

I mean, I got my mind changed, OK?

Normally, I'm the one that argues, don't give somebody an owner's manual.

Get them behind the wheel.

right?

They'll see their owner's manual later.

But in this particular case, I'm kind of going, wait a second, we better all agree what we're talking about.


SPEAKER_00:
So here it is.

What's the difference between structure and architecture?

Structure tends to be the pieces and the parts of the design and how it goes together and the finished object.

Architecture defines how the final object looks, behaves, and costs by designating how design choices


SPEAKER_01:
are made so architecture implies that there's some kind of agency behind the design and that's kind of that was kind of my interpretation of it also okay okay bunch of stuff there that last point would like the definition of architecture involves the choices rather than structure involving just the uh description of parts so that's kind of like the perception variational free energy that's like structure


SPEAKER_00:
It also means the entire thing.

So it's not just the parts.

It also means the entire object.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

But it still doesn't involve preferences or choices.

It's about description like perceptual processing is.

And then the architectural definition has like choices in it.

And then that is what you brought to agency.

And also architecture, it's like a profession and an operational approach to modeling the process of building a building, though there's probably theoretical and basic architecture and all this other stuff.

Okay, just a few thoughts here on the...

engineering and designing.

So I guess one ontology that can be helpful here is with Bucky Fuller talking about structural integrity, which is something that has static holding strength, like a metal cube.

has static holding strength um then there's process or the pattern integrity which is sort of like describing the life cycle of the butterfly and the caterpillar like a recapitulation of process and that is a lot more like this sort of dynamic systems approach to

rather than the build it and block it approach because these multi-scale systems always have things that are turning over at different timescales.

And then there's just so many mechanisms that that can be modeled by or actually occurs by.

Like just in the harvester ants, it's the historiosity of that colony over the years, then the nestmate and that day and its visual memory and just...

how many factors come into play, then every foraging trip at the estimate level could be seen as unique and the exact combinations will just never be recapitulated.

Some of the major ones can be explored and then controlled for or tested for in a lab, but that's part of the open-endedness of dynamical systems because by changing the setting, you can study certain features,

But then it's another step that's impossible in practice to understand how those features that were in a different environment translate to the first environment.

So you can take the essential behavior of the traffic jam and then recapitulate it with the simulation and the lab experiment and all this, but it's a different thing to actually put it into the design time, which is happening at a different timescale than just building the skyscraper and leaving it there.

But that's more like the dynamic organism.

So where's foraging on this?


SPEAKER_03:
And I would ask, is there a different kind of foraging if we're talking about sort of the machine learning type of foraging on this versus the wet foraging of an ant?

Like can we actually see those two things being quite different in terms of how those two foraging types plays out?

Or do we focus on the things that are different about those two things?

Or do we focus on the things that are the same about those two types of foraging?


SPEAKER_01:
Blue, also with your foraging from a more cultural and human perspective, what would you say about machine learning and foraging?


SPEAKER_00:
So machine learning and foraging, I mean, so yeah, so I've done some modeling of foraging with like agent-based modeling, but in machine learning, I wonder like,

I mean, I know that there's information forging, but that's usually explored from the human context, right?

Like humans going out and looking for information and how long we stay on a website and whatever.

So, but, um, I wonder about machine learning and like, you know, neural networks doing object classification.

Like, is there a forging that they do there?

Like, you know, they pick up things like, um,

Uh, Chris Ola wrote a really awesome publication about, um, you know, how we understand how neural networks work and they kind of deconstructed deep dream.

Uh, that's on, on distill pub, which is really cool.

It was like a 2018 paper, but you know, they look at how, how does a neural network recognize a dog?

you know, and a dog and a tennis ball.

So they look for like round object and like, you know, floppy ear.

Like, so there's like different neurons in the neural network that'll like learn what is a floppy ear or learn what is like a round object.

And so like, it's this combination of different things that the neural network learns that's pieced together to form like this is a dog with a tennis ball, which is a super interesting way to think about it.

And I wonder like in training neural network,

can that be looked at as a type of information forging, right?

Like the network is setting out to learn distinct pieces of a pattern that it'll later like piece together to make its complete image recognition.

So, interesting.


SPEAKER_01:
I'll give a thought on the machine learning and the bio forging.

so you mentioned like what's well there's the question of should we approach it from a similarities or a different perspective and there's different reasons why you might approach different angles right like what is the most pedagogical to someone learning about the difference versus what is the best way to approach this to a certain stakeholder who is actually applying this question in a certain context but to get to the question outside of that um

The idea of contrast came to mind because we recently had the model stream on contrastive active inference, which used machine learning.

So check out that stream, but it involved a contrasting step of processing inputs before doing policy selection, et cetera.

So that helped.

scenes that are broadly similar, but have a key difference that's small, like where the ping pong ball is, can be learned better because there's a contrasting.

And that reminds me of language learning when it's like, here's and here's.

And then that's a contrast that isn't going to come up in the language, but then it helps learn on that.

And that's not just a machine learning thing, because even in the parametric modeling of SPM, statistical parametric modeling,

mapping, but the model making of it.

the contrast matrix is the experimental design.

And so if it's just condition A and condition B and you have 10 measurements, it's just five of A, you know, five zeros and five ones.

And that's like the true or false matrix that basically gets multiplied to do statistics on.

So whether it's a very classical parametric sparse modeling approach, which was initially all that was had by statisticians or whether it is now things that are

highly parametric, or just all this other stuff with modern machine learning, the contrast is like this key piece, because it's always about what signal is being detected within a dataset, and then also how the difference between that sample and the population is being modeled.

And so like in parametric statistics, that's about the sample standard deviation.

And then there's a slightly different equation for like the population standard deviation if you would have kept on sampling.

And then it's also sometimes hard to incorporate that kind of a reasoning into these more modern statistical systems where it's like very easy to overfit because there's a lot of data, but it's hard to model how that large chunk of data is related to even other segments of data.

So it's similar to the phylogenetic challenge, but that is one that is like searching for contrast takes on a very different meaning.

But how is it related to foraging?

There's the info foraging like Blue mentioned.

There's the path element of foraging, which might be related to like inferring the best info foraging path for somebody on their feed, because it has to balance the epistemic and the pragmatic, or at least it acts as if it balances the epistemic and the pragmatic.

So foraging could be maybe looked at in that way.

Yeah, Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
I think what this slide represents is,

broadly speaking, not just or broadly identity.

I think what we do is in that diagram, we tend to differentiate.

We see the levels because we've created the partitions.

We see the dependencies because over on the far left, we have actual blue arrows that show what those dependencies are.

And then we reintegrate.

I remember when I was doing, I always come back to the programming that I was doing, but I used to say to the kids, I mean, there's a migration piece to this that we have to develop, which I would consider to be the tactics, which would include foraging.

And then there's a tools use or a strategy piece, which is sort of the information covered as change, as measured, which is kind of the instrument piece.

And what I kept saying to them was,

you kind of need to have both all the time.

You don't need to know the difference between something that's a migration or an inaction or a fulfillment in sort of the physical space and the tools, sort of the thinking instrumental parts where you can turn what you're seeing into these models and these representations.

And you have to kind of be able to marry the two of them all the time.

You have to be able to integrate them

across these boundaries when you're trying to get into these professional settings.

Now, that isn't a construction exercise.

That's being creative because you really don't know at the end of the day how it's going to turn out.

But the big point that we were trying to make was don't leave one of those two things behind.

Don't get stuck because you can't go out and forage.

Don't get stuck because you don't think you can draw the perfect representation

of the world.

It's just an instrument, right?

It's, I mean, even a spoon can eventually drain an ocean if you're prepared to spend enough time on it.

So I think that's what this representation, I think that's one of the greatest gifts of this representation is it kind of lays out very clearly that there's two parts to this, how we differentiate on different, eventually on different duplication, parallelization,

dependency, predictability, preferential, time-based and spatial-based, and then scale-based, and then reintegrate it all back together into some sort of a coherency.

For some people, though, I think it's kind of dense.

I mean, if you walked in today and

Gee, I don't know what kind of prerequisites you would need, what kind of priors you would need to understand what the heck we're talking about.

But as I said, for me, the entry point, the lowest level was, do you migrate?

Do you tool use?

Most people already admit they can find examples of when they do both.

So my question then would be, so will you know that you're doing both?

Going forward and then and if you can do that, maybe it's not quite so quite so dance or quite so mystifying A few things there so great point that going foraging


SPEAKER_01:
on your merry way without having all hidden states learned at the structural level or the parametric level, even conditioned on a structure.

So you don't even know what's out there.

No cognitive agent does.

And at the structural and the parametric level, the inference challenge is about action selection under uncertainty of multiple types.

The inference challenge is of action

having sub-problems involving inference on perception and causal modeling.

But those are like little sub-problems within a broader frame that active inference provides of like action orientation, action on policy selection, and then foraging is a great setting to study policy selection.

And then you brought up like that there's prerequisites that we hope to learn what different backgrounds can come to active inference from.

But like, I think one takeaway from the paper would be that perhaps

our cognitive foraging structure, whatever that means.

But the way that we forage through linguistic and idea space and solution space, strategy space can be modeled by some graph motifs and classes and transformations, which is what the contribution of this paper is.

And they also describe some of the more basal or homeostatic ancestral structures.

So it's like you have a linear model that works for height data and it works for weight data and it works for height and weight together.

It's just any numbers you pass to the linear model, the GLM, it's going to be,

Basically, okay, this is like another model class that can take or apply to cognitive modeling, homeostatic modeling, cognitive and homeostatic modeling, all these variations that are being described here.

So that's just one way to put it with perhaps fewer prerequisites.

And then these were interesting questions.

Is this what it was?

Do you migrate and do you use tools?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So if you're doing, and when you're talking about tools, are you talking about provisions?

And especially if you come to breakfast with a plan on how to build a spoon,

How is that going to help you eat your cereal when your foraging exercise was to be able to move the cereal from the bowl into your mouth?

So lots of times, especially in some of the more conventional ways we look at things, we tend to take the plan to the cereal bowl instead of the actual spoon.

So the provisioning part is more than a plan.

It's more than the words, and it's more than the representations.

It's the actual implements that we carry with us when we do that migration that I think really counts.

Because if you carry a, I guess you can origami a sheet of paper into a spoon, but then that's another process that you have to go through.

And really what you wanted was just to have the implement, so.


SPEAKER_00:
So when you talk about migration, like how far is the migration?

Like if you're a single celled organism, like, you know, migrating through the ocean, like what?


SPEAKER_03:
Maybe the migration in that case is moving around you, right?

Like you don't have to be, you don't have to think migration in terms of me from A to B if I'm stationary and A to B are passing by me.

Like when the car beside me is pulling out of the parking lot, I feel like I'm moving forward.

Right?

That's also a migration.


SPEAKER_01:
So that is related to...

we talked about with some of the geometry like the projective geometry and how there's the flipping between the egocentric geometric projection where it's like your peripersonal space and it's kind of like a distribution around you like there's me in the center or located somewhere and then there's like things closer to the eyes are generated to be

bigger because they don't have to be because we know we're making the generative model anyway so why does it happen why can't i see it from grand theft auto perspective it is a certain way for a certain reason so then that is flipping that's flipping with the um

more like objective or depersonalized stance like the prior on the architecture structurally of my room with the right angle and even if it looks different than a 90 degree angle in the generative model that's perceived as normal or unsurprising because it's compatible with the underlying structural hypothesis that's unobserved and then the observed structural observation that has to do with the actual way that the angles look

So here's just one other kind of Professor Gordon shout out slash angle to look into.

Evolution of algorithms for collective behavior.

So let's connect this to the cognitive foraging and then Dean's questions.

Do you migrate?

Do you use tools and do you provision?

So that's like related questions to that one might be like, how do you adapt when things change and you can't,

adjust certain things or um also the difference between like let's just say i'm using a software i'm not very familiar with like photoshop between doing one move photoshop searching on a search engine how do i paste okay paste okay i do one move so it's like a one step model of function versus someone who just rolls out of bed

opens up Photoshop, and then they just open their mind to being creative and being in feedback with what they actually do.

And maybe that does involve still using a search engine, but they're in a functional flow with respect to that tool.

And they've just set aside the time so that their regime of attention can be like productive or aligned with a project.

But they're not going step by step.

They're engaged in broader organization.


SPEAKER_03:
So we're talking about figuring out part rather than the finding out.

That's what you just described.

The difference between those two things.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Opening space for figuring out.


SPEAKER_03:
For figuring out.


SPEAKER_01:
And that's sort of like, it's a little bit like local and more meso or global foraging, which is like you can dig in a given patch of dirt.

So it's super labor intensive and,

but it's a local finding of what is there versus trying to find a better patch of dirt and dig there for a seed, maybe even find an exposed seed.

But whether one of those policies is like, has a higher risk reward or energy expenditure, that's gonna depend a lot on what one believes about the frequency of like,

half emerged seeds and seeds in this location and the time cost of moving from location to location.

There's just a ton of features.

And it's not just like as simple as making a heat map of where the seeds are.


SPEAKER_03:
We would describe it as mimic foraging and mimic foraging.

And what was the other one?

Modify foraging.


SPEAKER_01:
Something like, oh, blue, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
So it's interesting at the conference I was at last week that, you know, they talked about like how far can you get mimicking an expert?

And there were several like talks like so, you know, whether it's navigating a maze or, you know, figuring out whatever.

So like, you know, they'll train a model on a whole bunch of expert.

What would an expert do?

And then they set them loose in like a novel circumstance.

And if the novel circumstance is similar enough, it kind of works.

But really like the better thing to do is to put some exploratory component in there.

So, you know, you have like the expert training, but if there's an explorer component about that doesn't have to do with an expert or like, you know, if we train it to navigate its own maze, also sometimes like alternating with its own maze or, you know, a maze with experts in it,

So like following the experts only gets you so far.

And I wonder, and something that's come to really mean a lot to me in the field of intelligence is like when, it's when there's innovation, like when you can do something new, when you can generalize and solve any maze because you learned from a few experts, like that's innovative or, you know, like the ability to generalize, but also the ability to innovate and produce some new output rather than just do what the experts do.


SPEAKER_01:
so one thought that's awesome comments blue like learning from examples and from experts usually learning by example when used not in a malicious way is referring to seeing somebody who's better or at least adequate if not far far better and then there's this question of like should it be shown only at the expert level

because the expert speaker would do tongue twisters and Russian sentences with five conjugations.

But the expert in interaction is able to approach a zone of agreement and of like proximal development so that the example and the expertise as applied

is in a very specific space.

And that's like the order of examples and then knowledge, like this person is able to conjugate this thing, but they're having a challenge in conjugating this case.

So then depending on their personality, maybe you lean more on the one that they are more familiar with, or maybe they...

come to you to be wrong.

So there's a lot of advanced cognitive modeling and parameters that could be in a full-fledged model because that's a super complex scenario, especially in a group and all of these relationships on relationships.

And we don't need to have that whole

generative process model to have a generative model of policy that can be effective at forging in that space.

So it is a project and making that map is helpful for it.

But to make policy decisions in the cognitive space isn't the same as describing and mastering all the variables of the cognitive process.

And so this mental forging and physical forging, and also what we talked about with a sensory motor detachment helps make that really clear.

So like, how does Active Inference model relevant expertise?

Whether domain expertise or discipline?

like a set of affordances A versus a whole different set of affordances B or expertise like in that language learning example or some other example where it's not simply about like providing some advanced example and then having people asymptote to that.

It's about opening the space for figuring out in that setting.


SPEAKER_03:
I think you can find a structural adaptation in mimicking an expert.

And that typically sort of plays itself out as instructionalism.

I think you can find yourself also modifying your niche and adapting in that way.

and then being able to go back and have an expert look at what you've done.

And the reason why they're an expert in that particular case isn't because you're going to mimic them, but because you're going to ask them what they, how the process that they use to arrive at where they have a certain subject confidence, they are able to now diagnose

where your confidences might exist and where you might want to re-examine what the probabilities and preferences were that got you to the conclusions that you drew.

So again, you're going to adapt either way.

But I think that the path that you choose matters.

And knowing which path that you chose also matters.

So I adapted, right?

I adapted because I'm now trained up to be able to find the blue dot, the blue ball in the sea of plastic balls, right?

That's one form of adapting because I've never been in a ball pit before.

And now I found the one that I was looking for.

But another person could go in there and be able to maybe do something else with that blue ball because they modified the frame and the mesh.

And that, again, we just want to make sure that we know that there's a difference so that when we are reintegrating them at some point in the future, we know how we got there.

That's all.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

I like the throwback to instructionalism and interactionism.

It's an example that was like latently there when talking about that niche dependence and the co-creation.

So all these kinds of terms, digital stigmergy when working online, for example, become implicit when we're using a given

sequence to be talking about like a certain thing that we want to call our attention to.

We call our attention to some example or to some relationship and then that modifies our cognitive model so that we're thinking about things and doing things differently after.

And so it's kind of like quality of engagement rather than quantity because some people by reading a little change a lot and vice versa.


SPEAKER_03:
Ty set up the relationship, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
It's funny that you bring up reading.

So for a very long time, my PhD advisor never read anything.

She would never read anything.

Did you read it?

Oh, yeah, I read it.

She does, like, speed reads.

She speed reads, right?

Which means, like, she looked at every third word, right?

And then, like, when she really sits down to read it, she's got all these things to say about it and wants to, like, you know, wordsmith every sentence.

And it's great.

Like, we've had a lot of fun working together.

I don't mean to, like, make that sound evil in any way.

But, I mean, I don't speed read.

I read fast, but I'm totally incapable of speed reading because I feel like

I have to duplicate my efforts.

Like if I skim it, like I can, you know, pick up some key, you know, headings or whatever, but, but I never really got to read it.

Like, like I want to read something.

I want to really read it, like go through it line by line by line and look up things.

I don't know what they mean and this kind of thing.

So, so it's, it's a different, um, an interesting approach, how different people approach things in different ways.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

You know, talking about in this paper,

we've been going between the sort of physiological and biological substrate of cognition and the nervous system and the brain all of that and then this more cognitive modeling approach which can be sort of cut and dry or overly computational or so-called unrealistic with respect to biological foundations it's kind of like what dean pointed to with like the bifurcation and so now things are kind of coming together

not in the way that everyone might've expected, but at least in a way.

And so that's a very interesting space.

And then like blue with a fast and slow reading, it's almost like there are multi-scale dynamics associated with attention.

That can be measured with the EEG, but it's a hidden state, what is actually happening in the mind and brain.

But those are the kinds of experiments that people use.

And there's some rhythms like the fast cycles, like gamma that are playing out at like kind of like the speed of perception and awareness of like words.

And then there's also slower, like symbolic or semantic changes and all these different timescales.

And it's just like,

making the space to let the connections and the terms and the implications resonate and connect with the learner and the creator is like a lot more valuable than any amount of coefficient of low reading and so how to balance the information amount

and type and sequence and all of these things with holding the space for just the slower transformative process.

And that's very related to, yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
That's huge, Daniel, because I think a lot of people that they get into the instructionalism, you'll hear the expression, and I'm not overgeneralizing here.

You'll hear, well, we're going to break this down.

as opposed to the interactionism, which is we're going to slow this down.


SPEAKER_01:
There's quite a difference between those two things.

Open up and slow down, or we're going to drill down, finish it out, get it done in the time.

And as we discuss, this is the archetypes or the dialectic.

It's not like we're only taking one approach or another, but it's very easy to see how the range in at least education space, not even thinking of other areas, is like...

it's the amount of content and then it projects down into how it's delivered.

And then content gets slotted in or out or things get expanded or not, or the, you know, Monday's class gets canceled and it moves to Tuesday.

So that's like the sort of instruction projection approach, which is so different in multiple ways, especially in how it's applied to thinking more about the opening up a space and slowing down and the learner's journey and all that.


SPEAKER_03:
And when you're in the huddle and you're calling out the shorthand before you actually line up at the scrimmage line and snap the football, it's interesting what you point out, Luke.

I, in my history, I was always prepared to slow down when it was math and the symbology.

Like I have no problem slowing down for that, but trying to read out long sentences, it just about kills me.

I mean,

My ADD, I have to interleave like every 20 to 30 minutes because if I don't, my skin starts to crawl.

So I mean, those sort of contextual factors that are literally weighing on you, you don't know those sorts of things.

And if you're an expert who's just trying to push out all this information in a 13-week window,

I'm not really sure whether or not you can sort of get down to that level of personalization.

But if you're able to, it makes all the difference in the world in terms of what people take away from the exposure, right?

I find it way easier to do the shorthand thing.

You know, if a picture's worth a thousand words, I'm in full agreement with that.

You just can't do the thousand word thing.

So, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, really interesting.

And Steven wrote in the chat, good to see these questions about active modeling expertise being thought of in different ways, like the direction of travel, the distance to travel, the rate of travel, mode of transport.

Yeah, thanks for sharing it, Steven.

Landscapes and sort of the sense making and the way finding.

and being on this cognitive landscape versus or and being on this spatial foraging landscape.

So going out for the mushroom forage with someone who's familiar with mushrooms and somebody else who's familiar with the biochemistry but hasn't seen the mushroom in the ground, and then someone else who's on a different perspective because of their background or people with different physical abilities and knowledge in the spatial setting, and then there's

the cognitive foraging, and then just like, is it that the colony forges as a unit?

And then that's the sort of flip side of the nest mates forage collectively.

And so the team forges as a unit collectively, and the individual is sort of engaged at this level that we have experience at in the policy selection relevant to our participation in some either niche or team or project.

Let's go back to the paper, see if there's any other pieces that we could kind of look at.

Let's look at the roadmap.


SPEAKER_03:
Can we talk a bit about the endowment part of this?

Because we haven't really touched on that.

Well, just the endowment.

What's the endowment?

So in the point twos, essentially, now that we've built this base, this stable platform, what can we do with it?

What leverage have we now potentially achieved?

So what's the endowment here in terms of

what the paper really, what's the new affordances that we didn't have before, that we didn't maybe necessarily have explicated quite so clearly prior to reading the paper.

Maybe that's one, I don't want to put pressure on Blue, but what do you think, Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
so i'm trying to remember maybe you guys can remind me in this figure oh wait wait wait so endowing with temporal depth um it's got to be an allostat right is that correct yeah yeah yeah um because in having a homeostat with temporal depth like isn't possible right or or like isn't like they just can they can only do um

And I wonder if that's like, you know, a single celled organism can only like do at that moment, like they're not planning for it to get cold later or something like that.

Um, and really the, so I wonder if it's not only temporal depths, but any kind of relationship.

Like, I wonder if it's not necessarily temporal depth, if time is flat.

I mean, I guess in order to modify your own behavior or thought, you would have to have some temporal depth.

But this allostatic idea is interesting with respect to my relationship to my future self or my relationship to my previous self or my relationship to other people in my community or whatever.

So I just wonder about...

If that's why this is the allostat and not the homeostat.

Or can you endow a homeostat with temporal depth and get that same kind of ability for perspective and retrospective inference?

You can't.

But why not?

Maybe let's put some words to that.

Let me see if I can find some in the paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice point.

I would say homeostatic function could be in a model with memory or anticipation.

Like the thermometer could record the last 100 time points, or it could have a prediction for the next 100, but the function would be that it only turns on the heating once it gets too cold.

So it still is the, on the action selection side, it still is making a one Markov chain decision based upon an instantaneous

measurement.

And so it can be implemented whether just for a computational parsimony or in a simple biological system with just one time step.

If it's this hot, then turn on the cooling.

And so it's the ultimate if then, because it's like a threshold model.

And so it gets pared down over evolutionary time, but then you're bringing up like to even engage with a counterfactual or some influence or something on future policy, there has to be like a depth.

And then this gets back to whether it's modeling the thing itself.

what do these represent are they the scientists testing a model of one two three or four five hour temporal depth for the ant forager or is this the foragers quote cognitive model as if that were somehow not model-based science or is it the neural architecture or the functional anatomy of the forager there's a lot of ways it could lean or be framed um

I think in a complimentary way, but one will have to be really careful where support for one domain super valid and where is one not.

Like if it were a circuit board with that topology, then it seems like pretty good to go to use that as a pretty broad descriptor of a system.

Whereas if this was a simplification of memory and there was an uncertainty parameter labeled uncertainty or

anxiety, like we discussed a little earlier, someone slaps a parameter on one of these edges and starts addressing complex real-world settings, how does that exactly work?


SPEAKER_03:
So one of the things that I think that it endows us with is that the homeostat is the sort of the basic pattern of

there's a partition between the epsilon and the mu.

So the first thing that they did is they created a sort of horizontal partition.

And then when they went to the parallelism, now there's two epsilons and two mus.

And so now they added the vertical partition as well.

And I think that's really, really helpful in terms of at the basic level of the statistical.

We talked last time that you have to kind of be a polymath.

But I think from a modeling perspective, it's getting that orthogonal mesh established that moves us up the chain of complexity.

Because then all of a sudden, you can have diagonal dependencies.

And then you can actually add the Z plane going through this in terms of how the scale is built out on both distance and time.

So I think that's one of the endowments that it provides.


SPEAKER_01:
I could just restate that.

It's like when we say that one of the advantages potentially in application of active inference could be that models are composable.

So they can be composed within a given scale, like spatially or temporally, and that has a visual representation.

It can also be composed in this nested way, which, as we've explored several times, can represent physical enclosure or temporal enclosure, as well as this cognitive architecture, like mental action, depending on how different variables are interpreted in nested modeling.

And so it's composable in several dimensions of transformation, which they represented in figure four, in a way where each transformative step, even though the function might change a lot from the beginning to the end, each organizational or structural, architectural, cognitive step or morphological, if one is looking at that layer,

can be mapped into a certain space and direction of movement within that space.


SPEAKER_03:
Do you think it can also be sculpted out?

I mean, because we're looking at this historically, we're looking at all the things that happened in the history.

Was this the stuff that was kind of carved out and a lot of the stuff that doesn't matter removed in order for it to be more comprehensible?

because I agree with you, it can be composed, but I also think it's not decomposed, but I do think, or even deconstructed, I think it can be sculpted out of a greater history, a greater whole.


SPEAKER_01:
This, oh, yes, please.


SPEAKER_00:
So, sorry, like what, you know, when you talk about a greater history, and we talked about historicity in today, like during, in the last two hours,

And we've also talked about memory, and there's a difference, right?

So historicity is like historically accurate, and memory is like what I remember, or like what any individual remembers.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, we've talked about that before, actually.

A few live streams ago.

All I'm thinking is that what this does is compare all the things that... Is it Axel Constant that said...

How did he frame it so that we can understand why we're here now versus all the things that didn't make it, right?

That's essentially what I'm talking about in terms of explaining, right?

They're explaining why something got to the place that it did as opposed to the necessity of all the things you had to do, all the things you had to compose in order to realize the outcome.

I'm trying to bring that back to a sculpting metaphor now.


SPEAKER_01:
awesome so that's um the axel constant 2021 paper the title was the free energy principle it's not about what it takes it's about what took you there and so that's definitely an evolutionary perspective and it's partially because of axel's background in evolution and ecology because that's what we can say about evolution this is what got birds here right

And so the counterfactuals in evolution are a really interesting topic, and that's sort of explored in a variety of more popular as well as more mathematical treatments.

Like, how do we go from the observed, which must have existed, so it's very easy to fall to them being the best of all possible worlds, optimal form, etc.,

But then we also recognize the changing environments and interactions and all that.

And then blue, like with the historicity, facts and the impacts, which are like facts that aren't known.

And then there's the memory, which requires a perspective

People could use system memory or something to refer to a factor and impact on a system, but these are just being used loosely.

Like some parts of how the past influences the present and the future have to do with systems that take a perspective.

Other impacts are not through those adaptive active inference agents.

And so that's very different.

And so historicity is kind of like the stigmergy pheromone layer.

And then there's like memory with the forager.

So you could talk about the memory of the ground for the pheromone, but it makes sense to just remember that it's a different thing with the pheromone on the ground than the cognitive in for ants.

And no Nesme is going to have all the knowledge or the onboard modeling to make decisions, say for the ones that,

not to complicate it too much but it's stuck in the dialectic between doing exactly what worked in the past which is to say recently succeeded but might not work in the future and changing things but once you move into changing things the space of the adjacency of changing is sometimes like daunting and you still haven't really addressed the problem of changing world so origins very deep entry point like into a lot of these

questions in active inference and in other areas because it really connects to the egocentric hopefully not in the um solipsistic or narcissistic sense but just in the way finding sense making paradigm that actually accommodates for others through modeling them explicitly and prioritizing the environment and things like that so pretty

Cool.

And this paper, just to kind of restate what they brought to the picture, they looked at evolutionary timescales and they framed cognition as structural change, which in a Bayesian modeling framework is sometimes called structural learning, as opposed to like parameter learning, fine tuning, given the model structure.

And they connected that to the Bayesian graph model of the active inference partitioning.

then connected that to the factor graphs and then using the homeostat example talked about how there could be like elaborations into other structures so from structures to each other that might be enabling the rise of phenotypes or enabling the modeling of phenotypes that are interesting okay any final thoughts or like where does this pape take us

What is different now?

What are we going to be talking about soon?


SPEAKER_00:
So I'm excited to really delve into the math that is going to get behind the models that were elucidated out in figure four.

How do we go through time and through relationality and hierarchical dimensions and so forth?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Thank you, Blue.

Dean, you won't have the last word, but what do you think?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I'm still trying to figure out how this sort of ties in with the whole identity piece.

I left that because I thought that was just a rabbit hole that went way too far and too deep.

But I know that when you do get that parallelism and when you can sort of

create a dimensional grid that has negative space as well so like you can be as units going positively or negatively and passing through zero and how that fits with identity that's that's sort of a neck that's a kind of a personal thing that i got to do and then the other thing that i really but the thing that i really liked about this paper is that i think it took something that's really as you said over over huge time scales and sort of

took it back down to something that might be digestible for a lot of people that otherwise they kind of go, okay, so here's 100,000 years ago or a million years ago or whatever, from the bacteria to now, what are the sort of basic building blocks that we say might have played a part in

getting to the kind of sophistication where we are now.

And again, I think it's about learning.

I always think that evolution is about learning.

And so, as I said in the point one, this affirmed a lot of the stuff that I think we need to be bringing into some of the more formal ways that we structure learning, because I think it's learning sort of unleashed as opposed to all tied up.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Thanks both and everybody who was helping in all the ways for the previous videos.

Just some last thoughts would be from both of you.

And hopefully all together, there's really some interesting insights into learning and education for active inference learning, which is kind of like our meta regime of attention in Active Inference Lab when we're in that regime of attention.

many people have other regimes of attention where it would certainly apply to bring some of these methods and ideas in and also bring pieces from outside into our cognitive modeling of attention and collaboration and communication like those topics and how those are the pillars of education and research

during a time when education and research and participation are evolving is some of the most interesting things.

And so to be able to read evolutionary papers that take a cool scope and approach and then connect it to how we're hopefully organizing together and including the affordance to participate with anyone who's listening now,

It's an interesting mixture, so I hope that we all can just keep on learning and applying together.

All right.

Peace.

Thanks, guys.

Thanks again.

Bye.
