## mz7L4GD5g-E

SPEAKER_04:
Live streaming is on.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

It looks like we are live.

So welcome everybody to Team Calm podcast number three.

We're really looking forward to this discussion and we really appreciate everyone who has come out to come speak with us.

So without further ado, I'm going to share my screen and we're going to jump into our podcast section.

So this is Team Calm podcast number three.

Welcome to Team Calm, everyone.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream that we're performing.

We are an experiment in online team communication and learning, and we are the active inference stream for now.

So people can connect with us via Twitter at inferenceactive at this Gmail address here.

We have a public Keybase team.

And also if you're watching this, you probably know, but we're on YouTube at this username.

We really welcome all skills, backgrounds, and perspectives.

So please let us know how we can help you and help provide an on-ramp for wherever you're coming from.

And please be respectful of the rules of online communication and dialogue.

So you, if you're not speaking, if there's noise in the background,

You can use the raise your hand feature, which is on the bottom left of Jitsi and so on.

And please provide us with feedback so we can be improving our work.

Here's going to be the structure of the discussion today.

First, we're going to have a check in and a warm up.

Then we're going to briefly cover Tinbergen's four questions, which are a big idea that help us organize some of the concepts that are discussed in the paper.

Then we will get to discussing the paper.

We'll talk about the goals of the paper and the abstract.

We'll go through the roadmap of the paper and talk about the section headers and how the authors get from A to Z.

We'll talk about each one of the figures and try to understand them.

And then we'll have time for questions throughout as well as at the end.

So in the check-in or warm-up, everyone, absolutely feel free to introduce yourself briefly and your location, however you'd like.

And maybe for each of these questions, if one or two people could just give a first thought.

So first warm-up question is, what is communication?

People can raise your hand or just kind of popcorn in.

Yeah, go ahead, Jared.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so, all right, yeah.

So hi everyone, my name's Jared Basil.

I'm in North Carolina in the United States of America.

Yeah, for me, communication is just

a kind of set of behaviors and inferences that people use to align their mental states.

It's kind of like an abstract, I think, kind of way to think about it, but it narrates from my advisor's line of thought that communication is a sort of tool for people aligning their mental states to a degree good enough for their purposes.

Yeah, that's it.

I'd like to think of it as a behavior that's extended,

is like a sort of continuous extension of behaviors that species across the animal kingdom use.

Trying to think of it in a way that's anything too special, i.e.

in linguistics, for instance, thought of something very, very special and unique, and it is in a certain way, but the way that I found it useful to think about communication is as another sort of behavior in people's toolkits.


SPEAKER_00:
Any other thoughts on that?

Yep, Stefan.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I would say that I agree with what was just said there, actually.

And if you take like an inactive embodied approach, you could say that it's an extension.

Communication is an extension of the organism into the environment, but one which can happen with interactions with other organisms also extends into their environment and their niche.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And that kind of presages this second question, which is, what is special, interesting, or important about human communication?

And could be nothing, could be everything.

Any thoughts on that one?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so I have a thought that it's maybe not super special, anything about human communication.

My name is Shannon.

I'm at the University of California in Merced, but

because of the pandemic, I'm at home in South Dakota for the foreseeable future.

But yeah, I think what is special about human communication is that it's the point of view that we're coming from.

So when we're like studying communication across the animal kingdom, it's always the point of comparison, either implicitly or explicitly.

But you can look at like anything from nonverbal communicative behaviors of

like our primate relatives or even of our pets with us, like outside of their species or even of like chemical signals and plants.

So maybe there's just a question of how much of something that we want to call agency or intentionality is necessary to call communication important in a specific like niche or specific animal or plant kingdom or something like that.


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice.

And science as a special form of human communication, it's the one that we have, if nothing else.

And so as we kind of continue to build towards the paper, how do prior beliefs, so beliefs that communicators have about identity, narrative or culture play into communication in human or non human systems?

Sasha?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, just building on these really great previous answers.

I'm Sasha.

I'm in Davis, California.

But I just wanted to say that communication is highly culture and context dependent.

And in thinking about how to align

different peoples or organisms kind of views of the world.

Culture and context plays a big role in deciding on how much to align and whether or not that's important at all.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Jared?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so...

I wanted to briefly say something about the second point as well.

For me, real quick, something that's maybe the main point of interest for me in terms of human communication, specifically human communication, is the goals of communicators in the human case tend to be or seem to be based on communication.

a lot of, for instance, developmental and comparative research seem to be unique in that the goal is the alignment of mental states per se.

So that turns on gathering evidence for that in terms of our interactions.

So I have to get certain cues from you that you understand what I'm saying.

And so it's not, you know, if you grab the thing for me that I'm asking you to get by accident,

say, accidentally, you get the thing that I wanted you to get.

But you're also giving me cues that you misunderstood what I said.

And so it was just, you know, fortuitous circumstance that you happen to get what I wanted.

Even in like young kids, you'll see them try to correct that and say, no, you got the right thing.

This is really what I wanted.

And so those sorts of that sort of result, for instance, suggests that something that's unique is

alignment mental states per se um rather than just having some functional outcome which is often the case in for instance other non-human primates forms of communication um and then that turns into prior beliefs for instance how does that play an important role in communication for me that's um building what the uh previous speaker just said um uh your prior beliefs are the way

or an important part of your prior beliefs are the set of cultural conventions that you learn, i.e.

how a phrase or a mental state, how a mental state or intention should be made manifest in the environment for others to pick up on.

That's a set of prior beliefs.

How do I best do this?

Something that your culture installs in you through all sorts of joint attentional practices earlier in life.

earlier and earlier in in development and that's also something that species unique um that other species don't don't seem to engage in um is the installation of these kinds of culturally acquired uh patterns and and practices for communicating one's mental states in a way that everyone deems good enough for um sufficient for current purposes i guess cool yeah


SPEAKER_00:
Our last warm-up question is for you, what might a satisfying formal framework for communication look like?

And that might include human and non-human.

It might include all these features that people are talking about.

But what would be the attributes of a comprehensive or a formal framework for thinking about all this diversity of communication styles in humans and non-humans?

What features would that kind of a model be expected or desired to have?

Yes, Stefan.


SPEAKER_03:
I think one of the key things is it would have a spatial component in terms of how the dynamics happen in space and around space, particularly peripersonal space around the organism.

And one of the key things about humans is that we can also enfold narrative within itself.

In story, we can and we spatially arrange things.

So we often say that's right.

what left what's ahead what's big so that ability to somehow tag or embed within the niche is key and then the actual language part is somehow tied to that rather than the other way around which is what a lot of the kind of mind-based approaches it tends to be cool shannon i think i'm touching up on that so having this um account of how we use space


SPEAKER_05:
in conversation, it also needs to be flexible enough to account what Sasha was talking about, the way different cultures use space, like putting the past in front of you, which is awkward to me, but makes a lot of sense to other cultures.

And also aspects of communication that aren't linguistic.

So nonverbal would be obvious, but communication and like a musical situation where no

not necessarily any semantic referent is being called upon, but all the same, we know that we're feeling the same beat or like we're really in the same abstract space of interacting with each other.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yvonne or Alex, anything to add on any of these points?

Not by now.

Cool.

I agree about that aspect where linguistics are one of the modes of communication, yet there's this spatial element, and sometimes they blur when you say, do you grasp it, or can you see what I'm talking about?

It's very cross-sensory, and you can type out what you mean to say, yet we're sometimes talking about specific things, sometimes not.

So...

Let's just talk really briefly about Tinbergen's four questions, which are modeled off of Aristotle's four whys.

And this is a image from Kapheim's paper from the eusocial insect literature.

And Tinbergen's four questions are kind of like a two by two matrix.

The two aspects on the left side, the y-axis, are whether the domain of analysis is contemporary, happening right now, or historical, in the past.

And then proximate or ultimate are referring not to ultimate like the best, but rather like close and far.

Again, kind of a spatial metaphor.

And the four domains, though they sometimes go by slightly different names, are causation, which is happening proximately and now,

uh utility which is happening it's the ultimate why it's the it's the telios and it's happening now as well and then in the proximate version of history so recent history we have development or ontogeny and then the ultimate why of history why do birds have wings why are we here that's captured by evolution

And just to put a little bit more of a specific vision on this as we turn towards some of the figures in the paper, which will involve birds, this is from Bateson and Lalonde 2013, which was a 50-year update on Tinbergen's original 63 paper.

And here's the same four categories of mechanism, which is causation, current utility, development, and evolution, reflected by, respectively, the neuroscience, the actual meaning of the song, the developmental basis of the song, which is showing the song's trace change through time, and then the evolutionary history of the trait reflected on a phylogeny.

So any points on that, or can we jump into the paper?

Cool.

This was just to kind of bring up this idea for those who are maybe coming from outside of a philosophy of biology background, because it's a really awesome framework, and it helps us get on board with this idea that there's going to be more than one answer to why, not just because of just different opinions.

There's actually different kinds of whys when we're talking about why is a bird singing?

There might be multiple answers just fundamentally.

So the paper that we are here to talk about today, and lucky enough to have Jared, the first author here for a little bit longer, is A World Unto Itself, Human Communication as Active Inference.

And what I sketched the two goals of the paper down as were to formalize cooperative communication as a process of active inference under the free energy principle.

and to link the mechanistic, developmental, and evolutionary perspectives on communication by using active inference as a process theory.

Jared, what would you say about that?

Or how does that reflect on what you've intended when you wrote the paper?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, no, no, no.

I think that's great.

And I want to put particular emphasis within the context of this specific paper on the second point.

I really was hoping to...

uh yeah hone in on the idea that all these different scales of analysis are in some sense linked to one another um i.e like you had mentioned in the last slide you know if you want to explain any kind of behavior or inferential pattern or whatever that you see any aspect of a phenotype in in the animal kingdom that's going to turn in every single case um on

to fully explain it on explaining what's going on at each of these different scales of analysis and showing how they all kind of fit into a coherent whole.

In this case, if you take the active inference framework, the idea of gathering evidence for your model, your evolutionarily favored model, that bottoms out in real time sorts of behavioral patterns.

That, yeah, I was basically trying to link these different scales and show how they're all sort of part of this evidence gathering procedure.

It emerges in this idea of cooperative communication, which is something from my advisor, Mike Tomasello.

And I hope that this will lead to some sort of future more technical-explicit formal analysis.

Yep.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And when I see Tim Bergen's four questions, I think about yes and, because not only is that a tenant of improv and communication as we know it at the mechanism timescale to foreshadow, but it's like, yes, there's evolution.

That's an explanation.

And there's other kinds of explanations that we want to be addressing as well.

So it's kind of communication through and through and integration through and through.

Any other comments on the goals of the paper before we get to the abstract?

Okay, so let's work through the abstract and see how the authors reflected or summarized for everyone what they did.

They wrote, the purpose of this paper is to extend the account of human cooperative communication by proposing an integrative model of biobehavioral dynamics of cooperative communication.

Our formulation is based upon active inference.

Active inference suggests that action perception cycles operate to minimize uncertainty and optimize an individual's internal model of the world.

We propose that humans are characterized by an evolved adaptive prior belief that their mental states are aligned with or similar to those of conspecifics.

For example, that we are the same sort of creature inhabiting the same sort of niche.

Any thoughts or comments on these first parts of the abstract?

So we're within this integrative framework.

We wanna bring together Tinbergen as well as Active Inference with hopefully an eye towards more formal integrations that are possible in the future.

The use of cooperative communication emerges as the principal means to gather evidence for this belief.

Again, that we're in a shared niche and that we're similar kinds of interactors or English speakers, or we're interested in this topic.

Allowing for the development of a shared narrative that is used to disambiguate interactants, hidden and inferred mental states.

Any thoughts on that part?

What does it mean to disambiguate the hidden and inferred mental states?

Well, one thought on that.

Shannon, go ahead.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, yeah.

So I guess it's not just to know what the other person might be thinking or could say in words, but also to know that you're both maybe attending to the same reference or that you're both experiencing a similar emotion or if it's different, like why is the other person sad right now?

So any sort of

experience, I suppose, that two people could be feeling.

It's to figure out what they're feeling and what you are feeling and align them.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And we have such a rich internal experience that it's not enough just to infer the external states of a person.

Oh, they're sitting down.

Big surprise.

We need to actually do a lot of work to disambiguate or to reduce our uncertainty about hidden states, which are mental in this case.

Thus, by using cooperative communication, individuals effectively attune to a hermeneutic niche composed in part of others' mental states and reciprocally attune the niche to their own ends via epistemic niche construction.

Jared, what is a hermeneutic niche and an epistemic niche?

Are those similar ideas or different?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so the idea of a hermeneutic niche is that when we're communicating, we both have our sort of individual perspective.

So it's an I or a me and a you.

In addition to that, there's the we.

It's our shared dialogue.

We are talking about something.

At the same time, of course, we can decompose that into just set our own individual perspectives.

What I was trying to get at there was the idea of hermeneutics is, if you all have read, for instance, the Frist and Frith 2015 Duet for One paper, they talk about this hermeneutic idea where it comes from the idea of like a deep reading of a text.

So if you want to really fully understand a text, for instance, you have to both take words in their immediate context in a sentence in which they're composed, but then also

relate them to the larger context of the paragraph or the chapter or the whole book or whatever.

So the idea is relating these two or more different scales of analysis to one another and seeing it as a sort of integrative explanatory whole.

And the epistemic niche construction component, trying to link up with some of the stuff that Axel Constant has been doing on niche construction.

we construct our niche so as to offer up very precise, uh, uh, certain affordances for us.

Um, I E we make our niche more easily understandable.

Um, that could, in this case, in the instance of, um,

communication across long stretches of intergenerational time.

You see these patterns of using this terminology, epistemic niche construction, where languages, cultures build up.

I should say cultures build up a set of constructions, a set of four meaning pairings.

that if you align to that set of four meaning pairings and ontogeny makes your niche very easily understandable, i.e.

easily inferable.

You can easily grab a hold of others' hidden states, as it were, others' mental states, by using these sorts of very reliable sort of epistemic tools or devices, which are, we talked about in the paper, communicative constructions.


SPEAKER_00:
And the way that you describe that, it makes me think about the royal we in English.

And if somebody said, well, what am I talking about?

It's almost like, wait, what are you talking about?

If you're not sure what you're talking about, what are you talking about?

But when somebody says, what are we talking about here?

It's a rhetorical question that helps us have a shared informational niche.

And I agree, Axel's work in that respect is excellent.

This means that niche construction enables features of the niche to encode precise, reliable cues about the deontic or shared value of certain action policies, e.g.

the utility of using communicative constructions to disambiguate mental states given expectations about shared prior beliefs.

What is deontic value in this context, Jared or anyone else?

Maybe Jared first and anyone else can raise their hand.


SPEAKER_01:
I think Stefan.

If Stefan wants to go, I can have Stefan to be on there.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

The way of knowing rules of the game, so to speak, like cues which are set like a stop sign or something that you have in your environment.

So it can be useful.

So it's kind of a longer standing cue that's kind of established in the niche.

one thing I was thinking when I was seeing this I think it's quite important that they're talking about cooperative communication here and that narrows it down then to something a bit more instrumental it's not necessarily coordinated communication so it's not necessarily as action orientated as that but there is a sense that this is trying to get to we're trying to achieve

or trying to cooperate towards something.

Therefore, I want to align my mental states.

Because if you're not cooperating with someone, you could be just trying to work out the hidden states of like, what is it that it's important for me to talk to them about?

Which may not be their mental state.

It just may be their state in the world at the moment, if that makes sense.

But this is like, you've already got some alignment and assumed, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
Right, and if it's not cooperative, it might be adversarial, which kind of takes us to Dennett's intentional stance, where you just say, whatever it is, if it's a computer or if it's a human, I'm just trying to win this little local game theory interaction.

And the paper doesn't go that direction.

It moves towards cooperative communication.

So Jared, any thoughts there?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so this is all great discussion.

And building on the point you just said about cooperative versus adversarial sorts of, for instance, communication,

Even in the case of, you know, say, you know, I'm using communication or shared language to try to outsmart you or outdo you or something.

Exercising like a kind of like Machiavellian intelligence, I think it's been called.

That still relies on, you know, the shared presupposition, I guess, when you use that language of...

a cooperative bedrock so you know the idea is if i'm using this piece of language typically it's for you know honest genuine communicative goals and the idea for instance deception relies on

me using you know kind of exploiting that shared assumption to my own benefit to your detriment um so even at least in the case of humans when you're you know lying or something um adversarial communication or whatever still relies on there being some shared set of cooperative presumptions and that that that that is what is exploited um for humans when they're communicating um and also about the the deontic value that those sorts of ideas uh deontic or shared value that

The idea there is that in ontogeny, when you are attuning to learning your culture set of communicative constructions, what these constructions are in speakers' brains, there's lots of good work, for instance, from someone who I like, Joan Bybee,

that suggests that these are very automatized, automatic sorts of mappings between form and meaning that, at least in their normal use, don't require expensive, heavy sorts of computations.

Maybe when you're first learning them, they do.

But the more you use them and exercise them in actual joint practice with others in aligning mental states, they become very automatic.

And so the idea of deontic value is that it bypasses

the deontic value of a policy bypasses all the kinds of heavy computational updates that might be required by, for instance, someone learning how to use constructions.

But yeah, and instead provides a very automatic mapping between states.

It depends how you chunk a construction, but constructions become linked up in a very automatized way, and then it can be used effortlessly by speakers.

That's the idea of, at least in this case, the deontic or shared value of certain action policies, i.e.

constructions.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And using the niche, info niche idea, it's kind of like a tragedy of the commons.

If people pollute the environmental niche, it doesn't work as well as it could.

And if people pollute the informational niche with deceptive signaling, it also doesn't work.

So the niche metaphor really works well.

So let's think about the last part of the abstract.

In turn, the alignment of mental states, which are prior beliefs, enables the emergence of a novel contextualizing scale of cultural dynamics that encompasses the actions and mental states of the ensemble of interactants and their shared environments.

The dynamics of this contextualizing layer of cultural organizational feedback across scales acts to constrain the variability of prior expectations of the individuals who constitute it.

And then just to close it with the contribution, our theory additionally builds upon the active inference literature by introducing a new set of neurobiologically plausible computational hypotheses for cooperative communication.

We conclude with directions for future research.

Any last thoughts on the abstract or can we go to the roadmap?

cool really awesome and it just shows how much there is to unpack in the very distilled representation of the abstract so and jared i know that you have to head out at some point so feel free to just anyone can bounce when they need to yeah i was gonna say i'm gonna i'm gonna head out right now actually i have to go but uh this was this was wonderful thank you for uh putting us on

Thank you.

We'd love to have you at a future conversation too.

So see you later, Jared.

Thanks.

Cool.

So the roadmap of the paper, now that he's gone and we can really talk about the paper, it starts with an introduction.

Part two is a theoretical background, and they cover several of the key areas of background, which are the evolutionary origins and the developmental origins of cooperative communication.

So two different timescales, Evo and Devo, often called.

Then they take stock and table one summarizes some of the key features that are related to cooperative communication.

So two, A, B and C don't have to do with free energy.

They don't have to do with active inference.

This is more classical understandings of cooperative communication.

Section three is explicitly about active inference.

First, they talk about the idea of active inference broadly and about how adaptive priors help organisms relate in the world and about the idea of alignment of priors within the active inference framework.

Figure one and figure two show active inference in the world as well as active inference and communication in the world.

And we're gonna look through each one of the figures one by one.

They then turn to the topic of deontic values, which are shared expectations about the value of policies.

So section three takes us from what is active inference and why is it important for communication to what is this concept of deontic value in the context of the active inference framework.

Then they bring it together in section four, where they more clearly talk about human communication as active inference.

First, they look at the dynamics of communication at the time scale of mechanism, which is the individual in context, as well as the dyad, which is the minimum communicative unit.

Then the dynamics of communication at the timescale of ontogeny or development.

And then zooming back one more level, what are the dynamics of communication at the timescale of cultural evolution?

Figure three is a really nice representation of the communication and coupled action perception cycle.

Figure four has some examples in the bird song, as well as figure five of free energy minimization in the case of improvisational duets.

And then figure five is a duet for one learning to synchronize through active inference.

They then conclude with future directions and conclusions.

So we're going to get from introductions to communication from an evo-devo perspective through the free energy principle inspired framework of active inference to the point where we're actually making useful claims about the world within what we've put together in sections two, three, four, and then leading to future directions, what might be interesting for people to study.

Any thoughts on the roadmap or can we go to the table and figures?

So table one, would anyone else like to give this first summary?

I put up on the top right, the, remember the Kapheim figure, just so that we remembered that these are not, they're not conflicting layers of analysis or scales of analysis.

They're all part of one integrated Punnett square, if you will.

And what Table 1 does is, and anyone can just raise their hand if they want to jump in, but otherwise I'll just kind of keep the air alive.

Table 1 summarizes some of these key features that have to do with cooperative communication using the terminology in many cases from the non-active inference community.

So that's why this paper is such a bridge from a conceptual and even a keyword perspective.

And these four scales of analysis, which are reflected by Tinbergen's four whys, are the real-time mechanism.

And the characteristic dynamics there have to do with ostention, which means to show or clearly demarcated.

joint attention which is people looking at the same thing and in the human case often the the whites of the eyes surrounding the colors part of the eye have been discussed maybe shannon if you're familiar with the with the non-human primate literature i know that the non-human primate and humans have quite different eyes and people have speculated that has to do with attention

Also at the real time level, there's the optimization of relevance, which is if someone says, okay, I know this part of trigonometry, you can skip through that.

It's not relevant to me or that word wasn't relevant to me because I don't know what it is.

So could you optimize the relevance of your sentence by defining the word?

coupled by directional information flow, as well as approximate motivation to align and coordinate mental states.

Like if somebody needs something and you want to make sure you have the other person's attention.

Hey, I'm driving and I'm thirsty.

Can you get me this water bottle?

If the other person is not paying attention, then you're going to stay thirsty.

But if the other person is paying attention, it's the motivation that you have to align your mental states so they can get you the water bottle.

And there's other characteristic dynamics at the timescale of development, phylogeny, as well as adaptation.

Any remarks on this?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I was going to say, it makes a lot more sense that this is Jared's advisor.

to understand better the ontogeny of communication or cooperative communication.

So I found this an interesting and really relevant bridge to understanding the onset of cooperative communication in a person's life as well as comparing it across species.

But yeah, I just thought that was a very

interesting and relevant connection to think about how we learn to cooperate and make our internal states known and that we actually are unsatisfied until we are able to make our internal states known.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Stefan.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I kind of think I always find these these these the way they link with each other kind of interesting.

and kind of um could be read different ways um because you could you could the real-time mechanism could stretch out over time in terms of how you think your cooperation is going to have impact on your life um as an as an elder or as a teenager um but it is um in some ways i kind of wonder if everything in most organisms comes back down to those evolutionary priors and we're able to kind of

play with um well even even a puppy is different to a full-grown dog in terms of how they fit themselves into establishing their role in the communication but we really do

go outside of what our gut feeling tells us and start to sort of change the rules of the game, so to speak, about causation and ontology and current utility.

So it's quite useful in terms of sort of generative discussion beyond like what this immediately says in a direct short-term interaction.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Alex or Ivan, any thoughts on that?

And also just if you can raise your hand, if so.

One other thought is the two by two kind of Punnett square layout makes us think if we threw a dart, it would be, okay, that's causation, that's utility, that's development, that's evolution.

Another spatial metaphor would be like a wave and a ripple on a wave.

So the big wave is evolution.

And then there's smaller waves within that.

And so, yes, it totally builds on the evolutionary priors, like you were just saying.

And it's totally about development because that never stops either.

And it's totally about the mechanism because without mechanism, you don't have the voice box or you don't have the audio processing.

So it's all of those and they're all happening in an overlapping way that's not quite reflected by the cleanliness of this two by two or even a continuum model.

Cool.

Any last thoughts on the table or can we get to the figures?

Awesome.

So here we are in figure one.

And for Team Calm, this was really a great image that we had shared a lot before this discussion because it brings together the skeleton of active inference in a way, which is this cycle that goes from internal states, which influence through policy states, action states,

Action states influence external states of the world, which are also influencing each other, but we're not too worried about those.

External states influence our sensory states, the retina and the tympanic membrane.

And then the sensory states allow us to update our internal model of the world that's also generative.

So that's the very basic skeleton of the active inference cycle here reflected with just one agent.

in feedback with the world.

And so the flow is always going this way.

But also, all these things are happening all at once.

Your legs are always engaged in an action state.

Your retina is always involved in a sensory state, even if your eyes are closed.

Your internal states are always updating.

So they're all happening at once.

But we can kind of trace this causal diagram through time.

And then we also see represented in this image the equations.

And there is a level of math that is just sort of brought up in this paper and cited to other places for where people can learn more.

But suffice to say that each of these different

sectors can be thought of as happening at various levels of mathematical description.

In this center part of the image, it shows the minimal version of the math, and then this is a little bit more fleshed out of an equation, and then there are citations and future work to be done that really builds it out more fully.

What does anyone else see in Figure 1?


SPEAKER_05:
suppose not quite in figure one but in something you mentioned about the parts of your body that are doing the action they're doing the sensation um is a great skeleton like you said um but then there's all of the action that's happening constantly at sometimes conscious impacts of conscious level um but like saccades of the eyes so you're constantly having a small action to resample the environment or the like proprioceptive sensations of your legs so even

Within that larger cycle, there's all of these much, much smaller cycles happening where this perception action loop is functioning in every part of the sensorium of your body.


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice.

Good point.

And this image has the sensations coming into the person.

This kind of puts the black box or the Markov blanket, if you will, around the whole person.

But it's actually a nested Markov blanket situation.

So each neuron has internal states, action states, external states for the neuron, which are other neurons, other cell types, and then sensations.

So this is something that is about the world and about people.

but it also exists as a skeleton whenever we want to draw the boundary around any kind of active inference system.

And thinking about communication more broadly than the human case is where we start to see, oh, yeah, that's right.

Honest communication is the norm.

Neurons don't expect each other to be deceptive.

Sure, it might happen, but that's the decimal point.

And the real framework is about how cooperative communication goes down because adversarial relationships just don't persist over as long of time durations or spatial durations because they break down almost by definition.

And so thinking about this multi-level in space as well as multi-time scale, kind of tying it back to the Tim Bergen's levels or four questions,

And there's a lot to this and it's awesome.

And one of the key contributions of the free energy principle, which have to do with all of these equations that potentially, despite the differences in the specifics between timescales and spatial scales and different modes of communication, there may be some similar equations underlying the dynamics.

And that would be something quite fantastic.

So let's build on figure one to figure two.

So here we have the same colors and the same layout here.

If you just block off one side of the picture and you just look at this side, for example, it would be the same thing.

The one person with the action states that influence the world, I guess action and sense have been flipped here.

It's the action states that influence the world and then comes back through sense to the person.

but the two key differences here first off is instead of just internal states um it's now reflecting specifically the regime of attention so that's salience or attention and it's thought it can be thought of as a subset of the total internal generative model of the world by the brain but now we're talking about what specifically the

in the internal model should attention be paid to.

And then the key here, and this is almost the genesis of team calm in some senses is the world for communicating agents is other communicating agents.

And it's a deceptively simple conclusion or claim

because it's one thing when you have the person in feedback with the world that makes it, it's kind of, I'm thinking about Tom Hanks playing ping pong against a wall.

It's him, he's in feedback, it's a dynamical system, but the fixedness of his opponent makes the moves that he makes very, very specified and easy to determine.

Whereas once you even get two,

that are communicating and they have different attention, they're paying attention to different things because they have different internal models, all of a sudden you get these totally novel and improvisational dynamics that they call thinking through other minds.

Any thoughts on this?


SPEAKER_05:
That was a really great Tom Hanks ping pong metaphor though.


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, it would be that easy if you were just typing to a chat box and then it just copied and pasted exactly what you wrote back.

For example, it wouldn't be quite a conversation.

And then you could imagine speaking to a chat bot or something like that.

And maybe attention is playing out differently on the computer versus in your brain.

So the internal states are different.

But again, we kind of already knew that the action states are different.

The point is the shared epistemic resources.

So the epistemic being related to the knowledge.

The cues for the chat box, what time the message was sent or who the person who sent it was, the cues and the resources are a shared resource.

They're a shared niche.

And then each of those agents, depending on which sense states make it to their regime of attention,

are going to update their action policies in a different way.

And so one other thing I really like about this framework for communication is it highlights the necessity and the importance of alignment, but not perfect alignment.

It actually as a starting place takes that different people are going to be coming from different perspectives.

It's not that there's one correct interpretation of what person A says.

And if person B gets it perfectly, they succeed.

And if they don't get it perfectly, they failed.

It's kind of an absolutist notion of communication.

And here, we take a really fully pluralist approach to communication, where you have two communicating agents.

They have different internal models of the world.

And the communication is happening in this world that they share, in the informational and in the physical niche that they share.

And it's actually an action-oriented interaction that the agents are engaged in that's happening as their very different internal models are aligning.

And so it highlights the process of alignment without being too hard on the need for a perfect alignment.

And that just in so many situations is a helpful starting point about where am I at in this conversation?

Where is my conversant in this conversation?

How are we going to align?

What is this alignment for?

Any thoughts here?


SPEAKER_02:
Let me try to add about maybe about actions because as for this model and everything is about the alignment of the models and actions are like not side effects but not a primary one.

For example, if a team or a company speaking about planning actions

some kind of strategies or something like this.

Basically, it's again about alignments.

And that's why if a company or team wants to develop something or make some research, it's a need to planning recursively, not from actions, but from models and alignments.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah and to kind of give an example of that if we were uh working together on a team to build a car the goal isn't to align on what the perfect car would be the goal is the action of actually making that car happen and that's going to require us to synchronize on mental states but also contribute our unique skills and perspectives

And then to give one more example about action, declarative speech is an action.

It's a motor behavior.

It has to do with the way that muscles move.

So speech is an action.

This is one action that results in sound, clapping.

but they're body actions that result in different cues.

And so placing speech fundamentally as an action state, it helps us get away from this.

Well, you have acts and then you have speech.

But of course, there are speech acts and speech is an action.

And in pure conversation where the feedback is happening through conversation, it gives us that same action oriented

model that we can apply to non-linguistic systems.

And now we're thinking about speech as an action in a communicating system.

So we can really build on the strengths of linguistics, like Jared was talking about, without overly making it about the specifics of any human communication style or even a cultural communication style.

Because speech is, again, just one of the many multifaceted ways that we share information and that we call people's attention to different features of the world.

Any thoughts on figure two or anything else?

Any questions?

Yeah, Stefan.


SPEAKER_03:
I think this is also good for bringing action into what language is about.

Like action is out there in amongst the world as part of sort of interacting with, rather than it being these representations in the minds that codify everything.

So I think it's quite...

It's quite useful to see that and see the world in the background.

So yeah, one thing I find, in some ways, I'd almost be interested to see if there was a triad here to see how that would play out, because that might really bring that out.

But it is interesting that the descriptions you were given there

how things are unfolding.

And I haven't quite unpacked all the equations, but I think there's something useful in, like, there's something about the systemic resources are more like general complex adaptive systems, which maybe aren't entirely salient, but are kind of there interacting and bouncing off each other.

And the more internal stuff is much more noisy, non-linear.

And it's a sort of attunement between entities in the environment bouncing with each other.

And our kind of non-linear kind of free energy, trying to understand what's that all about by minimizing free energy.

So I think this is actually quite, there's quite a lot that can be played around with.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Um, yeah, I agree about the, the getting more than two actors so that we can imagine another yellow box up here and through action states it's contributing to the epistemic resource and we can be super specific.

Let's think about this video chat.

So the action states are what people are speaking about and the sensory states are happening to me through my eyes as I look at the screen and through my ears as I'm listening and

Through the sensations that I'm receiving, I'm updating the regime of attention.

When I see a little cue, an ostentative cue, like a little blue box around the speaker, that's putting my attention to not just where I should be looking, but conceptually what I should be paying attention to.

And then it also relates to the hermeneutics idea that Jared was bringing up.

And so I'm imagining this epistemic resource, our shared informational niche is we're all seeing basically the same six boxes on our screen.

Our shared informational resources are identical and we can in a computer system even know that they're identical, but each one of us are gonna unpack

in a different way what is being said.

And so it's like, the book's on the table.

And someone says, the meaning is in the book.

Well, it's not technically in the book.

It's not physically contained in the book.

That's a spatial metaphor that it's in the book.

And so where is the meaning?

Well, if the meaning is in the relationship between the regime of attention and the shared epistemic resources, well, then you get almost pluralism for free.

you get this idea that different people are going to, by looking into the book in their own unique way, they're going to unpack the book differently.

Maybe one person doesn't read the language.

And so the book doesn't reduce their uncertainty about anything.

But for someone else who's very familiar with the work of the author,

potentially they can read between the lines and even see things or unpack things in the book that aren't directly there.

And so we get all these amazing special cases and richness of communication coming out within this scaffold.

And so again, just to go from figure one,

where, okay, this is just the minimal possible active inference cycle, just external states, internal states, and then the Markov blanket is being pierced on the inbound by sense and being pierced on the outbound by action.

Let's just zoom one layer out.

Now we're looking at the dyad.

And also we can just say the dyad's not just there dissipating energy for nothing.

They're communicating to align on something.

We're here to reduce our uncertainty about this paper and about the free energy principle, about active inference, as well as other goals.

All of this is already starting to come out just as we qualitatively look at it.

I agree that the mathematics of complex adaptive systems and free energy principle provide a lot of those non-linear dynamics that we would want to see for a formal communicative framework.

I think it's a good time to show figure three.

This is the last figure in this sequence of three.

So here, we're kind of just specifying again, just drawing out again this communication between two brains.

And it's one canonical loop of the coupled action perception cycle.

We're keeping in mind it's always happening continuously and we're just going to trace out one loop.

It's kind of like we inject a little dye into the river.

We're just going to look at the trace as it goes just through one small part to get a bigger sense about the flow.

So it starts with my idea and my idea is going to influence my behavior.

that my behavior is going to fill out or pour into that epistemic niche.

My behavior in this case is a vocal behavior.

And then through our shared informational niche, my behavior is going to result, I mean, this arrow, you can imagine putting in other steps, intermediating here, like going through the ear and going through this cortex and that cortex, but just broadly,

My behavior will result in your version of my idea.

I said, grab a gallon of milk and you got it.

OK, I got it.

A gallon of milk.

Your version of my idea is going to result in combination.

This is the X. Your ideas and your version of my idea come together and that is going to influence your behavior.

then we're back right where we started where your behavior is going to say ah okay right they said exactly the thing that i wanted from the grocery store back to me so their behavior suggested that the attentional regime was there that the semantic content of what i wanted to convey was there i'm pretty convinced that my understanding of what you thought i said was accurate

AKA the alignment was adequate, doesn't need to be perfect, but for the purposes of that communication, the alignment was adequate.

And then my ideas and how I perceived your perception of them combined again in the generative model of the brain, and that's going to influence behavior.

I say, okay, great.

Glad you got it.

Here's five bucks.

Go ahead and do this.

So this is just tracing one loop, but already we get so many of these cool patterns and ways to think about how different sources of prior information, like my idea, your idea, relate to the just in time information that we receive.

Everyone has years and years and years of their own thinking.

And then someone says, hey, what do you think about this policy?

and they're combining this recent sensory information from the person asking the question with a really big and rich sensory or generative model of the world and so we we can capture that short-term information as well as these deeper developmental and evolutionary aspects of of thought together in this type of a model and again it's just a wireframe but

what does this lead anyone to think about or what might be a uncertainty that some of our listeners would have about this figure one, two, three sequence?

Yeah, Shannon.


SPEAKER_05:
I suppose in this figure one, two, three sequence, um,

everything seems like this event right now and what's left out is this iterative process.

So like going through these chains of language learners and as you get to the end, you might get a simple construction by the time you get to the end or chains of interactions between people where

my idea is continuously being just slightly adjusted by your version of my idea, which slightly adjusts each other node in this figure until we as a dyad sort of start to align on the sort of final state or something of our interaction, which is brought up a lot in the paper, but it's not super clear just from seeing these three figures sort of in a sequence.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Anyone else there?

Maybe Sasha, how do you think this relates to improvisation or where improvisation takes interactors?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I quite like this figure.

Adding the extra or kind of the next logical step that it's about not just how I'm expressing my idea, but what is your version of the idea that I'm expressing?

And

Yeah, I think it's very relevant for improvisation.

And I'm just thinking of context-specific clues that we get from iterative interactions.

And I'm thinking almost like a secret language, that you'd be able to speak in code

once you did it once to the person, you would know what these words mean kind of going forward.

But as Shannon mentioned, that wouldn't be captured in this figure precisely or explicitly.

But to know that when you're in this location, you call something by a secret code name.

These are the kinds of things that are really important for communication that wouldn't make sense in another context or place in your life.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

One other thought, and I wouldn't quite characterize active inference as an optimistic theory.

I don't know if it's optimistic or not, but what I really like as far as a starting point for our often discordant world is it starts from a notion that everybody has a unique perspective and through shared resources, they're coming into alignment.

And that's why we need intercultural communication and nonviolent communication, all these types of ideas.

Whereas the other way to think about communication would be somebody has the true idea of what this ism is.

Socialism is X. And if this person has the true one or this book has the true one, and then those who diverge from it, it's an error term.

And so instead of thinking about an absolutely correct idea and then divergence that different individuals have, whether a person is the one who holds the absolute truth or whether no one has the absolute truth and everybody's deep in the error term, we can just think about meeting people where they are, starting with the states that people actually have instead of starting from some hypothesized perfect state and then trying to bring people into alignment there.

I think it's just a very helpful idea and the secret language and the intermodal to kind of put one more finish on that.

If somebody puts their scare quotes on the video with their fingers, which is a nonverbal cue that suggests I'm using this term ironically, or it could mean different things,

But importantly, it might mean different things in different cultures.

So one might want to be very careful when they're using nonverbal or secret or culturally specific cues, because if someone's not looking at your video square the second that you make those scare quotes, or you lag out for a second in the context of online communication,

your semantic content will not update their model appropriately.

They may think that you're saying something that's quite the opposite of what you intended to say.

And so a lot of the times when people are talking about how to improve the communication throughput in online meetings,

And there's distraction.

That's kind of the opposite of attention.

There's all these issues that confront online meetings and online teams.

And people will say, well, use the body language and use nonverbal cues.

And yes, it's important to use those to the extent you can.

But also within this framework, we can already start to think about some cases where maybe that wouldn't help as much as we thought.

especially when we're in the challenging communication contexts like low bandwidth or different language speakers.

These are the communication scenarios where we actually want to have useful theory.

We don't just want to describe the easy low-hanging fruit of two people who are twins and speak the same language and read the same books.

We want to talk about the professor who's speaking with a child about math, and we want to get them together on the same vocabulary.

Those are the communication scenarios that really are meaningful to explore, and the ones that are so natural to this skeleton, but are not as easy to model in other frameworks.

Any other thoughts on this?

Yeah, Stefan?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I think it's also, like you just mentioned, the fact that they say canonical, like this feels like it makes more sense for deductive thinking that you're trying to align, because just having the brain there, obviously that kind of sort of, it's in this kind of

slightly disembodied slight way and so okay i have a deducted idea and then okay what is that and this this could make sense now if we're gonna ground it more in like my state or my embodied um feeling about something more generally if i'm working in a more iterative sort of inductive way or trying to sort of feel the situation abductively i don't know if this

probably would be quite how I would maybe one of the other diagrams is more appropriate.

But this may be the idea that an idea pops out, which would probably be a deontic or deductive, like, here's a new equation.

And now it's like, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, imagine it being a bit more schematic like this.


SPEAKER_00:
nice agreed and um the five e's uh that are sometimes brought up in these papers inactive embodied and cultured all these ways that go beyond just idea teleporting into another idea that is uh it's not even like that's the payload of communication it's just we can come at it from the other side by thinking okay what are the bodies doing what is actually being perceived in that embodied

setting and then, yeah, the ideas are there, but we could just as well have had two stick figures instead of two brains because or we could have had a stick figure over here for my behavior or mouth or something.

So let's go to figure four and five, which are closer to empirical figures.

And these are specifically in the context of birdsong.

So here's the upper part of figure four.

And

What is happening here?

Anyone want to just describe what they see when they look at this?

Well, on the x-axis of these diagrams, yeah, Sasha, go ahead.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so this is looking at birdsong improvisation and sound is a really nice way to do that because you can have a kind of a dimensional reduction and look at just the outgoing sounds instead of trying to analyze like body posture and interaction, which is quite challenging.

And when

birds sing together versus singing alone.

We might imagine that we could take the two of them singing alone and average it out or something like that.

That could be one possible outcome of when we put them together.

And then the other outcomes are that they improvise and create something completely different.

that isn't just the average of the two agents.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

So from the caption, it says, two birds endowed with prior expectations about the hidden states generating a shared bird song narrative.

And I love that they called the shared bird song a narrative.

The way that it works, it says, sing for two seconds and then listen for a response.

So that's why on the x-axis here where we have time in seconds, you have one, two in blue, and then listen for a response.

One, two, listen for a response.

The posterior expectations, so that's after the priors have been updated, what you get are posteriors.

The posterior expectations for the first bird are shown in red, and expectations for the second bird are shown in blue, both as a function of time.

The left panel shows the chaotic and uncoupled dynamics when the birds cannot hear each other, while the right panel shows the synchrony in the hidden states that emerges when the birds exchange sensory signals.

So the left image is kind of like two people, they're in two recording studios that are separated, they can't hear each other, and they're both singing a song.

It's a call and response song.

And under the model or the ecosystem where they're not sharing a shared informational niche, they're in two isolated recording studios, there would be no expectation that the turn taking would happen.

If someone took off their headphones and just was talking randomly, there'd be no expectation of turn taking.

In fact, it'd be quite impossible.

And so in this singing alone, like singing alone with two of the birds who are both singing to themselves,

You see that there's basically, there's strong discordances where the one bird is like, okay, I'm gonna sing now.

And the other one's like, I'm gonna sing now.

And also just, I think this is more of a schematic, but let's just think about this as like a prefrontal cortex.

This is where the higher order thought is happening.

And then this is like a motor cortex.

This is where the speech is being generated between the more basal regions of the brain and the more cognitive elements.

So on this left side, we have the bird is singing.

It's deciding when to sing and also listening for a response, but it's not hearing any response.

So it's uncoupled.

You get uncoordinated dynamics.

However, when you allow for the birds to sing together, you see that they can synchronize so that they can actually communicate.

And really importantly, it's not enough just to have the two singers in the same recording studio or have them listening to the same sounds.

They actually have to have priors that they want to strive towards alignment.

Because if someone says, yeah, yeah, yeah, this is a turn-taking song, but I don't care about that.

Well, then you're also going to get the emergence of uncoordinated behavior.

So you need the sensory coupling, which takes place through the shared informational niche and the adaptive prior that the person or the bird that you're communicating with is an agent like you who also wants to synchronize because that's the cooperative part.

If you're prior about your conversant,

is that they don't want to synchronize or that they're not going to synchronize, well, then you might not synchronize with them.

You might not give them the opening to synchronize.

So when we start from this place of cooperative communication, that means we're going to need that sense coming to the person appropriately so that they can turn take.

But then at an internal generative model level, we also want to have this deep prior about our communication that we want to synchronize.

And so a lot of the later work after this paper has gone into this more about how individuals who just want to believe or want to reduce uncertainty about a higher order entity that they belong to, that is what can actually lead to group formation.

So this is a really interesting concept.

Thoughts on the top half of figure four, or can we jump to the bottom of figure four?

Cool, so here we are on the bottom of figure four.

And on these plots, the x-axis is the second level expectations, which is like what you expect to be hearing.

The first level I believe is referring to what, like my first level expectations of my speech are just what I'm generating.

Whereas the second level expectations is what do they think, what do I think that my conversant is getting?

And so on the x-axis of both of these plots are the second level expectations of the first bird, and the y-axis is the second level expectations of the second bird.

So here, what's being communicated is a number between negative 20 and 60, but it's just a number line.

So how many, or what's the price of oil today?

Negative 20 to 60.

We're trying to reduce our uncertainty about this shared niche.

And what we're seeing is,

um we can just go to the right side first the y equals x line this one to one line would mean the second level expectations of the first bird is negative 10 and the second bird got negative 10. so this line represents points on this line represent where there's an alignment of communication because the expectations of the first bird are aligned with the expectations of the second bird and

we can see it really clearly on this right side when they're synchronized, that whether the value being communicated is negative 10 or whether it's 50 or 60, it's a dynamical system.

So we're still getting a trace that kind of flows above and beyond the line, but we're spending most of our time in alignment about what is being said.

But if we go back to this isolated case where there's no sensory coupling and there's no ability for even if there were a deep prior that said, I want to be aligned with another bird, we're spending as much time off of this Y equals X line as we are spending near it because the birds are just uncoordinated in their singing.

And so this is just showing this is what happens when you don't have alignment, and this is what happens when you have synchronization.

And a manifold is a lower dimensional line, let's just go with for now, that is a dimensional compression from a higher dimension.

So the points are in very higher dimensional space, but when you put them down on the two-dimensional piece of paper, it makes a parabola.

Or in this case, it's a higher dimensional space of two dimensions.

the expectations of the two birds, yet it exists, or at least converges towards this one dimensional manifold, which is just a line representing from negative 20 to 60, what the actual communicated state is.

So this is just another, a phase space, dynamical representation of what alignment looks like in the uncoordinated case.

And then in the coordinated case where you have sensory coupling and those deep priors for alignment.

Any thoughts on this one?

Cool, let's just go to five so that we can finish the figures and have any last thoughts.

Okay, anyone wanna take a first stab on figure five?

What is being communicated here?

So in the caption of the figure, it writes, A shows changes in the posterior expectations of an order parameter for the first bird in blue and a second bird in green, determining the chaotic structure of the songs depicted in figure four.

And it's as a function of the number of exchanges.

So here, the x-axis isn't the time in seconds with the two seconds of singing, two seconds of listening.

That two seconds of singing and listening, we're going to condense that into one exchange.

So now we're kind of thinking in that iterated way.

So we're starting to get towards iterated communication here by condensing through time and almost looking at Kairos rather than Kronos.

And then we have this value of an order parameter.

And yes, so we have an order parameter.

And what we see is that the order parameter starts off high.

Again, the green and the blue are the two birds.

And the green bird is starting

starts higher organization in both of these traces, the more dim one, the learning alone, which is these two dimmer traces.

And the line represents the mean of these simulations.

And the shaded area represents the 90% Bayesian confidence intervals, just to clarify that.

So we can start up here.

This green bird starts at perfectly ordered.

And then the blue bird starts at 0.5.

So a little bit more disordered.

Maybe this is like a mentoring relationship between a more encultured bird and a younger bird who's ontogenetically learning how to communicate.

And what we see is that when we have the ability to learn together, that the order parameter stays high and we can actually increase the order of disordered agents.

So for example, if five of us had a really good internet connection and one person was lagging a lot,

through cues, we could help order the person's communication even if they had lack.

However, if we learn alone, then the order parameter, even though it starts very high for the green bird and a medium for the blue bird, in both cases, you get this exponential decay so that after 30 bouts, so 30 times 4 seconds, 30 exchanges, 30 choruses,

you have zero correlation.

The order parameter is zero because they started out like partially synchronized just by happenstance.

Like you told the two singers and the two different recording studios, okay, start singing.

And initially they started just by coincidence synchronized, but rapidly that decays and it decays monotonically.

There's no chance they're ever gonna recoup alignment because they're not coordinated.

But again, if you are coordinated, you can learn together.

And just like Sasha was saying, when you have improvisation and feedback, it's not just that the green parameter stays at one and the blue one converges toward it.

It's actually that the two converge together and they meet in the middle, which is just so reflective of communication.

And we're getting this just from Birdsong.

This isn't at the semantic level.

This isn't at any other higher order level.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_04:
This also makes me think of like, you know, the two birds teaching each other the song or coming to a kind of more ordered state and mentoring relationships as well as teams.

And while I think people kind of intuitively understand that there's going to be some sort of meeting in the middle, linguistically to describe it,

but how to rise to that highest order and how to converge on something that is more ordered and not drop down to something that is less ordered, I think is an interesting question for teens and maybe is a little more straightforward in like a teaching relationship where one person is quite fixed and both people know that that's the fixed point to rise to from the student's perspective.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And it's kind of like when we say everybody can learn from everyone.

Even if one person's knowledge base totally encompasses someone else's knowledge base, at the very least, we're learning how to communicate.

We're learning how to learn.

So really, we can honestly say everyone can learn from every interaction with every person.

And now we have a framework to really go into that.

Let's just close it out with

five B and C. So this is reminiscent of figure four, where again, we have the expectations.

Here are the second level and expectations of the first bird, and then the expectations of that second bird.

And again, we have this Y equals X manifold that would reflect

points on the line being in perfect attunement, where the first bird is expecting to communicate 40 and the second bird's expectation is also 40.

So that's the alignment of the internal models through coupled communication and a deep prior that you want to align.

And what we see is that before learning, so now we're going to be talking about this learning together trace.

So before learning is here.

So before learning,

It's not as wacky as figure four was, where these are like all over the place.

It's truly uncorrelated.

It's like a cloud of points.

Here, we're starting with a partial ordering.

The green order parameters one, the blue order parameters 0.5.

So this oval is halfway between perfect

and random.

And there's some math that we could go into, but not today.

But it starts off partially organized.

And you need to kind of start from a place of partial organization for communication.

And that's actually granted by evolution.

And the synchronization manifold before learning gets tightened to the synchronization after learning, where the parameters have been improved so that now the birds are in improved alignment.

Yeah, Stefan?

Is your hand raised?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, sorry.

I was just trying to... Yeah.

No, I just thought one thing was interesting and the other is the more experienced birds, it's like there's still a slight dip in their coordination as they learn, as they... You know, in their kind of...

Maybe there's a trade-off.

The green one still goes down a bit.

Is there maybe a sense that you need to relax a little bit of the rigidity of the pattern to enable...

some compromise of some sort.

I'm not exactly sure they came up with the way that that that model works.

But that is that I just noticed that I thought that's kind of interesting there that there's a slip in that.

And maybe that's just a degradation of degradation over time, it just happens.

But there seems to be something about that ability to relax the rigidity of the model that you use.


SPEAKER_00:
Totally agreed.

And I'm thinking of a math setting where the equations are in the textbook.

And then one person might be very familiar with them.

One person has less familiarity.

So the green person is teaching math with the blue person.

And it's not teaching two.

That's that absolutist idea.

They're in a shared alignment.

They want to align around a proper understanding of math.

But the teacher person still has to be ready to address unexpected questions from a student, which may be extremely valid and actually push the field forward by leaps and bounds by bringing that beginner's mind to the equations.

And if nothing else, the teacher might have to resort to some informal metaphors or say, well, this parameter wants to do this.

That's kind of, if you just think about it from the textbook's perspective, it reflects a divergence of that order parameter, but it's being used towards this higher end, which is the shared alignment on the concepts.

And so, yeah, very interesting.

And I wonder about that too.

And maybe that's reflected by initially the blue line takes a larger excursion away from order, but then it then converges a little bit more.

So that's like when you have a first conversation with somebody and it's like, so where are we coming from?

You're taking more of an excursion towards disorder to be more in the explore phase.

And then once you have a better sense about where the person is coming from, you can enter into a more exploit type phase.

i think that's um almost all for our time and that's all the figures of the paper so on a closing page just if anyone wanted to share um a closing thought or if they wanted to share a question that they had an idea or a future experiment so anyone feel free to jump in or raise your hand


SPEAKER_02:
I just want to say an idea what you should never sing alone.


SPEAKER_00:
Is it a Russian proverb?

Yes, well, singing alone could be nice.

I mean, solo performance can be beautiful.

And it makes me think about the seeing the national anthem, which is often done with a solo performance.

They might do a little bit of more vocal flair or they might draw out a certain thing that would totally disrupt the if multiple people were trying to sing it.

But when one person is doing it, they can have a lot more artistic license.

But if you're in a choir context where it has to be synchronized,

You can't just say, well, today I'm going to sing it this way.

It's not going to sound good.

Um, and so there's, there's, there's maybe times to sing alone, but it's not singing together to sing alone.

That's for sure.


SPEAKER_05:
But are they singing alone?

I mean, if you're performing, you're singing, performing for, so you're engaging with an audience of some sort or a recording studio, which still has an implied audience.


SPEAKER_00:
Very true.

And they have a paper, this figure five caption, it's a duet for one.

And so I think that the joke there is it's one dyad.

It's a conversation for one.

This is a conversation for one shared Markov blanket.

It's a conversation for one informational niche.

It's one team comm.

It's one conversation that's happening.

It's not six conversations.

But there are six perspectives happening.

And so that's where I find active inference to be such a powerful framework, because it helps us really give full value and cognition to six unique perspectives coming together to one shared niche.

And so one fallacy would be, well, six shared perspectives means there's no way we're going to synchronize.

That's a little bit too defeatist.

And then the other alternative would be, well, because there's one informational niche,

there's only one conversation, and if you don't get it, then you're not with a picture.

And that's also not right.

But somewhere in the middle, we can have a shared niche and our own perspectives.

Sash?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, just to close it out with the meta connection, with the

words, teaching each other how to sing and coming to a higher understanding.

We're trying to come to a higher understanding of active inference.

And it was really great to have the first author of the paper here to kind of align us and set the order.

So that was really nice.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Yep.

He provided context to what we discussed.

And so it was very, very nice to have Jared come through.

Any other thoughts?

Great, well, that concludes Team Calm podcast number three.

I really appreciate all of our participants as well as all of our listeners.

And we really are interested in staying engaged on these topics and hearing people's feedback.

We wanna be really inclusive and engaging with how we're talking about these topics from conceptual perspectives and more.

So please be in touch with us

And we will have this every two weeks.

So we really look forward to participating with many of you soon.

And I'm going to terminate this live stream.

Thanks again, everybody, for participating and listening.

## ijuxHfPDd3U

SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to Team Calm, ACT-INF stream number 3.5.

This is a follow-up discussion from number three, A World Unto Itself.

And welcome, everybody.

So thanks again to Yvonne and Alex for coming to this discussion.

And thanks to Shannon for coming again.

Hi, everyone.

Cool, I'm gonna share our slides and we'll get right into it.

This is TeamComm 3.5.

Welcome to TeamComm for our first time or not first time listeners.

This is a recorded and archived live stream.

We as TeamComm are an experiment in online team communication and learning related to active inference.

You can reach us through Twitter, email, our public Keybase team or our YouTube channel.

We welcome all skills, backgrounds, and perspectives.

And we ask for our conversions to use good online video chat etiquette, to be respectful, muting and raising your hands.

And also everyone, please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

Today in Active Inference stream number 3.5, which is a follow-up to number 3 discussing the same paper, we're going to have a quick check-in and warm-up as usual.

And then we'll return to our discussion of the paper.

And we've...

a bunch of follow-up questions from ourselves and some colleagues, and we've sorted them loosely into a couple of categories.

And we'll be able to take questions about any topic, but the slides are somewhat organizing the questions into topics of communication, development, attunement, attention, and free energy itself.

So as far as the check-in and warm-up, the first question is, what is an interesting type of communication you've experienced or maybe even thought about in the previous week?


SPEAKER_04:
For me, it was a meeting with my relatives that I didn't have a chance to see about for half a year before because of COVID and so on.

So this last weekend was quite a happy meeting with relatives and some kind of discussion and so attunement between us after a long time.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And maybe either Yvonne or Shannon in related to that answer, how has going remote or just this situation of the past year influenced your style of communication or relating?


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

So yesterday we had our first meeting of our graduate student group and we had about 40 people in one zoom room.

And after a whole summer of seeing maybe four or five different faces,

on a screen and being able to make pseudo eye contact with whoever you're talking to.

Yesterday was a bit of a bombardment of like visual sensory information, like searching for the person who was speaking and trying to tune out like the extra movements or drinks of a water bottle or like someone's pet on screen while also trying to pay attention to if someone had like a nod or raise their actual physical hand in a video.

It was definitely an adjustment.

I was a lot more conscious of all of the interactions of everyone on the screen than I would have been had we been in a room in person.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, there's big differences between being with three people in a room and and 40 people in a room.

And so it shouldn't be surprising that there's differences between the kind of smaller video chat that we're having here and then the larger scale rooms.

But it's really hard to stay on top of everything when we don't get the full information.

And then I guess a last general question.

What is something that is new that you've experienced or learned about this week?

If anyone has thoughts, or we can just continue.

Ivan?


SPEAKER_01:
I can tell that in our company we have frequent meetings.

Each Monday morning we discuss about work issues.

This week I saw that the meeting goes different when different number of people involved in this meeting.

And it's very interesting why

People who are absent now, how do they influence the meeting?

And maybe they don't know about the influence while they are absent.


SPEAKER_00:
Interesting, yeah, with organizations, people can have influence whether they're in the room or not.

So sometimes the communication ecology of the meeting room includes like people who are in a different room fundamentally,

And then also because communication is so non-additive, it's non-linear, if you have a certain outcome with person A, B, C, and they have a dance party, and then you take away person C and there's no dance party, that doesn't mean that person C is the dance party.

It just means there's some sort of emergent outcome with the three people who were there, and there's a different emergent outcome when somebody isn't there.

So how do we deal with that, this non-linearity of communication?

And maybe even this paper might have some ideas.

So we are continuing our discussion of Vaisal et al.

2020, A World Unto Itself, Human Communication as Active Inference.

And last time in our stream number three, we went over the goals, the abstract, the figures, and a few of the big ideas of the paper.

Welcome, Sasha.

This time, we're going to be asking some follow-up questions and having continued discussion about the paper.

And so our first topic will be communication.

And these were compiled questions from a bunch of people who submitted them to us or some things that we wanted to address in the first stream but didn't get a chance.

So anyone is welcome to pop in with whatever they want to say about one of the questions or follow up with an additional question.

But we'll just release them one by one so we can stay at least on topic with what we're talking about.

Oh, maybe not here.

Let's go to the first one.

So I think this was, Alex, your question.

There's cooperative, competitive or adversarial communication, and there's other kinds of communication, too, possibly.

So what are the kinds of communication that can be identified and how?

What made you ask this question or what would be interesting to know about this?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, because the paper that we are reading is about cooperative communication and everything is about it.

But also it mentioned that it's possible and it's really true that it's possible that communication could be competitive in some situation between two people, between teams.

And the question is what other types could be to be identified, maybe some kind of mix of these two types.

And in case when communication is happening, how it is possible maybe to understand if it's really cooperative or it's changed in competitive in some moment.


SPEAKER_00:
Great question.

And is cooperative communication about the ends?

If it results in cooperative behavior, is that cooperative communication or does cooperative communication entail turn-taking and feeling of cooperation?

Because the feeling of cooperation and turn-taking can be hijacked or used non-cooperatively, let's just say.

And then the sort of all's well that ends well approach might excuse some extremely inappropriate communication mechanics in service of a cooperative end goal.

But who's cooperative end goal and how are they defining that?

So it's a big question.

Like, do we define communication by the mechanism and the details of the conversation itself?

Or do we define it by the context?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

So if you consider it from some, again, from an engineering point, we need to have some kind of approaches to manage communication and to control it during its way to have predicted or expected results from it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And I think that the general message passing or information sharing frameworks are almost broader than cooperation itself.

The communication outline that's in active inference could be between a person and a tiger.

And that whether it's cooperative or not, could be kind of a lens that you apply to it.

But the signals are certainly moving between the communicating agents, whether they think they're cooperating or they actually are.

So communication is sort of the fundamental.

And then all these other adjectives get layered on top, depending on how we think about that kind of communication.

Any other thoughts on that first part?

So if somebody wants to, they can always jump back or add non sequiturs, but we'll continue.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I want to add briefly and then thinking in the context of long term collaboration, it seems that communication would have to have signs of cooperativity at every stage along the way because there is no end that is obvious or

you know, if you want a long term collaboration, you don't want it to end because of a miscommunication.

And how to focus on that kind of positive feedback without sinking into kind of the superficial signs of cooperation of where people simply feel that it is cooperative.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

Good point.

This second quote speaks to that a little bit.

It says, a single individual is necessary to obtain a low risk and low reward.

And then collaboration appears as a riskier but more rewarding option.

So this is kind of within that prisoner's dilemma type game theory where individuals are, whether it's individual cells or eagles or birds or some other thing, it's being phrased as a question of action for the individual, whether they want to go their own way, whether that's considered defecting or it's just the baseline state to be individuated and obtain with a higher probability, a smaller reward.

Like I could work for $10 an hour by myself.

Or collaboration opens the door to potentially win-win collaborations where you make on average more than $10 an hour because you worked with multiple people and you allowed your specialization and your perspectives to contribute to a shared value.

However, it may be the case that this

collaboration is also riskier.

And so I think, Alex, again, you asked, what types of risk can be identified in a communicative setting?

And how could we quantify such risks, especially if we were going to quantify them using the way of thinking of active inference?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

Again, it's about, for me,

if we speak about collaboration and collaboration is based on communication and first risk is not to have alignment at the end of communication but what possible kind of risks could be arised additionally for example to take

wrong direction for communication and maybe if such kind of list could be prepared if there are any possible way to quantify it in terms of active inference framework and in terms I don't know maybe some kind of epistemic values or something like this


SPEAKER_02:
To have a bit of an addition to that, to bring it back to FEP and minimization of uncertainty, how do we determine kind of a good enough alignment, like something that is appropriate for the goal?

Because you could imagine that there's collaborations where you don't feel very aligned, but it's a low stakes situation at the start.

And at the end, you feel that your values or goals weren't really aligned, but you still did the task that you were trying to do.

And perhaps that's not the best case scenario, but it's a realistic one.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And de-risking communication.

So for example, and there's many kinds of risks that can be identified.

So maybe I'll start with that.

Like there's the risk that you end up trusting somebody who ends up leaking your information or directly causing an action to you or to a project that is deleterious.

Somebody who causes your time to be spent inefficiently.

There's all these kinds of risks of

of biting off a bigger chunk with the help of the team, but then the chunk that you bite off is the wrong one, or you fail to bite off the chunk if it is the right one.

And then how do we quantify such roots?

I like that idea, Alex, of sort of like a checklist manifesto, but from the active inference potential applications and asking,

More specifically, what kinds of things can we discuss as a team that reduce our uncertainty about this and this and this?

And I think that's definitely one of the directions we're moving.

So maybe we can keep that kind of question in mind and think about what are these best practices for teams at the onset or in the middle or in the closing of even a little phase of their collaboration

What are these questions or provocations that teams could take on that would de-risk their communication and improve the throughput potentially in a way that could be lending itself towards being formalized?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I have a thought on that.

This kind of sounds like the Grice's maxims where what you say like in communication, one maxim is like relevance.

It needs to be relevant to

the conversation or to whatever you're referring to.

And I think it's either quantity or quality where you need to say just enough that your message gets across, but not too much.

And this is like also something that you're inferring on your communicative partner.


SPEAKER_00:
Very cool, I looked up these Grice's maxims, G-R-I-C-E is the last name, and the four of them, just to clarify.

The maxim of quantity, which is be as informative as you possibly can without any more information than needed.

The maxim of quality, which is being truthful and not giving information that's false or not supported by evidence.

The maxim of relation, where one tries to be relevant and say things that are pertinent to discussion.

And then the maxim of manner is the fourth and last one, where one tries to be clear, brief, and orderly without obscurity or ambiguity.

So these are really interesting.

It reminds me of the truth, the whole truth, nothing but the truth from the justice system.

And also these are great reminders in all sorts of communication.

especially ones that are potentially recorded or for consumption, where the kinds of vocal pauses that are played off as irrelevancies in conversation become magnified a lot.

And good public speaking is a challenge because having these cognitive maxims at the top of our mind prevents us

from thinking the topic itself, unless it's a situation, thankfully, where you're talking about the maxims themselves.

So it's hard to speak directly and with high relevantness and quality and quantity when all these other things are happening.

So very interesting connection there.

And it would be a way to de-risk communication by using these maxims.

So third point here.

Communicative constructions, we'll just use CC, are patterned pairings of form and meaning.

Could we formally join communicative constructions with narrative and ontologies?

Or what other kinds of CC could we use?


SPEAKER_04:
yeah as for this question is communicative construction looks like a well-developed area and it's defines pairing of forms and meaning so it could be different forms and it's always i think connect to some meaning and as we develop in our our

directions and discusses narratives and ontologies if we'll find a way to join it with communicative construction and define it this way it could be more useful to discuss with other parties so and the next step is what other types of construction could we see or define or find else to be

formal so we could use it in a more efficient way.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice.

It reminds me of just regular constructions and there are specific kinds of constructions.

There's bridges and doorways and all these things and sometimes there's overlap or there's an object that's a chair and a bridge because you can sit on it but the point is they're still constructed and so

when we're talking about communicative constructs like turn-taking or these other, like what is a bridge for communication?

What are these constructs that are not just there in nature waiting to be discovered, but what are these constructs that we're going to implement in the world, ideally to get from here to there, to get from not knowing to knowing?

And what are these constructs?

And what would be an ontology or a framework for the knowledge to discuss these kinds of constructs?

Instead of just saying, well, it's a discussion.

There's no more detail I can provide than it's a discussion.

Are there types of discussion?

Are there types of dialogue that might be able to be more useful in one place or another?

Just like a bridge would make sense here, but not here.

So cool question.

And then last question on the communication slide.

There was a note about diversification of communicative systems across time, space, and speaker communities, as well as species, we could add.

Which communication systems can be identified in relationship to teams and organizations?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, and again for me it's open question and trying to see perspective to have this approach to describe possible way and possible communication systems what could be useful for teams and organization.

And here as we see is related to time and space.

And so it could be about time scales and organization also could be possible like space and could be present in different countries.

So we still need to have options to communicate and so define system in use for it.

So it's directions for future development of our work.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Any other notes on that?

Just from the chat, and this was in response, I believe, to something that Sasha mentioned about how good is good enough for the team.

RJ wrote, because there are opportunities for signal error, can the longevity of cooperation be assessed by goodness of fit between self-reporting of participants' concerns about risk of miscommunication?

And so this is a pretty meta comment.

It's asking instead of a let's say an annual progress checkup on how happy or how satisfied.

And if the satisfaction is going up, then it's getting better.

If the satisfaction is going down, it's getting worse.

This is like asking the participants to self-report on their perception of them.

risk of miscommunication.

And so you could ask the employee, how well do you think the communication channel is between you and your supervisor or vice versa?

And then by potentially maintaining the longevity of the group, which is a success in and of itself because of the many opportunities for failure of groups,

Beyond longevity, we could actually improve the self-report of the precision of the communication rather than trying to do this ultimately futile optimization on satisfaction because that's a moving target.

But something that we can latch onto is precise communication.

And precise communication within the context of an aligned narrative for the team or the organization would ultimately potentially lead to satisfaction.

So interesting point by RJ.

Any thoughts before we move forward?

Cool.

So this is what you all came here for.

Someone was told there would be baby pictures on the stream.

Here's a quote from the paper to get us thinking about development.

They wrote, human infants only appear satisfied following a communicative bid when their own communicative partner has aligned their mental states with their own with respect to the infant's intended reference and some citations there to follow.

So what does that quotation mean or what does anyone think about that?

Here's the questions that we can ask about development.

The first question is, how or when does a child learn to align mental states to satisfy communicative bids?

The second question, what we can, you wanna, does anyone have thoughts on the first question?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Go ahead.

Kind of as a corollary to,

Yeah, as I was reading it, I was really trying to parse through the development of this process, like the ontogeny of it.

And because there is a maturation of how cooperative communication happens that

There should also be a start when you learn to align your mental states.

But of course, upon reading the paper again and, you know, working through all the baby references.

The author states that.

You never actually learn to do this process.

It's part of the adaptive priors for alignment that humans are endowed with.

So perhaps I can already answer that first question.


SPEAKER_00:
So the answer is how or when.

The when, it sounds like it's continuous.

It's always a continuous process.

And then how is kind of the broad topic of development.

How does language develop?

How does culture develop?

And then I thought the point that you made about an evolutionary prior is very good.

And it's also a challenging question.

question to ask what exactly this prior is and that's why so much of the paper is about it because it's pretty clear that we don't have a prior for any specific language in the sense that a baby who is growing up around no language will fail to develop linguistic capabilities in this

Whereas any child raised in a different linguistic setting will take on that language.

So there's a prior that language will be communicated, but it's almost a prior that's above the level of the specific language.

Yet there seem to be things about our evolutionary prior, like grammar or structure or certain types of logical relationships that are harder to change.

Shannon?


SPEAKER_03:
not to be contrarian, but I'm going to be a little contrarian, is we talk a lot about language or maybe there's some innate prior that will develop language.

But there's something that happens even before language, and that's the rhythm of development in the womb.

So you have these bipedal rhythms of the mothers walking.

You have rhythms of the heartbeat, breathing rhythms.

And these are these like very embodied forms of not necessarily communication at that stage, but it is signaling to the infant in the womb, like whether the situation is stressful or not for the mother and thus for the new, not yet born infant.

And then once you're born, you're holding the infant.

There's a lot of skin to skin contact.

So you're still maintaining this, not quite communication, but this,

balance of the mother's heart rhythms or breathing rhythms to the infants and then slowly externalizing that to gaze relationships or to like when you're playing with the baby's hands, you know, you're holding their hands, maybe moving them and then slowly just externalizing these rhythms into more and more communicative acts and less sort of direct embodied relationships.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Yvonne?


SPEAKER_01:
I want to say that toddlers have very limited set of mental states and to align with its state

their vis-a-vis can do this alignment more simple rather than we talk about all the people who has more broad mental states more broad set of their internal states


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, and we can come back to that when we get to the attunement question.

Shannon, I really liked how you described the continuum from really the communication that is related to rhythm of the heart and the maybe circadian rhythms in the blood.

So very slow rhythms and rhythms that are transmitted through tactile stimulus through the womb, as well as chemical or neural type relationships.

And then it's like this gradual disconnection

where as the physical touch is replaced by the gaze, and then adults tend to have more of a barrier physically between them.

At least that's coming from a culturally specific place, but maybe it still does hold.

It's rare to see adults touching each other as much as, for example, a mother and an infant.

And so the second question, how does it relate this development of communication through these different modalities and from things that barely seem communicative, things that almost seem physiological?

But then in the end, if we're communicating about what's for dinner, isn't that also a physiological communication that reduces our uncertainty about where nutrition is coming from?

So is it that different than a pre-linguistic cry for milk?

And then how does it relate to this way in which adults understand each other?

And then it reminds me also of these different modalities of therapy and even thinking about like Maslow's hierarchy of needs.

The idea that the end all be all is the linguistic expression, I'm sorry or I'm happy.

That's kind of the tip of the iceberg for linguistically capable adults.

But what is that embodied iceberg?

What is the actual thing

that we're trying to communicate what's the territory not just the linguistic map and then how does this relate to the communication or other issues that adults have and we want to work it out and then are we going to use our words are we going to use our uh lower goals of the maslow's hierarchy lower chakras we get physical for better or for worse

And just to get to the last question on this development slide, what are some linguistic characteristics of cooperative communication?

This relates a bit to earlier our discussion about is cooperative communication characterized by the mechanics like polite turn-taking or relevant sharing of information?

Are they defined by the end goal?

So cooperative communication is all's well that ends well, or is it something else like something ethical or something normative?

Like, cooperative communication is when you follow those four maxims of good communication, even if you're impolite about it or it leads to a non-cooperative end.

For who?

As long as you abide by these conversational rules, then it's going to be a cooperative communication.

What are some of these linguistic characteristics, if any?

Or what are the characteristics of cooperative communication that go beyond linguistics?

Cool.

Go ahead, Sasha.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Kind of, well, yeah, sort of relevant to this question, but the first question on the slide made me think about other alternative states or abilities of communication so that children who


SPEAKER_00:
uh grow up not being able to hear or speak or see for any number of all right looks like we had a brief little disrupt and so i'm just going to send a link to get the rest of our colleagues back into here

While they are getting back in, I'm going to go back to sharing our screen.

So we were just having Sasha talking about

the developmental characteristics of cooperative communication.

And yes, yep, sorry, something definitely did go wrong there, but we're on part two of 3.5, 3.5.2, c'est la vie.

And we are continuing on the development slide.

And as people join in, we'll be ready to move on.

Yep, Sasha, something definitely blipped a little bit.

Alex, if you could message Shannon just to make sure that she knows that we'll use this link.

We are back live.

So continuing with what you were saying, Sasha, about the linguistics and cooperation.


SPEAKER_02:
It's like it knew I was going to say something wrong, so it cut me off.

um yeah so to that point i i think the linguistic characteristics um at the very least would look like a back and forth um such that the communication would be happening um on multiple scales that

people are communicating, but also getting feedback within their short blips of communication.

And that kind of reminds me of the checklist or the multiple scales of communication for teams that we brought up earlier, but maybe that's kind of like the baby steps of developing communication.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, cool.

And Alex, you've sent the message.

Thank you.

So let's get to the question of attunement and whenever she rejoins, we'll just hop in.

So here's a quotation from the paper.

The hypothesis here is then that repeated couplings between infants and children with adults and more experienced peers may cause the prior beliefs of inexperienced individuals to converge more towards the hidden causes generating sensory consequences, i.e.

the mental states of more experienced others, rather than the other way around.

That is, coupled action perception cycles in such dyads tend to be characterized by an asymmetric entrainment of prior beliefs.

What does this mean?

What is the most just foundational interpretation of this question?

And then how does this relate maybe to the infant adult dyad communication?

I'll just start with the base interpretation.

So we're talking about... Hey Shannon, welcome back.

Sorry about that.

We're talking about these communicative dyadic situations between two or multiple agents.

And we're referring to one of the individuals as more experienced and one of them as relatively inexperienced in the context of some niche.

So it isn't that one is closer to absolute truth.

That's not that babies are closer to absolute truth.

It's not that the adult is closer to absolute truth.

It's that one of these individuals has had more experience in a certain informational niche and also might have a higher degree of precision on their beliefs.

And that could be an example of this evolutionary hyper prior, which is like the temperature on decision making of a young person starts high.

So you could tell them,

Yep, the sky is like a fabric and the sun is carried by a chariot.

And that explains, it reduces their uncertainty about the path of the sun in the sky.

And so potentially that is taken up by the younger or the more inexperienced individual.

Whereas somebody who had very high precision on what the sun was, whether they thought it was a car or a nuclear reactor or something, that person is going to be harder to move into a new narrative.

And so when you have an experienced and an inexperienced individual, or for that matter, a stubborn and an open minded individual,

because of the asymmetries, you're going to get this type of asymmetric, this differential outcome through the communication.

And here it's being described as the inexperienced individual converging to the priors of the experienced one and not vice versa.

So any thoughts on that one?

And this relates to figure 5a, which we discussed in our last discussion.

But here we have the two birds, the relatively experienced one and the inexperienced one.

And here, experience is represented by higher value of this order parameter on the y-axis, such that a high level of experience in singing

is correlated with a high order parameter reflecting a very accurate ability to perform turn taking.

And that would relate to optimal flow of information if the turn taking were optimal.

Like if one person started talking right when the other person stopped talking.

And then when we're in this learning alone paradigm with the shaded confidence intervals of the two birds, we see that the order paradigm, how ordered the two birds are relative to each other just drops off as a function of bouts of communication.

And we were thinking about this, like the two recording studios, the two individuals are singing a call and response song, but they're not synchronized.

And so through their singing, they end up desynchronizing through no fault of their own.

However, when you're having a sensory coupling and a deep prior that you want to be aligned with your conversant or with your communicative partner, that's learning together.

You need the sensory coupling and you also need this prior that you want to be aligned on your mindset.

And then we see that the blue line becomes asymmetrically entrained more to the,

green line than the other way around.

And we talked about that, how the green line looks a little bit like it's going down, almost like the blue line induces somewhat of a disordering of the green line.

And we asked whether that was reflected or not by the kinds of communications that we see with adults and with humans.

Any thoughts on this attunement slide?

We have one more attunement slide.

Sash?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thank you for explaining that.

That was my question in understanding this rather long sentence and just getting to why it is building towards the state of the more experienced partner rather than the other way around because

Yeah, and adding in the precision of an open-mindedness versus stubbornness, that really helps to kind of help better understand why it's moving in one direction versus the other.

Because the parameter in this graph is not just an arbitrary value of how much you're like one thing or another, but it's about your precision on what you're doing.


SPEAKER_00:
Shannon?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, to follow up on that, there's also, like if this was a graph that was showing oscillations around the steady state instead of the graph that it is, like you might actually see smaller oscillations in this top partner because they're sort of converging on a steady state already.

And this blue partner might have like very wide oscillations until they start to find the similar steady state.


SPEAKER_00:
yes definitely true this is averaged out and has the confidence interval but then in the context of real learning or potentially niche entrainment it's not just this step by step there's periods of stasis and oh i get it and then you jump up it's a quantum change in comprehension or there's an overshoot somebody oh they were too eager on this one and then they go too far to the other side but then we're able to

look at the error residual, and then hopefully reducing the error is what gets us to precision.

So a cool way to see it here visually.

Let's think a little bit more about attunement with this other quote from the paper.

They wrote, human individuals appear characteristically, i.e.

species typically, we can discuss that, to be endowed with an adaptive prior that one's mental states are aligned with those of conspecifics.

What does that mean?

Just what is the first level interpretation of that sentence?

And then what about our priors are adaptive and

Can they go wrong?

And then what about that is species typical with respect to humans?

Any thoughts there?

And I also added in a replicate of the Kapheim figure about Tinbergen's four questions.

Just a reminder that we're always thinking about these multiple versions of Y at the same time.

So why do humans do X?

Or why does X appear in life?

These are questions that are going to have multiple kinds of answers.

So we're not looking for an exclusionary answer.

We want to understand whether our answer is actually striking at the level of causation of utility of ontogeny development or at the level of evolution itself.

So any thoughts on either responding within the context of one of these four squares or just what the sentence means?

So in differentiating human communication from non-human primate and other species in the paper, what happened a lot was this discussion about the humans wanting to have their mental states aligned.

And we saw that in the previous quote, like the baby isn't satisfied until the

mental state is aligned until it believes that the mental state is aligned.

And I think it was Shannon who brought up this something where if somebody gets the right food for you from the grocery store, but you think that they were misinformed about something else, it's almost like it's not good enough for us to get what we asked for at the grocery store.

We really want to make sure that they also knew exactly at a deeper level why we were wanting that.

And so this question about the humans being

endowed with a prior that we want to be aligned at a mental state level.

I'll just first start with the species specific question.

I wonder if in a wolf pack or in an ant colony, although one could debate to what extent these mental states are aware or something like that, that's a little bit on the qualia end of the spectrum.

I would still say that in these groups, be it insect or other mammals,

these individuals do benefit from having the mental state of the pack aligned.

And so in that respect, I wonder if they also have an adaptive prior that their mental states would be aligned with conspecifics.


SPEAKER_03:
That's actually interesting bringing up, like animals is intuitive or wolf packs, because we have dogs and we can see they try to align maybe something about their emotional state with their human owners or with other dogs you have in your house.

And you can see that

maybe with wolves, but when you bring up ants, that's interesting because outside of like the movie Ant-Man, you don't really prescribe emotions to them.

But there's definitely an alignment of their action states, like in terms of which chemical pathways they're going to follow.

And when they leave these chemical traces that say, there's definitely food here, more and more ants travel, there's more and more chemical traces.

And as the food's depleted, the trace

goes away.

So even though there's that really close physical proximity, there's still some knowledge of the other ant's mental states in their coordinated behavior.

And so it's interesting to kind of make that jump from behavior to actually ascribing, I want my mental state to match yours in some way.


SPEAKER_00:
And the way that that gets manifested through feedback with the environment or stigmurgy in the social insects, the way that somebody might decorate a tea room and it's very serene.

It's like, when you're in this space, I want you to be synchronized on this mental alignment.

This is a sacred space, or this is a messy spot.

And then similarly, when we're just talking about the traces in the ant colony, which fundamentally are serving to reduce the uncertainty of the colony about where to get food in that case.

And the way that the ants can communicate with each other is through a direct touch, tactile touch and olfaction, as well as these long-term traces, which can potentially generate something like collective mental state.

And so these are really interesting questions.

Like, does the worker ant have a prior?

Is that the mental state that's being shared or does it want it to be shared?

Or is it that

individuals who act in a way that lead to coherent colonies, we end up seeing them over evolutionary time more.

So it's almost independent of whether there's this experiential component to the adaptive prior.

It's almost whether it is adaptive is this sort of circular question, kind of like survival of the fittest.

We're going to see packs of animals or packs of single cell bacteria or

insects that end up having aligned and adaptive and effective communication.

And then what does that actually tell us?

Because we're only going to see those systems persist.

We're only going to see communication as a dysfunction in mostly functional systems because things just didn't randomly show up here one way or the other.


SPEAKER_02:
I think you nailed it with that statement, that it's a circular argument in a way.

I was thinking about that rereading the paper as well.

It's like, wow, this sounds just too clean.

It all kind of makes sense in the direction that this argument's going.

And back to the point about...

how we as humans interpret what other species are doing to be communicative cooperation or not is you know a whole other question because if it's furthering their means as a species then they're cooperating the right amount.

There's a line about how even great apes

they do pointing, but in a way that's not communicative cooperation, but more selfish.

And I wonder if that's just kind of a human, our human species bias on how other species communicate, but not as good as we do.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And to bring this actually to narratives and narrative attunement, the action patterns from a mechanical standpoint that humans are being asked to do by each other are too complicated to just be hard coded or directly.

You can't say, hey, move your left hand a little bit up.

OK, now go a little bit down.

Now go back to where you were.

OK, so you can't tell someone, here's how you draw the letter A. OK, now here's how you draw the next letter.

You tell them,

The next level of would be write the word Alexandra, and then they're going to interpret that, unpack that in their own way.

And then an even higher level of narrative attunement would be like, I want you to do this, or here's why it's important that you should do this.

And so if you can get people to be aligned at the, here's why it's important to go out and do community service towards this end.

then they're going to figure out all the details with getting in and out of the car and turning left at the stoplight and coming to all these details that you would spend your whole life trying to micromanage.

If you can provide narrative attunements, then each individual agent is going to unpack that in their own niche in a way that makes sense to them.

And so it's a very high leverage point.

to be able to specify and attune narratives because people who are narratively aligned with you will act in a similar way.

They'll respond to stimuli in a way that's similar to yourself or at least beneficial in a broad coalition.

And that's a avenue or a vector for attunement of action in humans that is not as developed potentially in other species.

which comes back to this question about human-specific.

Is it really human-specific to be having an adaptive prior that communication is useful?

Well, it's different in degree.

There's no other species with such an extent of digital or written communication, but is it really different in type when we have turn-taking, rhythmic coordination across the animal and even non-animal kingdom?

So cool stuff there.

Any thoughts on attention or on attunement before we get to attention?


SPEAKER_04:
I just want to say maybe should we or is it possible to separate maybe for like a signal level?

and for, I don't know, content level.

So to have a good attunement you first, for example, need to exchange some kind of special signals to start the main part of this attunement.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, and that relates to these ostentative cues.

So if in a email, the first line is, to whom it may concern.

It's a relatively formal way.

It's saying, this is a cue.

I'm showing you my hand right at the beginning.

I speak English, I speak formally, et cetera, versus there's other ostentative cues that could attune somebody.

Hey, just a quick message.

These are different cues.

And then there's the level of syntactic attunement.

That's making sure that the message comes across just from a bitwise perspective.

And then there's the semantic attunement, the meaning of the message, but of course the media is the message.

So there's like somewhat of a blurring between the content and the delivery mechanism.

And then there's the narrative attunement, which is at the highest level that goes beyond any single meme, the JPEG or the words in it or whatever.

It's that higher level attunement that actually dictates how humans respond.

Sasha.


SPEAKER_02:
I just wanted to comment a bit on the.

What.

Where do our priors go wrong, and if this is a bit of a meta comment, maybe you'll see in the recording, but as we're working towards alignment of mental states, your video and audio are not aligned and

in the adaptive sense, or in the evolutionary sense, like... Oh.


SPEAKER_00:
Go ahead.

Go ahead.


SPEAKER_02:
In the evolutionary sense, I want to make sure that your voice and video are aligned because that would never happen outside of a video chat.

But in a video chat, I don't need to worry that they're offset because I'm listening to your voice for the content of what you're saying.

So that those two things are not aligned is actually okay in this scenario, but it's still concerning and draws my attention to that mismatch.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, that's a deep prior that we've learned by communicating in person that definitely gets violated.

Also, people being pixelated in person.

I don't remember that happening, but it did happen from time to time.

So here on the attention question.

So here's another quote from the paper, and I really like this because it brought a connection from so-called folk psychology or just everyday discussions of topics that are neurophysiological into what is going to be bringing us towards a more formal phrasing of the question.

They wrote, in active inference, the folk psychological term attention refers to two distinct but closely related phenomena.

The first one is epistemic value, and the second one is precision weighting.

There's a citation there.

Epistemic value, salience, or affordance is the component of policy selection just discussed.

It is the component of the value of policies that tracks how much a policy reduces uncertainty about the state of the world.

It provides a description of the folk psychological phenomena of actively orienting towards or turning one's attention to a certain modality or part of the sensory field.

For example, there's visual saccades that sample particular locations in visual space.

In short, salience or epistemic affordance is an attribute of how we sample the world in the sense that actively sampling sensory information will reduce uncertainty in relation to our current beliefs.

In contrast, this is the second type of attention.

Precision is an attribute of sensory data per se of itself.

Imprecise sensory data should have less effect on Bayesian belief updating relative to precise information.

It is therefore important to afford the right precision to each sensory sample via precision weighting.

Here's the two questions I asked about this quote.

People can answer one of the questions or ask a further question about this paragraph or bring up their own interpretation.

How is this idea of attention related to ostentative cues?

And how is this idea of attention related to culture as an informational niche?

So first we can think about what are these two different kinds of attention, because they talk about how there's two distinct but closely related phenomena.

So we're going to reduce our uncertainty about this term attention.

And it's broken down into two categories, the epistemic value, which relates to the value of knowledge, and then precision weighting, which is like the value of the sensory data itself.

We can go to this last sentence to look at how they differ pretty specifically.

Imprecise sensory data should have less effect on Bayesian belief updating relative to precise information.

So let's imagine if someone says, OK, I'm going to turn on this TV and it's going to have the results of the election and you turn on the TV and it's just static.

Now, there's many kinds of static.

But the point is, with respect to the question that you want to reduce your uncertainty about,

imprecise sensory data or if your eyes are very blurry or if you can't hear what the speaker is saying, this kind of sensory data that's garbled shouldn't be used to update your beliefs about the world at a deep level.

So this is kind of getting to this question of the syntactic versus the semantic attunement, because in the sense of precision waiting,

If you're paying attention to a stimulus in free energy, that means that that stimulus is rising all the way up to the top of the attentional salience hierarchy, in a sense.

It's touching your deep priors in a way that's influencing them meaningfully.

Whereas things that aren't being paid attention to in the sense of precision weighting are the sensory inputs that don't make a difference for your deep priors.

So I'm not paying attention to how my sock feels in my shoe until I am, but I'm not paying attention to it in the sense that the precision weighting is very low.

Even though it's a valid sensory input, it's just the attention being paid to that stimuli is low.

But the value of that information about the foot can also be thought of as relatively low within this epistemic value sense of attention.

So if someone says, pay attention, 50 percent of this is like that.

It's like saying this is an important piece of knowledge.

So, yes, you also need to have the epistemic value.

content it's not just enough to get the jpeg across completely or to have somebody hear your words there's this epistemic value to certain things that are said and a way that this is related to ostentative cues is just with the simple phrase hey pay attention or listen up

The next thing I'm gonna say is important.

These are broad ways that are, they're ostentative cues, they're demonstrated cues that people can use linguistically or non-linguistically like waving or things like that.

These are cues that say, hey, if you can make out this signal, if you can hear my SOS, if you can see me waving, then please pay attention because this next thing I'm about to convey is not just syntactically important, but it's actually epistemically important.

Thoughts on this?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, it's interesting because when I read this paper, I also use red highlight to this part about differences between folk psychology term.

and because usually i use yellow and for this part i decided to use red one because it's really it looks like very important for communication and understanding it and as we know from uh figures and from this paper about uh regimes of attention

which are very important to really have attenuation and synchronization of mental states.

So, and if you want to speak about how to set up this regime of attention and maybe as it's usually discussed in psychology, like how to train attention and

to manage attention, we should see this difference between epistemic part and this precision weighting.


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice.


SPEAKER_04:
And so if we, how it could relate to ostensive cues,

I think about, I don't know how, is a concept about attention governance.

So some kind of rules to manage attention and some kind of proofs which ostensive cues is really important and which ones is not important or maybe wrong, for example.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And special signs that say, hey, I didn't hear what you said.

You lagged out.

Could you repeat that?

I needed I needed more precision waiting on what you said because I couldn't even get to your epistemic content.

And then, oh, wait, I heard you on what the name was.

I just I don't know who that author is.

So that's the epistemic level or, OK, I know that author, but I still don't understand how this is fitting into the narrative of why we're in this conversation.

It's another level saying, I got you epistemically, but now narratively, I'm a bit lost.

And so these are different levels that could be quantified and could be formalized and de-risked as well.


SPEAKER_02:
anything else go ahead sasha yeah another thing to add about um ostensive cues i think this answers the one of the questions posed in the paper which is how might an individual recognize another's intention to generate an active communication intended for oneself in the first place and um that was another question that i've written out as as interesting and it seems like

of comes back full circle to answer it that um ostensive cues are a way to let our to let other people know that we're intending to communicate with them in a more um

multi-level way to focus their attention first before we communicate the important information.

And then to the point about rules of attention, at least from a neuroscience background, which I think shies away a bit from

understanding the psychology of the human experience and tries to have a more deflationary account of what's happening.

The rules, as I've heard them at least, of attention is to try to unpack and understand why a human is attending to a certain

stimulus or not versus how a human can modulate their attention so that they can better attend or pay attention based on what they want to accomplish.

So it's a bit of internal versus external perception of what human attention is.

So I like that point about the psychology perspective on this because

Ultimately, that's a bit more useful for individuals making choices than to understand what's happening from the outside.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And the precision psychiatry work of Fristin and Badcock and others talks a lot about these aberrant precision errors and about how they result in decision-making or experienced pathologies.

So in this last section, I think we could actually even go one more level

into this epistemic value topic and bring it to free energy so this is again about active inference as a process theory and we can see the minimal active inference loop here but i think this is going to be an opportunity for us to kind of go up

the chain another dimension, which is to go from this active inference loop, which is very qualitative and like the skeleton of action.

And let's look at a quote from the authors about where does free energy play into this?

So the authors write,

The free energy expected under a policy tracks the probability of that particular policy being pursued, i.e.

of that specific policy being selected to guide action.

So it's kind of weird when people think, well, wait, what is my brain doing inference on?

Doing inference on the probability that right now I'm in a chair.

I mean, don't I just know I'm in a chair or don't I just know that it's likely to be me in a chair in 20 minutes if that's where I want to be or not.

But no, actually what's happening is the brain is doing inference on the probability of a policy being pursued.

Relatively less expected free energy indicates a relatively more probable policy.

And this is seen sometimes not to go into too many details, but when people take the log or the negative log of a probability, it's just so that you can minimize a number.

And by getting closer to zero, which is like a fixed number, we can know that we're maximizing the probability.

So if we make it so that smaller numbers are more likely, like one over the likelihood type thing, then we can actually do a minimization problem going towards zero as a lower bound because some of these things being bounded by zero and then know that we're making more probable or better policy decisions by minimizing.

Whereas if we were to do a maximization problem and just say, well, let's just maximize the overall likelihood, there's no known upper bound for how optimal it could be.

So you might not know when to stop, but minimization helps you because it kind of puts a hard stop on zero.

Expected free energy can be decomposed into two terms.

So here we come back.

There's epistemic, and there's going to be another one.

The two terms are epistemic value, which is the information gain of an observation, and pragmatic value, which is the expected log evidence of an outcome given a generative model of how outcomes depend on action.

The relative influence of each term quantifies the degree to which a particular policy generates actions that explore the niche, i.e.

exploration, or actions that leverage reliable expectations about the niche to secure preferred outcomes, i.e.

exploitation.

This is depicted in figure one.

So any thoughts on this?

Or there's a lot more to say here.


SPEAKER_04:
One, I'm trying to listen.


SPEAKER_03:
I was just going to say that explanation you gave for why it's a minimization problem was really helpful, like in a really lay sense of just that minimization is an easier computation that has a lower bound.

That was a really helpful explanation.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

Alex?

I just want to point one thing about what these terms of exploration and exploitation also could be met in some literature about business strategies.

So it's possible ways to company to choose direction to act on different stages and different states.

And as it wrote it in this literature, the company should first to exploit some new area and the next step is exploitation if there is some value for the company.


SPEAKER_00:
Great, and we'll come back to that in just a second.

It's so true.

It's a lot like explore, exploit in other domains.

And if you go too far onto one end, it ends up being less than useful.

If it's purely exploratory,

but never exploiting anything, then you never extract the value.

That would be like searching for where the oil is, but never drilling.

And then on the other hand, if you're just like, wait, there's oil right here I'm going to exploit, you're going to find out that that well is going to run dry, and you won't have put in enough research and development into exploration.

And so there's no simple answer as to whether it's better to be exploratory or exploitative, at what level.

That's what free energy is about.

And I thought this could be a good opportunity to actually connect what is free energy?

Why is it called free energy?

If it's just the probability of a particular policy being pursued, why don't we just call it the probability of a policy being pursued?

And to answer this, I'm going to draw on a little bit of chemistry, a little bit of statistical mechanics.

So the term free energy in the usage of Friston has less to do with the Tesla sense of free energy, like electricity for everybody, and has more to do with this sense of Gibbs free energy, which is a thermodynamic characteristic.

We can look at this equation.

The total Gibbs free energy equals U minus TS plus PV.

And in chemical terms, these do have physical interpretations, like the absolute temperature in Kelvin or the entropy measured in some other unit.

The idea that I want to get across with this equation is just that you can partition.

You can have an expected free energy of some chemical reaction, and that even though it's a total singular number, it can be partitioned into, for example, the internal energy of the system chemically, the temperature weighted final entropy of the system, and the pressure weighted final volume.

Let's look at how this plays out in chemistry.

So on the left, on the top, we have an exergonic reaction or a reaction where the delta G is below zero.

So there's some big differences between Gibbs free energy and Friston's conception, not the least of which that free energy, as it's being discussed previously, it's bounded at zero.

but Delta G gives free energy.

It actually works in a little bit different way where values that are below zero means that the reactants have more energy than the products.

So these are exothermic or heat releasing reactions.

And then conversely, if the Delta G is greater than zero, that means that the reactants have to basically go uphill.

And so we can look at this reaction coordinate graph.

And whether you're going downhill overall on the left side or uphill overall, like a non-spontaneous or endergonic reaction, in both cases, you need to come over this hump.

That's the activation energy barrier.

And that's why certain reactions happen at high temperature, but they don't happen at low temperature.

It's like a ball that's right here, but it doesn't have enough energy to get over the hill.

So it's like, even though the candle is thermodynamically favored to burn, otherwise it wouldn't burn, it's not going to spontaneously combust because it doesn't have the activation energy to burn.

And then if you're going uphill anyway, then it's an even higher hill to climb because really you have to climb up over your final endpoint and then drop back down in a way that's thermodynamically favored.

And so again, it's kind of a metaphor at this point, but there is math that we're just not going into.

We can look at this delta G,

partitioning of the system.

And again, delta G doesn't capture everything about the system.

It doesn't mention the activation energy.

It doesn't mention other things about the stoichiometry of the reaction.

But it is something that can be partitioned.

And then similarly, we can think about this expected free energy in the Friston sense.

And we just heard it discussed as being partitioned into two things, the epistemic and the pragmatic value.

So the knowledge or exploratory value of a policy and then the pragmatic or the exploitative value of a policy.

And then we can just directly link it to that language around explore and exploit, as well as around divergent and convergent thinking.

So these are still a little bit metaphorical, but

I thought it would be interesting just to directly contrast the free energy from thermophysics, basically, and from chemistry, and then note how this partitioning of expected free energy into multiple terms has a lot of carryover from chemistry and from physics.

Any thoughts on this, or we have more math that we can survey too?

Cool, let's just go back to this figure with the outline that we've looked at a lot and let's actually look at these equations and not to derive them or to implement them, but let's just look at what are these equations?

Because we've talked a lot about how there's internal states and there's external states.

We've talked about how sensations are what enter the Markov blanket and how actions guided by policy are what exit the Markov blanket.

And so this is the minimal loop of embodied inactive cognition.

OK, so where do we go from the qualitative theory of just saying, hey, ecological cognition means it's always this action embodied feedback loop.

How are we going to add a layer of math and move towards formalization of this?

So we can just look at the equations that are in each of these four categories.

And what we can see here is what action is doing is minimizing the agents bound on surprise.

And this equation, again, even though it could be expanded into larger formats later, the two pieces are basically the complexity of the action and the expected accuracy.

You'll also note that there's a ton of things where it's like, wait, you're calculating the expected free energy, not just the free energy itself.

And the reason for that is the actual values are inaccessible to the organism.

And so the computation or the inference that the organism is actually doing is like, not where is my leg?

It's where do I expect my leg to be?

And that's the genesis of things like the ghost limb syndrome, all these phenomena that don't quite make sense in a sensory relay paradigm.

If you make it about a second order expectation, where do I expect to be now?

It's now casting.

And it turns out that where am I now?

How would you even know where you were?

But if you ask, where do I expect to be and how confident am I about that expectation?

It turns out that is what gets good enough and does it in a really computationally tractable way.

So action is minimizing the agents bound on surprise by balancing or combining, we won't go too much into detail there, the expected complexity of the action versus the accuracy of the action.

And so one way to think about that is complex actions like playing the piano are difficult to perform unless there's a feeling that there's also going to be accuracy.

Whereas very low complexity movements like flailing one's arms maybe are done without worrying too much about the accuracy of the motion.

And then on the perception in the internal state, the yellow box, we have the

Internal states are reflected by the KL divergence, which is the informational divergence between the priors and the posterior.

So that reflects how the worldview is being updated.

And then it's penalized by the surprisal.

And yeah.

I just want to put it out there.

There is a layer of mathematics and equations that go beyond the structure of active inference.

And then just these last two boxes, before we kind of summarize and close out, it frames external states, the niche construction of the external states, as bounding the surprise.

And so again, it looks at this green box, the equation with KL divergence minus the surprise,

it should remind you a lot of this yellow box, which is also the KL divergence minus the surprise.

And that's because this system is actually symmetric with respect to whether the external states are the human or whether the external states are the world.

Because in the end, it's a bidirectional Markov blanket with sense and action moving both directions.

And so it would be a little bit weird if, depending on which system we decided was internal to the Markov blanket, it went one way.

And if we put the system on the other side, it'd be the other way.

So this is the work that's been built out in the variational ecology work of Axel Constant and others,

where it's realizing that, hey, the niche, especially when it's just other agents, it's actually like the Markov blanket gives us this symmetry.

And so the internal state equations look a lot like the external state equations.

And then sensations minimize the agents bound on surprise.

And again, this is complexity minus accuracy, which looks a lot like the complexity minus accuracy in red of action, because the senses coming in are the active states of the world.

And so similarly, we have this penalization of the complexity versus the accuracy of sensation.

And that should remind you of earlier when we were talking about the value of communication.

If the input is garbled, then the sensations, it's not even that they're surprising or not.

They're just not that useful for us.

And so there's a lot of parallels between the different states in this model across the divide of the Markov blanket, as well as the two types of things that pierce through the Markov blanket.

And so just first coat of paint to close out this discussion with a little bit of the math underlying the formalisms of active inference.

Cool.

So any overall thoughts or questions?


SPEAKER_02:
Just a comment on that last slide.

I kind of braced myself for the equations, but I think it's actually very useful to talk through them.

And you did a great job really drawing those parallels out.

And I would actually love to see more of that in future discussions about linking the papers back to the equations in sort of these layman's terms.


SPEAKER_00:
cool.

Well, we'll definitely need assistance, but it's good to try.

It's good to try.


SPEAKER_03:
It was also really nice that reflittle marriage of your action states are the world or the other agents sensory states.

And then their action states are your sensory states, which I mean, it's shown in the pictures, but sort of, it's not always internalized that this is like,

super perspectival.

So it depends on from which agent you're looking.

And it's also putting some agentive sort of characteristics on the world or the eco niche that you're interacting inside.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, very nice.

It's really a fully relational theory because there's no objective internal states.

You can say, well, the internal states are internal to my epithelium.

It's like, okay, you can choose that as your system of interest from an engineering perspective.

You can choose that to be the bounds of your Markov blanket if you define it appropriately, but there's no way that you're going to be able to say that that's unambiguously the singular system of analysis.

It's just Markov blankets all the way down.

And then when you think about, let's say, contact improv or turn taking conversation in both of these cases, there's the whole world.

But we can kind of zoom in on the dyad that's interacting.

And then you're right for them.

The external state is being the generative part of the external state is like the other person.

And that's what's generating the coordination between the two arms from which you're receiving sensory input from.

And so one person is doing inference on the sensory state of another.

And this kind of ties us back to this idea of alignment of mental states.

So maybe let's look at one of the figures.

Here we are in the world.

and so yes it could be that two people are paying attention to the same world so here's like one person writes on the whiteboard and that contributes to changing the informational niche this person sees what's on the whiteboard they think ah what did they mean by this they add something new to the whiteboard or they say something that contributes to the niche and you get this infinity loop um or you can actually almost cut out the middleman here and just

fuse those two parts, you have two individuals and one person's action states are received as sensory information by the other person.

And that's why the alignment of mental state is so important because we can't just align people on each syllable by syllable.

We have to align people on semantic content of what is being conveyed.

And then even higher, we have to align people to really a narrative understanding of what's happening because there's never gonna be enough time to convey all those microstate details.

And that's why this is so cool to see that the mathematics reflects that symmetry.

And the symmetry is what allows us to be fully relational without taking an absolutist perspective on what the correct system of analysis is for communication.

So communication is fully relational.

It's all about those edges between nodes.

And then now we have this mathematical framework where we can talk about the nodes and edges in a way that gives them their due.

Cool.

Any closing thoughts?

Otherwise, this was a super interesting conversation.


SPEAKER_04:
I just wanted to highlight again the importance of this description of attention in a more formal way.

and from perspective of active inference.

So, as we see, if this part of attention is important to communication, and communication is important to alignment, and it's basement alignment of mental states, so maybe for future discussion we need to unpack this part more deeply about attention.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

I think it would be cool to look at perhaps a mathematical treatment of attention in a multi-level scheme.

And I think I know a good paper for that because I agree.

If the person isn't paying attention to the syntax, if they can't hear the story, they're not going to get it.

If they can't get the words, they're not going to get it.

If they can't get the narrative, they're not going to get it.

Or they're going to get something.

but what it is that they get may not be what the speaker intends.

And so how do we formal model this and how can active inference help us cut through some of these complexities and simplify the whole system in a way that we could actually impact the systems that we want to impact by designing attention regimes and culture in the way that we want to make it.

Cool.

Very great stuff, everyone.

Thanks so much for this follow-up, ACT-IMP Stream 3.5 Part 2.

I think I'll try to find a way to fuse these two streams.

And we really appreciate everybody who's listening and providing us feedback and coming out to discuss with us.

So thank you, everyone.

And I'm going to terminate the live stream.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.