## c7ybFyP9KrI

Hello and welcome. It's March 17th, 2023. We're here in ActInv Livestream number 53.0.
Welcome to the ActInv Institute. We're a participatory online institute that is
communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference. You can find us at the links
on the slide. This is a recorded and archived live stream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome. We'll be following video etiquette for live streams.
Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about the institute and getting involved with learning groups and projects.
We're here in ActInv Stream number 53.0, and our goal is to learn and discuss a pair of papers.
The first paper is Snakes and Ladders in Paleoanthropology from Cognitive Surprise to Skillfulness a Million Years Ago
by Hector Manrique, Carl Friston, and Michael Walker. The article was posted to SciArchive in 2022.
And the second paper is To Copy or Not to Copy? That is the Question.
From Chimpanzees to the Foundation of Human Technological Culture. This paper is with Manrique and Walker as authors, Friston-less.
It was also uploaded to SciArchive, and recently, as we have been delighted to discover, the paper has been accepted in Physics of Life reviews.
However, the quotes that we're drawing from and reading from today are drawn from the SciArchive version, just so people know.
And like all the videos, we're here to make an introduction for some of the ideas and the materials. It's not a review or a final word.
In this 53.0 video, we're going to introduce ourselves, say hello, and then we are going to call it like we see it with the aims and claims, abstract, roadmap, keywords.
And there are no figures or formalisms in these papers, but I think we'll have enough bounded surprise to navigate nonetheless.
So, let us begin with introductions and then we'll head into big questions. So, Dean.
Thanks, Danny. I'm Dean. I'm here in Calgary. I'm not going to do much around the warm-up question piece, because I've got a big question coming up. So I'll pass it over to you.
I'm Daniel. I'm in California and agreed. Please lead in with your big questions.
Well, I'm going to start by just sort of highlighting the big questions that the authors have, if that's okay. I'll just read them out.
So for the snakes and ladder paper, there were a number of questions that sort of enabled the authors to go forward with their ideas.
Two questions arise. First, what is it that could provoke cognitive awareness as to the possibility of fashioning stone hand axes in relation to the affordances of raw materials and potential advantages for minimizing bioenergetic effort?
Secondly, what does this say about the irregular appearance of this regular technique in the Pleistocene spatial temporal record?
Also, how was remembered awareness retrieved from personal short and long-term memory transmitted as knowledge to others in whose memories it could become embedded with a degree of fidelity sufficient to enable intergenerational or intercommunal diffusion?
How far was observational learning involved? Do you want me to read the CRNC or do you want to do that yourself?
All right. I'll read the questions from the authors in copy or not to copy.
They wrote, why do chimpanzees not live in a complex technological world? Why does innovation fail to translate into technological cumulative complexity?
Does it owe to a limited capacity to copy with fidelity? What is the implication for innovations? What ingredients must be present from a free energy principle standpoint in innovators' minds slash brains and in observers' minds slash brains for innovation to take root in a community and be transmitted between generations?
Yeah.
Yeah. Great questions. Now, how do we want, well, we know how we're, we want to do this, but one of the things before we get too far along is, we want to, we as hosts today, really want to honor the fact that a lot of time has been spent making sure that we're
the ideas that the ideas that the authors want to bring into the public domain are very clear and that we don't read a whole bunch into it. Now, we're not going to speculate. We're not going to go off on any kind of tangent here. We're going to try to focus strictly on the arguments that they are putting forward because they're putting forward some pretty strong and I think well evidenced
arguments. So although there's lots of questions being asked, they're also trying to provide a few very defendable answers.
Absolutely. That is to prelude the questions that we, Dean and I and Ali are asking. And then we're going to dive largely into verbatim quotations from the texts. And we'll have a dessert session where we bring up some future topics and ideas.
What big question brought you into this 53D?
Okay, so apologies. There's going to be a lot of reading today. So if you don't like my voice, you're going to just read this and hit the pause button. But anyway, the attention to topical transition is paper one to paper two. And we're not really spending a lot of time right now saying which came first, because we think of them as a pair.

So we're going to read these manuscripts and then I singled out many examples of where the authors speak expressively around combining combinatorial.
And you can read that on your own. If we were to look at combinations, what might we learn when bicameral, for example, two eyes, and bitemporal, meaning holding up then and now strategies as analysis, are approximated with active and inference as parentheses.
Tool uptake, for example, two uptake, for example, telescopes and microscope usage after before or concurrent with compounding strategy uptake.
So that's my big question. And I think we're probably not going to get close to an answer until the doc two.
That's why it's a big question, because I think it's going to be able to span a little bit of a window here.
Great. And I wrote a shorter question. Apart from other applications, for example, in research and development or in other fields or looking towards the future, how does the free energy principle and active inference serve as a historical framework or approach?
So whether we lean towards Aristotelian causation philosophies or Tinbergen's approach to ethology, behavioral analysis, how does a historical explanatory power fit in amongst the whys, the plurality of whys in our investigations?
And Ali, who is joining for some discussions, proposed the question, how can self-organized systems use copy discard functions to store information?
A little bit of an externalization from our category theory developments that I'm sure will arise later.
So you go for the top. I'll go for the bottom.
Okay. So just before I start, I want to really ask you,
emphasize the fact that the authors, I think to really comprehend what the authors are trying to put forward as an idea here, you have to really spend some time thinking through the aims of the papers and the claims.
We've placed a heavy emphasis. We're going to give a lot more time over to that.
And it does seem like we're going to give a lot of time over to the keys because having talked to the authors prior to coming on and doing this live stream set, they use those terms of the key and the key to unlocking some of these ideas that have been held for a long time.
So apologies again, if it seems like we're text heavy or dialogue heavy, but in order to really appreciate what's going on, you have to kind of get it out there.
So for the snakes and lattice paper provide a hypothesis, a paradigmatic account around how variational free energy is both individual, ontogenetic and collective phylogenetic modeling could have played a part in what could now be described as a methodological FEP paradigm or relating biological and technological behavior in homo.
So the snakes and lattice in this context pertains to appearances and disappearances of paleolithic skills in the early and middle Pleistocene record.
Our proposal invokes a methodological paradigm grounded in existential principles that underpin the evolution of living organisms.
It is that some, at least of the irregular irregularities and regular irregularities of phenomena attributable to homo in the Pleistocene record reflect the kinds of plausibility, anomalous behavioral outcomes that doubtless occurred often in the stakes and ladder model of evolution in early members of our genus,
ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
or unorthodox behavior, which is rarely, rarely is copied precisely or accurately. So things that
can be innovated in a moment, but do not have the ability to be recognized and carried forward.
And they discussed the circumstances under which Pleistocene Homo underwent remarkable
evolutionary adaptation of neurobiological propensities. Cerebral aspects are discussed
that, it is proposed here, were fundamental for faithful copying, which underpins social
transmission of technologies, cumulative culture, and culture.
So I think what we're going to be doing is holding up two things at once. The two things are
copying as repetition and copying as origination, if there is such a word. But essentially,
of these images here, there are copies that were simply cut and pasted. So they were repeated.
And then there was one representation between those two, that's an origination, it didn't exist
to be copied. But now it can be. So now what we're going to be doing is looking at, okay, so
how does maybe all of that play out when we're observing the world around us, when we're taking
things in and trying to reduce our surprise? How many things are we being deep faked on? How many
things are actually original, representational, and therefore manageable as two very different
places of understanding or appreciation maybe?
Great. All right, I'll go for the first of the sections, and then feel free to comment on them or
to pick up on the second sections. So in Snakes and Ladders, they wrote,
Cognitive surprises favoring anomalous behavioral propensities to sporadic expression can explain
snakes and ladders appearances and disappearances of Paleolithic skills in the early and middle
Pleistocene record. Some behavioral outcomes attributable, plausibly, to individual members
of HOMO unable to maintain orthodox behavioral responses when faced with cognitive surprises,
which is surprisal in the Bayesian terminology.
Such individuals may show a particular neurobiological propensity for exploring unorthodox
possibilities. The propensity has evolved further in humans than in great apes, which, unlike even our
very young children, our larvae, seem unable to envisage how things might be as well as how they
actually are. Whereas by coupling recall of past experience with prospective memory, humans are
capable of blending reality among different potential spheres.
Statistical considerations of classical population genetics are incommensurate with notions that
Darwinian fitness and Pleistocene HOMO increased imperceptibly through gradual dual inheritance co-evolution.
Inherited changes preceded in well-nigh invariant lockstep with heritability of adaptive behavioral and
technological changes. Although ontogenetic autopoiesis may involve action perception cycles,
a phylogenetic consequence could include unawareness by companions that those exceptions might allow new
cooperative opportunities for minimizing the group's variational free energy by performing unaccustomed
behavior to attain dubious benefit. Though foresight or fluent communication, innovations often must have
disappeared unremarked, seen as useless, and their creator's prowess as misplaced energy and wasting time
needed for satisfying the group's existentially implacable energetics.
Pre-potent, routine behavior and pro-social early homoplausably resulted in failure to become aware of the potential
of idiosyncratic inactive outcomes. Here, a prosaic approach
merely inverts that narrative approach to interpreting the deep past which draws for its inspiration on humane and
social studies. The inversion subordinates the narrative approach to critical scrutiny such that
the narrative approach no longer seems to be the most appropriate or most parsimonious interpretation available.
Now again, what we're doing is trying to avoid the situation where we're cherry picking. So, if you want to pause
and read what's been written in context, please feel free to do that. But we just want to make sure that we
touch on the, you know, the highest peaks in this range.
Yes, the full papers are out there. We're linearizing and curating in this dot zero, which has been an incredible
experience. And that has helped us grasp some of these points, hopefully, so we can take them further. And I'll read the
quote, then you can go into the red zone.
Yeah, go for it.
In Snakes and Ladders, they wrote,
The argument proposed here about a neurobiological propensity to an individual enactment in modifying
stone, considered from the standpoint of the free energy principle, is not concerned with a null
hypothesis of innate latent spontaneity. Instead, it is directed towards interpreting irregular
regularities and regular irregularities in the Pleistocene Snakes and Ladders record of appearances
and disappearances of BF-LCTS, which we're going to get to, tools. Given presence of BF-LCTs in widely
differing biotopes, which likely led to differential behavioral evolution of appropriate subsistence
strategies and diets, there is widespread comparability of the principal morphological
attributes of BF-LCTS of diverse petrology at sites with contrasting paleoenvironments and different
spatiotemporal contexts or paleoanthropological taxa. This renders unlikely any notion of a straightforward
Mendelian genetic basis favoring BF-LCT outcomes by natural selection for a specific behavioral adaptation.
The circumstantial evidence seems to apply the adaptive evolution of human neurobiology propensities
that support prospective memory in toolmaking together with short-term working memory, including haptic working
memory, long-term working memory, and long-term procedural memory and episodic memory of past matters and things.
So I just wanted, I'm doing a tease here because on the previous slide I starred one of the claims and then the
last claim on this slide here. My note is essentially, I'm just going to read the part that
doesn't, again, have me speculating. Memory broken into types, as you can see here, working memory, long-term,
procedural, etc., and now being applied instrumentally. Did all the memory types at some threshold of uptake
afford a parallel processing of time, given time's potential variance over the simpler sequential sense of change as the
starter pack priority today? And when I say starter pack priority today, how much about what we do today is being projected or
overfit onto the deep past? This is a question that Michael's presentation in the 53.1 is going to have much to say.
Also, the last claim of the copy or not to copy. So a bit of a teaser, you're going to want to show up for 53.1
because I think Michael's presentation is going to really open up a lot of eyes.
Awesome. Into to copy or not to copy, we go to their claims. So just to read some of the first parts.
What is the implication for innovations? A sine qua non, for one to spread, so something that must happen to spread, is following its conception by one mind, namely the HMM,
hierarchically mechanistic mind of the protagonist brain. It must then be apprehended by another mind, namely the HMM of an observer's brain. And we're going to come back to that on the roadmap.
Here, innovations represent an anomaly, and innovators are unorthodox actors or protagonists. Their policy selection is, in a sense, faulty, in the sense that their ensuing behavioral outcomes are in marked contrast to those of their fellow actors or agents who deploy orthodox responses that reduce discrepancies between predictions and sensation.
Thus, innovators fail to fulfill their predictions.
Thus, innovators fail to fulfill their predictions. If innovations be regarded as behavioral outputs, theirs are then responses that fall outside the repertoire typical of their community.
And hence, ceteris paribus, all other things equal, increase the prediction error, e.g. the level of cognitive surprisal in their exchanges with the surrounding eco-niche.
Predictive consequences of any observed innovative behavior will be too imprecise for the conspecific to make sense of that novel or unorthodox behavior.
When sense cannot be made, copying cannot take place.
Very clear.
When can brains cope with high levels of cognitive surprisals?
A plausible answer is that it is when the holding capacity of working memory increases from two to three.
Working memory in this setting corresponds to the temporal depth of generative models that generate or predict the consequences of successive actions.
This transition increases temporal horizon, which amplifies cognitive versatility and, one of my favorite things, recursive thinking.
A working memory or de-temporal model able to entertain diverse novel Bayesian beliefs is more likely able to recognize and remember innovative behaviors.
And it's easier for chimpanzees to perform complex actions that involve considerable motor demands than it is for them to reproduce actions that are simple and undemanding with regard to motor dexterity,
and yet unorthodox with regard to their habitual behavioral repertoire.
Great.
I'll just...
Let me continue, yeah.
Just joke and meme internally as we carry forward.
Do you want to keep going?
Oh yeah, go for the top half here.
All right, I'll do the first three.
When considering early Pleistocene behavior, we need not assume memories were less complex than the
psychocognitively than are ours.
It is prosaically sufficient to infer that they were simply less frequent owing to earlier consolidation of cerebral networks in Homo erectus' smaller brain.
And we're going to get into something called the zone of bounded surprisal, here and after the ZBS, restricted them.
Observations by early Homo erectus were translated often into activity intermediate between...
I love that...
Emulation and imitation, owing to limited foresight.
The, or their, ZBS limited their ability to join up the mental steps involved in planning and to infer counterfactual possibilities.
The focus of the ZBS is on the observers and their ability to make sense of an observed innovation.
The ZBS allows any potentially novel or unorthodox behavior to be copied provided that the ranges or the levels of surprise provoked in observers are tolerated or manageable by them.
There is bilateral neuronal activation in some brain regions when some tools are being fashioned.
Activation is bilateral because fashioning stone requires precise and accurate monitoring by right hemisphere neurons of the left hand holding the future artifact,
as well as the actions shaping it performed by the right hand holding a hammerstone which are monitored by left hemisphere neurons.
Together they coordinate continuously changing sensory motor representations with appropriately changing hand movements undertaken in an organized forward sequence of perception action with feedback.
Entertaining multiple and varied predictions in the Bayesian framework represented as probability densities in alternate models generated about reality enables the narrowing of cognitive gaps or lessening of cognitive dissonance or surprisal when conspecifics are seen to carry out unusual or unorthodox behaviors.
That paves the way for horizontal and vertical transmission.
The working memory capacity of chimpanzees seems to be below that tipping point at which multiple mental spheres or possibilities can be entertained simultaneously for pitting against an observed novel behavior while keeping cognitive surprisal within a tolerable range.
Unsurprisingly, no copying occurs when innovations observed deviate markedly from usual chimpanzee behaviors.
Can I just throw something in here now at this point?
We'll just step back and think about this as a live stream.
We are trying to avoid a tipping point by placing a heavy weighting on the aims and claims relative to most of the live streams that we've done in the past.
This is a big buildup, but think of this as your classic barbell analogy.
We've just set one plate on the bar.
Now we're going to look at the bar and then we're going to look at the other plates on the other side of this when we get to the keys.
You can go for the first abstract. I'll do the second.
You got it. OK. A scientific paradigmatic account suffices to interpret behavioral evolution in early homo cognitive surprises favoring anomalous behavioral propensities to sporadic expression can explain stakes and ladders appearances and disappearances of paleolithic skills in the early and middle Pleistocene record.
The account applies to the principle of stationary action, which underpins the free energy principle to self-organizing systems at an evolutionary timescale.
Unusual personal attainments often explained by invoking progressive ascent of evolutionary phylogenetic ladders of cognitive and technical abilities could be disregarded in a hominin community that failed to imagine or articulate possible advantages for its survivability.
Such failure as well as diverse, fortuitous demographic accidents could erase from collective memory, the recollection of exceptional individual conduct, which disappeared down a snake, so to speak, of the human evolutionary puzzle.
The puzzle discomforts paleo anthropologists.
The gloves are on.
Some explain it away with the self-justifying assertion that separate paleo species of homo differentially possessed cognitive abilities that allegedly underlay the differential presence or absence in the Pleistocene archaeological record of traces of particular behavioral outcomes or skills.
An alternative methodological perspective grounded in fundamental relationships between organisms and their environments affords the parsimonious, prosaic, deflationary account for appearances and disappearances of behavioral outcomes and skills, thus the title, Snakes and Ladders.
Great.
And the abstract of copy or not to copy.
A prerequisite for copying innovative behavior is the capacity of observers brains regarded as hierarchically mechanistic minds to overcome cognitive surprisal by maximizing the evidence for their internal models via active inference.
Unlike modern humans, chimpanzees and other great apes show considerable limitations in their ability or zone of bounded surprisal to overcome cognitive surprisal induced by innovative or unorthodox behavior,
which rarely is copied precisely or accurately.
Most can copy adequately what is within their phenotypically habitual behavioral repertoire, in which technology plays a scant part.
Widespread intra- and intergenerational social transmission of complex technological innovations is not a hallmark of great ape taxa.
Over 3 million years ago, precursors of the genus Homo made stone artifacts, and stone flaking was likely habitual before 2 million years ago.
After this time, early Homo erectus left traces of technological innovations, though faithful copying of these and their intra- and intergenerational social transmission were rare before a million years ago.
This likely owed to a cerebral infrastructure of inter- connected neuronal networks that bounds the expressivity of internal world models entailed by their functional architecture.
Brains were smaller in size than ours, and cerebral neuronal networks ceased to develop when early Homo erectus attained full adult maturity by the mid-teen years, whereas their development continues until our mid-twenties nowadays.
Pleistocene Homo underwent remarkable evolutionary adaptation of neurobiological propensities.
Cerebral aspects are discussed that it is proposed here were fundamental for faithful copying, which underpins social transmission of technologies, cumulative learning, and culture.
Great.
One of the most amazing road map became road rail became train station clearing house slides.
So what is happening?
So the growth, I think the great gift that the authors have provided Daniel and I here is the opportunity, because this work is talking about sequential time.
And when on that timeline did things happen, which came first?
Or why did something that we thought came after, suddenly we find new evidence that maybe it didn't come after?
Maybe it was co-occurring.
And so what I wanted to do in this particular slide was talk about things like timelines and timetables around the idea of a learning destination, assuming that learning does have some sense of convergence.
So my question was, well, what if all roads, be it be the rail or paved lead to an active Rome or Rome for instance?
Like what is this journey that we're on?
What is this interstate that we exist within?
And why do we always assume that what we're looking at is the ties between the rails instead of making sure that when we're talking about a tipping point,
we're talking about the fact that the entire underlying structure can hold up the vehicle that Daniel and I are basically sitting on right now and moving forward with back and forth.
So the timelines and timetables to learning destinations are not uptakes.
Someone else's formatting is not your outing of a figure.
Okay, so I've never been on an official dig site, but I have come across dinosaur bones being in Alberta.
And so you stumble across these things and whoa, what's that?
Right?
And in an otherwise field of play, how much can we schedule and how much is dependent on the sophistication of our hierarchical model?
And again, I've practiced this.
Tues trenes ahora están saliendo en las plataformas 1 y 9, with apologies to Hector.
Where are we departing?
All we know is that it's platforms 1 and 9.
Let's go.
Vamos.
All aboard.
But great, great visualization.
The papers do have sections.
However, without figures or formalisms, we were able to, and drawing on the unique subject matter and contributions, able to also even reconsider the linearity and the structure of the stream.
The keywords are displayed on the slide.
Just to quickly read through them.
In Snakes and Ladders, Free Energy Principle, FEP.
Paleolithic Enactment, Irregular Regularities and Regular Irregularities, Haptic Working Memory Tasks, Prospective Epistotic and Procedural Memory, Phylogenetic and Ontogenetic Time Scales, Favoring Anomalous Behavioral Propensities to Sporadic Expression.
The Principle of Stationary Action, Applied to Self-Organizing Systems at an Evolutionary Timescale, and In Copy or Not to Copy, Chimpanzees, Cumulative Culture, Free Energy Principle, Generative Model, Homo Erectus, Innovation Observer, Stone Tools Technology and the Zones of Bounded Surprisal.
What can you add about the published priors?
Well, I just think it's interesting because we've always used this image of the sort of the infinite and anference ref, which I've always really liked because I just momentarily lost the strange loop piece.
What is that, Mobius?
Is it a Mobius, right?
A Mobius Stripped also developed by here, MC Escher and Doug Hofstetter into the strange loop concept.
Right, right.
So all I wanted to do is add the fact that maybe there is these branch lines.
And when we're talking about published priors, which came like, I mean, I know that in the chronological time, they came first.
But if we were now to go to them post having read these papers, what would that reveal?
Right?
Like, is a branch less important than the trunk?
I guess.
I don't know.
Without a trunk, there are no branches.
But without branches, there is no totality.
So that's what I was kind of laying out there.
Also, with respect to the literature, it's a canonical example of cumulative culture.
It's all at once.
And the timing of which through chronos publications were added in is by no means the chronos or the kairos of the learner or the researcher.
So going from just the past and the present, two, min two, of the literature, to the past, present, and future, three, with literature, expands.
Into the key points with another disclaimer for your health.
There are no Coles Notes version that will both make sense and do justice.
The analysis research arguments is laid out in his papers.
We begin with keys and then start a process of unlocking.
All right.
So how do you want to do this, Daniel?
Do you want to split each one of the slides or do you want to just swap slides?
I'll do one.
You do one.
Yep.
You go for this slide.
You go for even slides.
I'll do odd slides.
Okay.
All right.
So this is all the keys.
There are 17 of them from the Snakes and Ladder paper.
Again, I really strongly recommend you have a read of this.
It's a fantastic paper.
But if you want the one and a half times speed version of hearing it, this is what it sounds like.
The evidence of early and middle Pleistocene behavior is distributed in disconcertingly uneven ways between 2 million and 200,000 years ago.
Our proposal is that some, at least, of the irregularities and irregularities of phenomena attributable to HOMO in the Pleistocene record reflect the kinds of plausibly anomalous behavioral outcomes that doubtless occur often in a Snakes and Ladders model of evolution in early members of our genus, regardless of their skeletal paleo-specific taxonomy.
Increasingly, complex, extractive, and concomitant procedures appear in several parts of the world at various times towards the end of the late Pleistocene.
Some seem to have arisen separately and independently in a Snakes and Ladders fashion and with different outcomes in different places and times.
Self-evidencing underwrites much of the following arguments.
However, there is an important nuance. Certain creatures may have evolved deep generative models with the ability to predict the consequences of their action.
This kind of creature now has the capacity to entertain counterfactual futures under different actions.
This is a key aspect of active inference under the FEP. Namely, actions and plans are selected on the basis of minimizing expected free energy under that plan.
In terms of Bayesian mechanics, evolution and natural selection can be regarded as natural Bayesian model selection, which is also known as structure learning in the cognitive sciences.
Evolution thus develops imperceptibly and intermittently.
And the FEP concept is biologically and especially neurobiologically relevant, both at ontogenetic levels of cellular dynamics, neural circuitry, and behavior.
And I follow the genetic levels of populations involved through natural selection of biological adaptations and adaptability.
Just before we move on, because there's a bunch of other keys here, I hope it makes sense that not only are we setting the bars up or the plates up on either end of the bar.
If we're talking about a tipping point, we as the agent, we're going to now bring that bar down to our chest and then re-extend ourselves.
We don't want the tipping point to be the bar comes down and then squishes us.
So, setting this up, there's not a tipping point as a threshold is met and over the whole thing goes.
The tipping point is here, is there some agent that's actually capable of?
We're talking directly about them.
Continuing with Snakes and Ladders,
Snakes and Ladders, doubtless tried and trusted routines predominated, and whoever performed them with daily efficiency was trusted by the group, whereas eccentric or idiosyncratic conduct was treated with indifference and not retained in collective memory or lore.
Pre-potent routine behavior plausibly resulted in failure to become aware of potentially idiosyncratic inactive outcomes.
There is a difference between a spatiotemporal Snakes and Ladders picture of disappearances of tiny hunter-gatherer bands and appearances of others,
and the Snakes and Ladders model of individual idiosyncratic or unorthodox activity.
Heterogeneous composition renders the former picture inappropriate for making predictions,
whereas the latter model, individual idiosyncratic or unorthodox activity,
by focusing on the information theoretic and energetic constraints on biological, neurobiological, and psychosocial evolution,
allows for the consideration of whether by doing so it may offer a reasonable interpretation of the material record,
in particular, the uneven distribution of stone hand axes and evidence of Paleolithic combustion between 2,000,000 and 200,000 years ago.
The marginal relevance of stone about 3,000,000 years ago for the existential biological imperative of maintaining homeostatic integrity and consequent reproductive success and survival of inarticulate hominina
plausibly led stones to be regarded as quintessentially predictable and unsurprising,
and crucially lacking epistemic affordances implicit in tool use.
Nevertheless, an individual could entertain more expressive, i.e. deeper generative models,
and respond to exploratory, epistemic, and exploitative pragmatic value.
She might discover novel ways of attaining predictable or unsurprising outcomes through her behavior and its outcome may well have been disregarded by her companions.
All the same, such idiosyncratic behavior may trump prevailing expectations that normally are unsurprising and therefore favor minimization of variational free energy in line with the free energy principle.
It is unclear by what mechanism transmission of any conjectural package could have been sustained over the spatiotemporal dimensions involved,
and so with respect to some kinds of tool usage, it is imprudent to infer that they reflect an unbroken tradition of manual behavior handed down from generation to generation.
If a generation lasts 25 years on average, then 200,000 years imply 8,000 generations, which presents a major challenge for the culture history approach to interpretation.
In the late middle Pleistocene, BF-LCTs were made by precursors of H-Sapiens in Africa and Neanderthals in Europe.
Probably both used in similar ways.
Nevertheless, the uneven spatial temporal distribution of BF-LCTs is undeniable.
Cognitive and manual designs and strategies were responses in common to underlying neurobiological propensities shared by the early middle Pleistocene nappers.
Nappers are people that actually form and shape these tools.
Sporadic local enactment by H-Heidelberg-Genis could well have been responsible for puzzling exceptional finds of what, at first sight, looked like in possibly early instances of stone working techniques that flowered only much later on,
showing that hand axes could be napped with care and attention in Europe before the middle of the middle Pleistocene, thereby disproving a commonly held view to the contrary.
The alternative ways of modifying stones that appeared after 2-MA, namely, on the one hand to make LCTs, that's one-sided, and in particular BF-LCTs, and on the other to remove usable flakes from cores,
that also may have undergone some modification, and that also may have been able to use this.
The alternative ways of using this, that also may have undergone some modification, sometimes sort of facilitate the removal, implies that H-Erectus could carry out 2 different irreversible chains of the manipulative reduction of stone,
implying the capacity for haptic and short-term working memory, long-term memory, and prospective memory.
respect beyond that of earlier homina or extant pandans.
Artifact diversity implies that, at times, H-Erectus could recognize not only the irreversibility of their respective chains of sequential manual reduction of stone,
but also their correspondence to distinct morphological sets, which at least is comparable to second-order cognition that's understood implicitly by pre-verbal toddlers nowadays.
While studying regional differences in the development of grey matter, which may be prolonged in temporal cortex, perhaps related to its role in integrating memory,
object recognition, and auto-visual inputs, from the perspective of the free energy principle, these differences testify to structural priors that inherit from epigenetics and contextualize experience-dependent learning,
and planning as inference, at a somatic timescale.
Great. And continuing with snakes and ladders.
Also, just to get it said as well, the BF-LCT is bifacially flaked large cutting tools. It's a type of tool.
The circumstantial evidence seems to imply the adaptive evolution of human neurobiological propensities that support prospective memory in tool making, together with short-term working memory, including haptic working memory, long-term working memory, and long-term procedural memory, and episodic memory of past matters and things.
These propensities were, and are, phylogenetic outcomes of existential ontogenetic programs adapted through natural selection for satisfying the bio-energetic requirements of organisms.
However, teaching and learning stone-napping skills are very different from a communicatively challenged H-Erectus individual spontaneous enactment resulting in a disregarded BF-LCT outcome of iterative, inactive, haptic, lithic manipulations,
regardless of any neurobiological, cognitive neuronal propensity for such enactment.
It's a huge claim.
Getting and fashioning stone for subsequent use suggests awareness of potential, albeit delayed advantages, for lessening the efforts needed to acquire bio-energetic resources.
Such behavior draws on short-term and long-term working memory, episodic and procedural memory, and prospective memory or forethought to a degree well beyond the capacity of living anthropoid apes.
Those are all the keys for snakes and ladders.
There's a strong, relentless, even, focus on the moment of tool production, the cognitive and extended cognitive phenomena associated with the performance of that act,
specifically with regard to hominids, and with a focus on the BF-LCT bifacially flaked large cutting tool, of which the authors have extensive field expertise seeing in situ.
So, snakes and ladders uses this fun board game metaphor to, or reference, to explain the sudden appearance and disappearance,
not by appeal to a cultural continuity mechanism, tradition, but rather the instantaneous, agential, zone of bounded surprise and action.
Now, just before we get into copy or not copy.
What I think is, what we're trying to do here is hold up the fact that we believe that these, although each paper has been discretized to a particular topic,
the continuity between the papers is what we'd really like to emphasize here because there are such strong strands, or basically the shores are within such easy sight of one another,
that it's very nice to be able to kind of float back and forth.
And we're going to now focus on the copy or not to copy piece of this, but to say that there isn't a way of being able to look at this as a continuity.
I think we're trying to disrupt that right now.
So, try to hold on as much of the snakes and ladder key points as you can as we, as we morph into this second perspective.
It's, it's perspective swapping one on one doesn't mean we're losing the details of either.
Want me to start? Oh yeah, I'm on evens. You told me I had to do that. Okay.
Social learning theories about how information spreads do not explain how a seed of information is planted in each individual brain.
So we're back to the brain based stuff.
A useful lens is the free energy principle, which underpins a generative hierarchically mechanistic mind or HMM.
Surprising or uncharacteristic sensory and physical states are precluded via a minimization of variation of free energy.
Interactions involve predictive processing and consequent perception action responses.
Active inference. Yay.
Actively seeking predicted sensory exchanges with the world that minimize surprise or variation of free energy.
Fundamental involvement of learning minds is precisely the minds, i.e. the brains, that are concerned in a mechanistic approach seeking to ascertain the minimum requirements,
back to that threshold thing for an innovation to nest as it were in one individual's brain before it can do so in another's innovation and innovator are treated throughout in the context of habitual phenotypical behavior of a species from the perspective.
of a conspecific observer.
of a conspecific observer who witnesses novel or unorthodox behavior or its outcome usually through, but not necessarily those that owe to activity performed by a conspecific, but which at the time of the observation have not been adopted by other conspecifics in the group and therefore have not undergone social transmission.
In many respects, the words are synonymous with invention and inventor, though these often connote post hoc recognition.
The imperative to maximize the expected information, curious behavior, responding to epistemic affordance resolves uncertainty and thereby reduces the long term average of prediction errors in the future.
However, this kind of innovative behavior is risky owing to its deviation from those phenotypical responses that selection is favored in a specific ecological ecological niche.
innovation, innovation, when viewed from Charles Darwin's vantage point of evolution by natural selection may be a far from advantageous trait.
Deviations can have under under work consequences that even may threaten an innovator's very survival before reproductive age can be reached.
Oh, the risk reward.
Pre-hawk, post-hawk, and that fine line that bridges the two.
Continuing with copy or not to copy, they write.
And also I will add Dean has excellently visually differentiated in these slides.
Innovative behavior can be regarded as a latent variable, a plausible policy whose posterior probability must be reached.
whose posterior probability must be inferred from a set of observations.
The family of probability densities entertained by an individual is restricted to the system's prior Bayesian beliefs.
It could be the case that a conspecific's innovative behavior will not fall neatly into one of these prior conceptions of a behavioral policy.
This means by definition that innovative behavior is both unlikely to be evinced in any given phenotype and crucially, difficult to recognize when observed by another.
It was true for modern art.
It was true for the large tools.
Small deviations by innovators may be accommodated by observers who can take discrepancies into account by making minor adjustments.
An innovator's behavior should diverge markedly from the repertoire of plausible policies used by an observer to predict another's behavior may be beyond the capacity of the latter's generative model.
A prerequisite of registering and encoding surprising sites may well be an ability to modify the generative model in order to accommodate sensory evidence that fails to meet top-down predictions.
Brains might balance top-down expectations against bottom-up sensory evidence.
The ability to do that dynamically and to conduct complex computations suggestive of high attentional executive control implies sensitivity to both previous experience and the current context.
Perhaps the overriding of top-down predictions implies that those complex attentional and strategic components of working memory distinguish humans from chimpanzees.
Plausibly, familiarity by conspecific observers with the actions demonstrated in an experiment kept their surprise associated with the demonstrated actions within a manageable range, and this, in turn, prompted copying.
And it's easier for chimpanzees to perform complex actions that involve considerable motor demands than it is for them to reproduce actions that are unorthodox with regard to their habitual behavioral repertoire.
Brains must shoulder an additional energetic costs whenever novel associated behavior responses are introduced that may override those already present.
The acceptability of reproducing a novel artifact may owe at least as much to the ways in which broadly similar copies might be used with predictably accurate outcomes.
Again, big, serious, disciplinary claims also with broad transdisciplinary and application consequences.
By focusing attention less on the creative process of an innovation, more on the observers of it,
this acceptance of the outcome underpins its intra- and intergenerational transmission, questions raise their head.
About just what materialistic phenomena are implicated, as opposed to psychocognitive and social cognitive notions,
about mental developments during human evolution,
and how and when they impinge on the HMM of our neogene hominid precursors such that
only in Pleistocene homo was faithful copying become widespread and give rise to technological cumulative complexity.
It's obligatory, therefore, to pay attention both to fundamental principles of biological science,
with particular reference to neurobiology,
and to the evolution of bi-natural selection of species of the genus homo,
with particular reference to their brains.
I added the smiley face.
Narrowing the range of adult behavior open to him may be protracted corticogenesis evolved in homo only around 0.5 ma during the middle Pleistocene.
In adolescence nowadays, coactivity between prefrontal and caudal cortices underlies agile working memory.
From the perspective of the FEP, these differences near anatomical testify to structural priors
probably established through neuroepigenetic evolution,
which contextualized experience-dependent learning,
and planning as inference at a somatic timescale.
It's relevant that the interplay between working memory load and associated reinforcement learning
affects prediction errors via proboparietal and DOPA,
minergetic striatial neuronal circuits involving algorithmic-like effects mediated by loops
with basal ganglia, with likely impingement also of episodic and procedural long-term memory input
or medial temporal hippocampal cortices.
You can read the middle section.
When considering early Pleistocene behavior,
we need not assume that relationships between different kinds of memory were less complex psychocognically than ours.
It is prosaically sufficient to infer that they were simply less frequent owing to earlier consolidation of cerebral networks in homo erectus smaller brain.
That's being restated. We already talked about it earlier in our introduction.
Yes. It reflects many of the so-called biological attributes that archaeologists study in terms of cranial volume and developmental trajectories,
and reaches towards some of those more ineffable or at least unrecorded cognitive phenotypes like working memory,
ability to integrate diverse stimuli, and so on.
More on that.
Homo erectus observers' brains may have locked neuronal networks efficient enough for enabling them to develop innovative behavioral responses
in the early Pleistocene that were habit-forming.
A zone of bounded surprise, here and after ZBS, restricted them.
Plausibly, observations by early Homo erectus were translated often into activity intermediate between emulation and imitation,
owing to limited foresight about the significance of precise manipulations for determining the practicality and effectiveness of an outcome dimly envisaged.
Their ZBS limited their ability to join up the mental steps involved in planning and to infer counterfactual possibilities.
That is a fundamental aspect of active inference.
That selection of actions and plans is based on minimizing the free energy to be anticipated in undertaking them, minimizing effort.
And also, extremely interestingly, as we explored in Livestream 52 with Lance Dacosta,
free energy is not the only discrepancy measure and one that was mentioned was the Earth Movers' distance,
so it's interesting to think about active inference with the Earth Movers' distance if you are actually moving Earth.
Zones of bounded surprise, ZBS, are different from the zones of latent solutions, ZLS, proposed by Tenney et al. in 2009,
in their attempt to explain the lack of cumulative culture in great apes,
on the basis that cultural complexity is restricted by the limited potentials for individual intervention.
Zones of bounded surprise are separated by varying degrees of surprise from the species' prototypical behavioral repertoire,
and could therefore resist the gravitational pull of the ZLS.
The focus of the ZBS concept is on the observers and their ability to make sense of an observed innovation.
Encoding and subsequent copying of an innovation depends on the degree of disparity or surprisal between predictable behaviors,
which are those typical of the species, and the perceptual incoming information about novel behaviors.
The ZBS allows any potentially novel or unorthodox behavior to be copied,
provided that the ranges or levels of surprisal provoked in observers are tolerated or manageable by them.
The ZBS is constrained by the capacity of a species' cerebral neuronal network,
as opposed to potentially a sociocultural explanation which might argue that the continuity or pattern overall of a tool's appearance
would be rather constrained by the capacity of a social group's transmission capacity.
It's a yes and they're proposing a different tack.
ZBS focuses on the observer of an innovation, and hence ZLS and ZBS can be useful complementary concepts.
I think we checked, but we never went below min 2 in this paper.
Properties of mirror neuron circuitry are necessary prerequisites for imitative copying.
The left side of our brain contains neurons with canonical properties involved in tool use, and perhaps understanding it.
The matter of understanding raises unavoidable awkward epistemological problems of mirrorology, however.
Mirrorology is about parts and wholes.
The cardinal and the ordinal.
Number three is known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to
trying to practice this before we came on live and I still do a trip sorry. Arcaic fasciculus
white matter has undergone evolutionary modification affecting temporal low connectivity.
Learned behavior involves long-term working memory and procedural memory. Conscious modification of
learned behavioral patterns reasonably permits distinguishing long-term working memory from
short-term attentional working memory even though most long-term memory is implicit and non-declarative.
The boundary between explicit and implicit memory is porous. It's a broken mind.
Still lacks imply fact for propositional perception. Individual trained sequences changed to a greater
extent earlier in learning and stabilized later. Patterns of neuronal activity became increasingly
distinct for trained sequences carried out at full speed. The selective importance of particular
neuronal groups and included striatal activation comparing the motor sequences when carried out
at different speeds permitted an analysis of the observation that areas of motor and sensory motor
cortices show relatively slight changes in patterns of neuronal activity that are specific for particular
sequences following training. Possibly on account of the slow speed at which participants previously
have been paced during training hence defining that patterns of sequence specific activation are
strongest when performing at greatest speed implies that investigating fine grain patterns of activity
requires participants to cope with a strong manual challenge. Activation is bilateral because fashioning stone
requires precise and accurate monitoring in an organized forward sequence of perception action with feedback.
Home erectus brains had an appropriate working memory. Moreover, they had to have a
had a hierarchically organized neurocognitive capacity to generate. In an observer, the combinatorial ability needed for there to be any
any acceptably accurate copying. The stone undergoing artifactual modification as envisaged outcome that is abstracted and understood implicitly by both parties albeit invisible explicitly during the materializing through shaping process. Such abstraction severely challenges innate homeostatic drives in naive observers.
Rearble neuroimaging of students learning to nap chopping tools via those learning to nap BFLCTS suggest significant distinctions in their respective judgments concerning the physical accuracy of predicted outcomes versus strategical appropriateness in preparing the intended tool. It is as if the two groups were trying out different cognitive strategies to
make ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
or physical models available for copying, e.g. models in an artist's studio or stone artifacts visible to Paleolithic observers.
As argued elsewhere, working memory is a complex, multidimensional concept.
You can take the last part.
Evolution by natural selection is inherently conservative.
An emergent neural representation exploited by lone individuals need not have been shared automatically by other minds and groups of largely inarticulate Homo erectus,
whose adaptive priors guided their action perception cycles towards adaptive unsurprising states by way of minimizing variational free energy.
Those priors could involve neuroepigenetically controlled expressions of genes implicated in those cerebral neuronal developments that prioritize routine expectations and consolidate habitual behavior to the detriment of recognizing the epistemic affordances that underwrite curiosity and surprising novelty-seeking behavior.
In consequence, some infrequently found technological aspects of early Pleistocene innovative behaviors may well have been isolated instances until such times active inference brought about modification of adaptive priors,
thereby permitting acceptance and adoption by observers of unorthodox behavior that had failed to provide adaptive advantage hitherto.
So much to unpack with what active inference allows.
Right.
So that is where our discussion of the key rings of the two papers ends.
Just as a reminder, the more extensive quotes are great resources to see in the final versions of the paper and so on.
And in the following couple of slides, we wanted to bring in a few other directions,
a sampling of the extra resources that Dean and I were looking through in our .zero preparation.
And do you have any comments on this before I describe this side by side?
Yeah, I think it's good that you show the two representations on the right side of the screen.
I think oftentimes we think of things of interstate as, you know, here are the two train tracks and they are in perfect parallel.
What I think often happens is the shortest distance between two points from formalism aspect is a straight line.
But when what we're talking about is generative models, we're talking about two kinds of time, one that's continuous and one that's discrete.
And our ability to uptake something may be afforded when we meander slightly.
So the representation on the left isn't to remove the idea of the barbell or to impose on the model that it has to be direct.
Sometimes getting to the answer comes about in kind of strange and wonderful ways.
Sometimes things happen suddenly because we meander.
So I'll turn over the actual diagram now to you and be able to talk a little bit about that in terms of how we shape that in terms of discrete and continuous time.
Awesome.
Awesome.
Well, this is figure 4.3 from Par Pizzullo and Friston's 2022 active inference textbook that we have textbook groups at the Institute around.
And two different taxonomic groups, maybe generative modelis erectus and generative modelis habilis or something like that, are juxtaposed in a way that highlights their structural similarity, but also calls attention to some of their details.
On the top is a partially observable Markov decision process.
And this is a discrete time representation of a generative model.
So the hidden states are evolving through time and there's a past, present and future, which are indexed with temporal markers.
Time minus one, time right now, time plus one.
And at each time, there's the emission of observables.
That's the tail of two densities.
It can emit generative AI densities from hidden states, or it can learn hidden states from observables.
That's the A matrix.
D is the prior.
B describes how those hidden states change through time.
And G shapes policy selection through expected free energy that intervenes in how hidden states change through time.
And more briefly, in the continuous time generative model, rather than explicit representation of past, present and future, the approach taken is much more resonant with generalized coordinates of motion or a Taylor series expansion,
in which all past, present and future time points are implicitly predicted through the specification of the derivatives of increasingly high order around the target variable latent state x.
Again, there's a lot of states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states, states states, states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states
reandering route, that you're not always in a hurry, you would probably have a better chance
of realizing that in continuous time. The suddenness would occur as you stretched
your window of analysis out, which again seems counterintuitive, but that's what the representation
affirms. And one last note on this before you introduce the next one is in this figure 4.3,
we see a crystallization of methodological pluralism in active inference. So all questions
of the form, how does active inference treat X phenomena? Even for a specified subsystem,
there's no a priori reason to favor the left or the right foot. We want the barbell loaded
on both sides before we bench press it. And so even the decision of the time window and the
treatment of time, which is one of the most absolutely fundamental decisions in a model,
let alone further structural learning questions, which were mentioned earlier in the quotations,
even at that most fundamental divergence between discrete and continuous time generative models,
the active inference absolutely has a decision.
So what do you see here and what do we want to bring in?
Yeah, no, this is, this was Ryan Smith's paper. And what I, what I, what I like about this
is he broke it down into decision active inference, just to, if you want to go back and have a look
at that live stream set, um, what he was trying to speak to there was that a lot of stuff that's going
on in folk psychology doesn't contradict what we now kind of understand in terms of how we can model
things out using active inference. And again, you can, you can explain the diagram better than I can,
but I think what's interesting here is, um, to decide to make a choice to copy or not to copy to,
to throw a stone or not to throw a stone. There's two slides here that we kind of have to kind of pull
together again for, for what I wanted to focus on, which is on the next slide next, but here,
what I want to do is kind of talk about this paragraph on the bottom left-hand side.
You have a paper about sensory attenuation. What, what do we pay attention to?
As an outcome desensitization, desensitization, this only becomes problematic when contingencies
in the environment when the environment changes over time, right? So we are talking about things
that agents do in, in time and in place, but what this paper was talking about was sort of the folk
psychological and some of those stories that we've used to try to explain things and focuses on what's
going on in the envelope, what's going on in the niche. This highlights an important distinction
between this type of habit formation and other mechanisms promoting habit-like patterns
of behavior in decision active inference. For example, actions can also become resistant to
change after repeated experience because agents build up highly confident beliefs about the reward
probabilities under each action. If contingencies change, it could take a very large number of
trials for agents to unlearn such beliefs. So I wanted to throw this in as a compliment to
the habitization step that was in the copied or not to copy paper. Do you want to explain the diagram
real quick? My only comment there is with respect to Ali's question about copy discard, the shadow of
to copy or not to copy is to discard or not to discard. Because if people have been hitting their rocks one way
and somebody else, even if the functional mirror neurons allow one to understand that one is doing it
differently, there's a whole variety of things that can happen and not all of them involve the successful
contagion of even a resolutely positive improvement on tool use. And especially with complex trade-off
frontiers and partially obscured views and all these other social complexities, that is going to mean that
to copy or not to copy, to discard or not to discard, copy discard becomes a central piece
in compositional accounts of surprise minimization under the hierarchically mechanistic minds.
So on this slide, which was just a continuation of that live stream set for DEC,
I'm going to drop down to the fourth paragraph. If the highest value
value in an outcome space was specified for observing tasting ice cream in the policy and the policy space
included either choose don't move or choose walk to the ice cream truck and buy ice cream, a deciding
active agent, active inference agent will infer that walking to the ice cream truck and buying ice cream is
the highest probability policy that is, it will form the intention to go buy ice cream in addition,
when considering the range of cases involving goal directed choice, we have been unsuccessful at
identifying examples where the policy would play a role inconsistent with represent representing desired
outcomes. Now here's an interesting thing even back then, if you look at the ice cream cone and you ask it
to the third person now, Daniel and Dean looking at the slide, is the ice cream truck closer to us as we're viewing this
or further away from us than the actual ice cream cone is, you get one sense of it and then if I grab
this line, at first it appears that the ice cream cone truck is closer to us, if I do this however, and I grab this line,
just like that, pull that away, now all of a sudden what's in the foreground, the ice cream cone.
So oftentimes when we're trying to figure out what we desire or what our goal is, we're completely unaware
of how we're setting up our own frame, what rule we're actually following, if we have a rule,
we're completely unaware of it, and yet that has a huge decision implication on what's the desired
foreground background here. Is it, you know, how are we coming about to this idea that this one shape,
which we're going to have to arrive at by removing things, is more advantageous than just leaving it the way it is.
So just to have one perspective on something, unidirectional, versus to be able to have those two
perspectives on something. So again, this was in comparison to a folk psychology telling, a folk
psychology narrative of telling how we might come to behaving versus the active inference. What Ryan wanted
to do in his paper was say, they're not fighting with one another. And oftentimes, if you actually
understand that you've made a lot of choices that you're not even aware of, that your generative model,
sometimes is a reduction to some rules that you may or may not even be able to articulate, and that's
fine. That yes, it will influence what you do present as an articulation. It doesn't change the
what we now understand as the mechanisms that are present, and that may help us in terms of some of
that predictive processing. Awesome. Livestream 46, way back when. All right, just a few more pieces to
bring into the puzzle. So I'll give the first description on each of them, and then Dean,
feel free to kind of bring in why you wanted these to be here. So here's a paper,
A Variational Synthesis of Evolutionary and Developmental Dynamics, which was written with
Friston, myself, Constance, Knight, Parr, and Campbell. We recently uploaded it to Archive. And
one of the main novelties or contributions of this paper was in contrast with previous multiscale
biologically oriented active inference models, which used the formalism of nested POMDPs to model nested
Markov blankets, thus creating one bigger and bigger tree with finer and finer leaves. We used an explicit
discontinuous multiscale or scale friendly jump such that within the lifetime, the intra-generational
action perception loops and also developmental loops that we heard about in some selections from
the papers today, that that particular partition, that thing, over the course of its life in an
ecologically embodied way, can have bottom-up causation to this higher order thing, which is a population
thing. And this higher order extended genotypic thing also uses the exact same particular partition,
mathematics, and framing that we see across systems in ActInth. And another way to look at that is
here in the center is one thing with a blue ring going around it at a given level. And it is itself composed of
these smaller things, which also are composed of even smaller things. And also that main blue ring is
playing a role in potentially a larger thing. And this is the scale friendliness or the scale
freeness of the FEP formalism discussed in an ontogenetic phylogenetic setting within and amongst
generations. And rather than utilizing this graphed bigger and bigger POMDPs strategy, we introduce an
explicit discontinuity in that things at a lower level are sampled or instantiated from a higher
level distributional thing. And the differential success of those within generation trajectories
can result in bottom-up causation modifying the extended genotypic thing. I hope that we'll have more
sessions to talk more about this paper and related work, but just wanted to give that quick overview.
And I don't have a lot of deep background in biology. So I'm, I, the reason why I wanted,
I was hoping that you would be interested in at least touching on this is because I think, again,
we're back to, so which have we chosen to do? Have we chosen to zoom in on the scale friendly or have we
just, yes, zoom in on the scale friendly or zoom out onto the scale free. And I think we get a better
understanding when we're able to appreciate the differences and put them back together in our,
in our sort of our own model. Great. On to the next. Here is a paper with Sean O'Connor who led this
effort and myself from the end of 2022 predictive processing interpretation of the mirror test and
implications of a reflection prediction for human cognition. And just to read one sentence from the
abstract, we hypothesize that a reflection prediction upon which our predictive processing
interpretation of the mirror test is built may also offer a novel perspective to understand how
humans locate themselves relative to a mirror, imitate others and are self-aware from a social perspective.
So what have you seen in that mirror mirror on the screen and why did you want it here?
Um, because I think the sensory, first of all, I strongly recommend people get this paper and read it
because I thought it was, I thought it was an excellent paper and it should, uh, it should become on,
part of more people's reading lists. One of the things that really speaks to very clearly and makes a
strong case around is the role of sensory attenuation and bringing the concept of sensory attenuation
into the world of predictive processing. And I think it's, would be something that would be helpful
for people to understand, especially if you're, if you're thinking that for example, yeah, and I don't
forget, Danny, you'll know what this is, but there was one of the things that was talked about in this
paper was the idea that if you believe you do not have a limb, that one of the things that you could do
is come up with a way of a mirror showing you without that limb, even if you already possessed it. So it's
going, it's, it's reinforcing what, um, Hector and Michael and Carl were talking about in terms of, so
how does, how does active inference help us get to maybe some more plausible answers in prosaic ways?
And so the sensory attenuation piece to me was really valuable and tied in with some of the concepts
we're talking about here. Yeah. One thought on that is let's grant an effective mirror neuron or
recognition capacity just spatially in terms of tool usage. So that is not always granted with eyesight
and partial occlusion of the working locations of tools and all of this, but let's just say that
an observer can observe somebody else doing a motor behavior and entirely understands the basis of that
motor behavior. Like the person does a pirouette or they write a line in cursive or they play violin.
You can have absolute understanding of the mechanisms of the baseball pitcher of the hockey stick. Yet
there are multiple reasons from an embodied and cognitive perspective why the behavior cannot be
copied. We can all understand that there are certain sport acts that are not just strength limited and
they're not even necessarily dexterity limited that we cannot do. We cannot write in a language we do
not know by hand, even though we might have the motor dexterity. And so that's a semantic explanation. Or
quite simply, and to call back the zone of bounded surprisal, an observer may observe a hetero praxis,
a different praxis, and simply implicitly or even explicitly believe that's unlikely for me to do.
And as it was thought, so it shall be done. The innovation is over.
And then lastly, in a little bit, most extrapolatively,
previously in some work, I've juxtaposed Buckminster Fuller's life and work and times
with that of William Blake. And the prompting quote from the paper was above,
zones of bounded surprisal are different from the zones of latent solution in their attempt to
explain the lack of cumulative culture and great apes on the basis that cultural complexity
is restricted by the limited potentials for individual invention. So, Bucky and Blake were both
tremendously inventive individuals. And to reflect a few lines of some Blake poetry,
the auguries of innocence begins with, to see a world in a grain of sand and a whole and a heaven
in a wild flower, hold infinity in the palm of your hand and eternity in an hour. Those are some of the
famous opening lines of that poem, and they speak to this time representation. But the closing lines
are less often quoted. When we, we are led to believe a lie, when we see not through the eye,
which was born in a night to perish in a night, when the soul slept in beams of light. God appears,
and God is light to those poor souls who dwell in night. But does a human form display to those who
dwell in realms of day? And I'll let you get the word on that. Well, here's the thing. I want to thank,
again, the authors who are going to be joining us for the dot one and dot two for allowing us to
pull two of their papers into proximity and allow us to talk about them so proximally, because we,
I think I speak for both of us, but you can correct me on this, Daniel. I think with the use of active
inference, and our continuous updating with active inference as a way of strategizing, are coming to
realize that sometimes things that seem really distal and unrelated, when brought together, you,
as the person who is looking at two things at once, with both of your eyes open, tend to learn a lot.
And so whether it's pulling Buckminster Fuller and Blake into the, into the same slide deck, or
talking about to copy or not to copy and snakes and ladders, it's actually a real treat to be able
to bring things that seem like, well, that, that, you know, conventionally, that was field work. And this
is lab work. Being able to have one foot in both of those realms really helps the person who likes to go
back and forth, who is moving from a position of being really familiar with the subject matter, to being
somebody who can actually get into the predictive matter, matters. Because they're more comfortable in doing the
thing. They're not quite so stuck and bound. So that, and that means when I see ZLS and ZBS beside one another,
makes me very, very happy. So that's, that's my, that's why I wanted the, I wanted you to get acknowledged
for some of the work that you've done in terms of this isn't the first time that you've seen an
advantage in bringing two things that don't seem like they belong on the same table and bringing them
together and kind of going, Whoa, look what happens when you do. Great. Thanks. Any final comments or I'll
give a final thought. Go for it. All right. Well, I would just like to echo your words. We really
appreciated even dare I say, working with the authors in this dot zero and even negative dot one,
the first of its kind interval. These papers initially to me, at least felt like two
pillowy beds of plain text. Can't think of any other way to say it right now. However, once we dug at that
field site and we brushed off some of those uni and bifacial tools and ideas,
there was just more and more to find and explore. So I'm very much looking forward to the coming
dot one dot two and potentially beyond. And we hope you've enjoyed this 53.0.
Thanks, Daniel. All right. Thank you, Dean. Farewell.
Here we are now.

## iHgxmn0ockg

Hello and welcome. It's March 23rd, 2023, and we're here in ActInf livestream 53.1.
Welcome to the Active Inference Institute. We're a participatory online institute that is
communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference. This is a recorded and an
archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work. All backgrounds
and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams.
Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about the institute and learning groups and projects.
We're here in ActInfstream 53.1, and we are discussing a dyad of papers.
We are discussing Snakes and Ladders in Paleoanthropology by Hector, Carl, and Michael.
Welcome, Carl. And we're discussing to copy or not to copy with Hector and Michael.
Previously in 53.0, Dean and I provided some background and context on these papers, and today
we're going to be able to share a video of the work that we have. So, we're going to be
going to be able to share a video of the work that we have in the future. So, we're going to be able to
feature a presentation by Michael Walker, and following the presentation, we'll have a discussion
and see where it goes. So, with no further ado, we will all say hello, the non-authors first, then the authors,
concluding with Michael and leading into the presentation. So, I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in California,
California, and it was a great fun and learning experience to work on the .0. So, I'm really excited
to continue in the .1 today. To Dean.
Thanks, Daniel. I'm Dean. I'm here in Calgary. I guess the only thing I want to just highlight
today is the fact that it's a 3-2-3-2-3, and I love that bouncing back and forth between those
those two quantities. So, I'm really excited, and I will pass this to Hector.
Okay. Hello. I'm Hector Manrique, and I will just summarize what brought me here. Basically,
I graduated in psychology. That was in Spain, and then I did my PhD in psychobiology. So, I came to
learn the biological basis of behavior. Then I recycled into comparative psychology when I joined
the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig. I was lucky that I could
work with Josef Kaj and his supervision. And then I had the opportunity to work with the four species of
grade eights. And after that, I came to know Michael in a conference on human evolution,
and we have been working together ever since. So, we are now good friends and also colleagues. And
that's it, basically. Thank you, Hector. And Carl, if you'd like to say hello?
Yes, I do. Please. So, my name is Carl Fiston. I'm a professor of neuroscience at University
College London, and a colleague of our main speakers today, who I've never seen in person.
But now, at least I have seen you virtually. So, very nice to meet you.
Great. Thank you, Carl. Michael, the floor is yours.
Hi, Michael. I'm very pleased to say hello to Carl, whom I've not yet met personally,
but we're now meeting visually, virtually. I'm a retired professor at the University of Mulfi in Spain.
I'm getting rather ancient. I shall be 82 years out tomorrow. But anyway, that doesn't stop me from
digging up Neanderthal skeletons and even earlier things here in Spain. I'm very pleased to be
presenting this. It's a case of the dog that didn't bark in the night. So, whenever you want me to begin,
I can begin, Daniel. Yes, the slide is up and it is all you.
Well, this is really a paper which we have out on SCI Archive in the version, in an earlier version.
It's now been modified for a different journal to the one that was originally intended. But the
presentation is in order to make a complicated subject fairly simple to comprehend.
I call it Snakes and Ladders because stuff appears, disappears and reappears throughout human
evolution over the past at least two million years, if not before. And the question is, why is there not
a continuous trajectory? Let's move on to the next one, Daniel. Right. The traditional view is the received
wisdom is looking at what paleoanthropology can tell us from the outside. And there are two basic
methodologies, one based on geology and Darwinism, which gives us one view of what it is all about. And
another view down on the bottom right is all based on what modern people do and what modern apes do. And
it's all by so-called analogy. Let's move on to the next one.
So both of these have drawbacks. I won't go into this in detail. You're welcome to take these slides
away, provided you don't publish them because they do include some material drawn from other sources,
which I haven't acknowledged formally. But the drawbacks to Darwinism is really the difficulty of
being able to prove anything in the past in its own terms. Okay, we can accept it as being a valid way of
explaining natural phenomena and evolution. The drawback to using modern analogies is the
spatiotemporal incommensurability with regard to the regular irregularities and irregular irregularities
of which things disappear and reappear throughout the Pleistocene record and, indeed, prehistory in general.
Let's move on to the next one. So instead of looking at it from the outside, let's look at it from the inside.
And this has an advantage of commensurability and compatibility at the same time with the gradual
evolution of and within species by natural selection and at the same time with the documented behavior
of Argenus Homo. Well, this is from Karl's and his colleagues' latest book. I'm sure you all know it.
So let's move on to the next one.
Right. In the 1960s, some archaeologists were certainly reflecting, including some Cambridge friends of mine,
the ostensibly, on the ostensive presence of irregular irregularities and regular irregularities in the archaeological record.
And a well-known one is the case of the wheel. Wheels were used for traction in Central Asia and the Middle East
from about 5,000 years ago. They were invented separately in Mesoamerica just over 2,000 years ago.
They weren't used for any kind of practical purpose, but just for moving effigies, statues and toys around.
And this seems to have been completely independent inventions.
Okay. So let's say that surprising enactment with stuff was the exception in early humans.
Let's see if I can... I'm getting a little bit tied up with two screens here because I'm working on my own screen at the same time.
Cognitive surprises were probably disregarded in general because surprising spontaneous enactment with stuff
distracted attention away from daily routines.
Cognitive....
certainly occurred innumerable times without gaining any footholds as
technological or cultural if you like communal behavioural traditions passed
down for generation and innovation because this is unlikely if we take a
period let's say from two million years ago even one even to half a million years
ago that's one and a half million years that's 60,000 generations if you consider
one generation as lasting 25 years it's most unlikely that things could be
handed down from father to son over 60,000 generations so let's take a
different take on this let's go back to look at it from the inside from
considerations of the free energy principle and active influence it follows that
active influence underpins biological behaviour that has exploratory or
epistemic and exploitative or pragmatic aspects sensitive respectively to
ambiguity and risk enabling epistemic and ambiguity resolving responses to
support pragmatic reward seeking ones and therefore it is not implausible to the
snakes and ladders appearance disappearance and reappearance of stuff over let's say
the past two million years of existence of Arganus oh to no more than the extreme
rarity with which unorthodox epistemic exploration of possibly advantageous
opportunities in the human equation resulted from incipient albeit in
perceptibly evolving neurobiological propensities in brains or hierarchically
mechanistic minds to generate exploitative pragmatic attention via active influence to
cognitive surprises from untoward behavioural incidents which won't express more on to the next one so let's forget to see the next one
so let's forget about let's move on to the next one Daniel let's forget about this
uh how do i get from here to there how do i get from a lump of rock to let's say a hand axe
by spontaneous enactment what could provoke this okay let's move on next slide
i excavated the site i am excavating the site almost a million years old which has one hand axe
remains of burning lots of small stone tools as you can see some burnt ones on the bottom left but then
this is the dog that didn't bark why are there no more hand axe why do we only have one big large
bifacially shaped first cutting tool the hand axe and hundreds of tiny little tools people don't ask that
question let's move on to the next one they explain it away
boom people really didn't bother with
cutting up big animals they didn't need big cutting tools
well that's one way of looking at it prove it
people lost stuff and so there should be more of these around but there's only one well prove that
there's only one because people took them away and use them elsewhere move that the problem is these
these so-called interpretations only explain stuff away could well have been a valentine gift or not next
slide so let's get back to snakes and ladders we have fire at the site there aren't too many sites with fire
either and again uh the general assumption is that there was continuity uh once
trouble with moving my other um my other screen just a moment how can i move this on excuse me a moment
uh my eyesight isn't all that good these days no that's not doing it oh dear excuse me one minute um
um so we have the file as i just mentioned and
i don't believe that suddenly fire was brought to humans or invented and then passed on from father to
son nor do i believe as we'll see in the next slide that this was done along with an expansion
that can we have the next one daniel please um of these early homo erectus moving from africa outwards
carrying a hand axe carrying little embers and spreading the good news no next slide don't think
it works like that stuff couldn't have been passed on over all that period of time over all that space this
is not commensurable with modern human or modern ape behavior let's move on to the next one daniel so how do we
begin we begin we begin by bashing stone enactment with stuff and that started over three million years ago we know that
next one please
and then we have another problem which is that there is almost exponential increase in stuff
artifacts made by people and yet the brain as we know from fossil evidence does not follow that trajectory
which is the red one the brain increases and gradually flattens out at the same time as the number
of stuff that people make increases or almost exponentially let's have the next one so here we
have another problem to try and solve
and one possibility which was pointed out by the late professor uh philip tobias uh is that as the
brain increases we see in the paleo paleo anthropological record an increase in the uh variation in the volume of
the brain suggesting perhaps that there is some relaxation of selection pressure as homo uh evolved and we
have the next one again that's a point which is worth bearing in mind so let's think about another way of
how all this may or may not have happened
a methodological perspective grounded in fundamental biological and physical relationships
gives us a parsimonious prosaic deflationary account all these appearances disappearances and reappearances
of behavioral outcomes and so-called skills now professor nicholas teambergen who was a professor of
zoology at oxford and got a nobel prize uh was possibly fascinated with four questions let's have the next
slide and see what those are you want to know how we can relate evolution at
uh four different levels that of ontogeny and that of the mechanisms the causation
that of phylogeny and that of adaptation or survival value and
these are related uh diachronically and synchronically as one can see from this little diagram
uh into also what we might call approximate and ultimate explanatory um uh approaches
if we look at the problem in hand that's the next slide down um we can see that here we have in the
diachronic aspects paleolithic behavior in general in the synchronic one stuff appearing at different times
in the top right as far as ontogeny is concerned we have uh something which i'll mention later on but
we need to make a big deal of it that we know that there was a lack of adolescent growth splurt and a relatively
small brain in homo erectus one and a half million years ago compared with ours about two-thirds of
the side of ours when we think of mechanisms here we come to look at it from the inside we have the
matter of awareness involving active influence the free energy principle and variation of free energy
and we have what happens at the neurophysiological level uh allowing a complexity of behavior between hand
and stuff and and the stone in this case or stones we have to involve matters such as working memory
long-term memory perspective memory and indeed um constructive memory so how does all this tie into
phylogen here we have a snakes and ladder model uh based on the empirical evidence from the past
and we have survival value that clearly existed because homo erectus eventually gave rise to us next slide
please so let's get back to snakes and ladders here we have a man looking at the lock and saying how the
hell do i get this hand back and now the next one and in the same way with the next slide we have the
snakes and ladders a game of pure chance and random outcomes but but but next slide please we are not
dealing with completely random outcomes there's a big difference between on the one hand the
spatio-temporal snakes and ladders game of chance as if throws of a dice alone thought about appearances
disappearances and reappearances in behavioral phenomena unrelated to responses of the hierarchically
mechanistic minds of early homo and on the other hand a snakes and that is analogy for regular irregularities
and the irregular irregularities in the behavioral record owing to individually do syncretic or an
orthodox activity and the receptivity to it or not of an observing hierarchically mechanistic mind
whether that's an onlooker a bystander or that even the south same man making the or woman making the
hand acts in this case okay let's move on to the next one and here we begin to see that the heterogeneous
composition of a picture of appearances by chance alone disappearances by chance alone reappearances by
chance alone then is it useless as a model for making predictions that can be compared or contrasted with
archaeological findings of early parallel science whereas our preferred model by focusing on the
information theoretic and energetic constraints on biological neurobiological and psychosocial
evolution affords us a picture that lets us consider whether the model's focus could offer a rational
interpretation of the material record and in particular of the uneven distribution across the old world
things like stone hand axes and evidence of the tending of fire or even visiting caves things that
chimpanzees and dwellers don't do between two million and let's say two hundred thousand years in this case
eighty thousand generations okay let's move on very quickly and the rest of it in fact you're welcome
to uh read for yourselves rather than have me read it out to you because basically um you can take this
away or copy it or download it what we are arguing is that by about a million years ago adaptive evolution
was underway of cerebral human neurobiological propensities that support prospective and constructive
memory in making artifacts or working with stuff doing unusual unorthodox things together with short-term
working memory including that of the hands haptic working memory long-term working memory and long-term
procedural and episodic memory those propensities were phylogenetic outcomes of existential ontogenetic
programs adapted through natural selection for satisfying the bio energetic requirements of organisms
our genus in particular so here we have the basis of our argument that in a small band of communicatively
challenged homo erectus one member spontaneous enactment often was went district unregarded disregarded
it was regarded as useless pointless and unhelpful to gathering the food requirements needed for
surviving from day to day and we can refer the matter to the free energy principle applied to
ecological niche construction variation on your orthology to use as a fissons phrase whereby selection
of adaptive actions of organisms involves their assessment of the alternatives in terms of the
expected variation of free energy expresses the combination of epistemic and pragmatic affordances
so these early individuals a million and a half years ago who experienced cognitive surprises that's to
say prediction errors about the effective uh variation of the energy were unlikely to introduce novel
behaviors whether affected or seen by them that could gain a foothold in their community before
those communicative skills had developed in some groups that widened their social scope for active
influence and involved by natural selection within a shared framework of adaptive prior beliefs favoring
alignment of common expectations and joint activities that affected their ecological niche well
that's the basis of our argument um uh of course it's no more uh as it were uh falsifiable or
refutable within the terms of the data from the past than the alternatives that i began with but at least
it makes rational coherent sense and fits in with the uh darwinist view of evolution of species and within
species by natural selection it is a more prosaic and deflationary argument than the ones that people
archaeologists and anthropologists like to use uh and which i began with so you can take this away and read
it carefully uh what we're arguing is about a million years ago uh it's all right can you move on daniel
and again so let's just uh stick with this um well i think we can i think we can go through this
further quickly move on to the next one uh if it would yes sir right let's go let's go back to a million and a
half years ago let's look at the stuff we know there's a skeleton of a kid only nine years old according to uh
uh professor christopher dean of university college and uh that's a professor of dental anatomy and he studied the teeth
and whilst at one time uh this individual had the same height as myself i'm about um um i'm older short i'm about one meter uh 57
um nevertheless although he had our adult size he only he was only a child at nine years old and his
skull had almost certainly stopped growing it was only two thirds or less than the size of ours but he
was these people were clearly making hand axes and lighting fires or at least carrying fire around it from
time to time and visiting caves you know there was one in south africa pond of that cave and doing stuff
that uh is sort of halfway between what a chimp does and what our modern primitive peoples are
supposed to have been able to do let's say 10 000 or 20 000 years ago during the last night age
but there's a big time difference here and when we think about this kid clearly he was developing much
sooner than we do he became an adult probably before the age of 15 years old whereas our brains are not
fully formed for at least another 10 years so this would have limited let's have the next slide um uh
you can take these away and look at them i don't i don't have to read all this out in detail to you
but in uh in short um these people were precociously developed and therefore much more limited they'll
be behaving perhaps more like let's say um a modern i don't know four or five year old child of modern
adult height and with a small brain well they were not doing too badly if they kept uh uh making
uh things making stuff uh with their hands doing things and then forgetting about them because their
main purpose was to survive and they had to eat and find something to eat and they couldn't spend all
their time in these rather unproductive activities so let's say that um let's take the um active influence
approach to this and suggest that from the perspective of the free energy principle and active influence the
differences uh that we're seeing uh contextualize the experience dependent learning and planning and
influence on a small scale but they reflect the structural neurobiological priors
that could be inherited by epigenetic and genetic processes within the hierarchically
uh mechanistic minds that were evolving and which certainly were not the same as those of modern chimpanzees
and uh gorillas that don't do all these things that even our homo ancestors were doing one and a half
million years ago well okay i accept that the uh absence of uh evidence need not imply uh the evidence of
their absence but that fails to satisfy most people or many people particularly scientists like ourselves
certainly uh the darwin's argument had power has power but if we take a look at early human evolution
from the perspective of the free energy principle our proposal invokes an overarching methodological
paradigm grounded grounded in an existential principle fundamental to the evolution of living organisms
and is consistent both with the long periods of time and the vast periods of space in the old world that
we are dealing with let's say 60 000 or even 80 000 generations across three continents and
and nevertheless uh explain allows us to interpret from the point of view of natural selection uh what was
going on albeit imperceptibly slowly by natural selection and adaptation
at least some of the irregular regularities regular irregularities of phenomena attributable to homo
in the pleistocene record reflect the kinds of plausibly anomalous behavioral outcomes that doubtless occurred
often in a snakes and ladders model of evolution in early members of our genus regardless of what species
we want to call their skeletal remains whether neanderthals homo erectus modern homo whatever
okay these are plausible uh outcomes of behavior by individuals who fail to maintain orthodox behavioral responses
when faced with cognitive surprises and who showed almost certainly particular neurobiological
propensity for exploring unorthodox possibilities a propensity that's involved further in humans and in great apes
which are leak and like even our very young children seem unable to envisage how things might be as well as how they
actually are as the canadian psychologist and climatologist professor and rusten uh has written and with that i will uh end my little uh introduction
which i hope will um explain a rather complicated approach to producing a novel interpretation of uh uh how uh human behavior
was evolving during a very long period of time and across a very large period of space on our planet during the pleistocene thank you
thank you michael yes that is the end of the presentation
great
thank you for the presentation we will now move into discussion so i'm gonna
open up a blank page and then hector carl and dean please feel free to join
dean first i want to just first of all michael i don't know i'm not sure what your stature is in person but
after that presentation you're a giant in my mind so and that's that's not said out of
out of me needing to compliment you i think that thank you for the presentation i'm curious now
because the approach that daniel and i took was one of trying to parameterize a space between the two
papers i'm curious now what hector thinks in terms of sort of holding up that other that other side of
this set in particular with the paper on to copy or not to copy and how we might now sort of gain some
depth perception around things like zone of abounded surprise now that we've had sort of the introduction
with the presentation that michael just shared
hector feel free to give a first comment wow okay so you want me to comment on to copy or not to copy
on this one or how they yeah there's all about it surprise them in particular given sort of the
groundwork that michael has just established okay perfect i would like to start by thanking both
michael and carl for uh i mean this collaboration because i think i was thinking in the aphorism by
newton well attribute to newton is not original from him of on the shoulder of giants and and i think i
i feel a bit shy here among this huge intellect and and i feel very privileged too so i want to thank them both
and carl especially because he has been so kind as to revise our two papers i mean in one he's co-authored
but in the other he revised it and give us very good indications and advice so i'm very grateful because we all know how busy he is so he took the time to help us and i'm very grateful
and coming back to the the papers the thing is that michael came up with this original idea of explaining this
appearance and disappearance of hand access in terms of the free energy principle um and when we were
working on that paper i thought that the same argument could apply naturally to the case of gray dapes
and the thing that there was this puzzle in great days um studies when they studied this kind of social
transmissional culture or cumulative culture or cumulative technology and what happened is that
there are many reports on chimpanzees being innovative meaning innovative like they invent new things new
behaviors or new exploitation of resources by applying new tools so there are many instances of this
technologies but there is a puzzle here as there is the other puzzle with appearance and disappearances
of technology that there is no cumulative technology so this is a puzzle for me because if you have one
creature who is able to be so inventive how is it possible that it doesn't accumulate complexity in the
technology so the same cognitive machinery so to speak should be able to produce more complex artifacts
so there is no kind of accumulation of complexity across generations and that's a big puzzle for me so
i thought maybe the free energy principle was useful here too so i just made this analogy so it's michael
who opened up this new avenue thanks to the work of of karl and i just took advantage to think maybe it is
because new things are too surprising for gray waves so there are features that cannot cope with
high levels of surprise and i mean if i'm talking too fast or too much just tell me i think you're
following the argument i assume is it okay so the idea is that if something that i observe is too
surprising i have to deal with this high level of surprise and also by reading a paper by andy clark
was the title was relative coding it was in behavior and brain sciences if i remember correctly
he talked of one can see very surprising things if he's able to credit the sensory information as opposed to the
top-down prediction and this is the point of view of the observer of an innovation if something is too
surprising i have to consider if i trust the sensory information as opposed to the the top-down prediction
and this kind of i need to decide i mean i'm talking and i need to decide like it was some kind of
animistic thing but you you know what i mean so this is the wake waiting up of sensory information
and a top-down prediction so my idea was that perhaps what happens here is that this
gray waves when they observe something new and it's surprising they kind of do not credit it so it's like
they basically do not register that because it's um kind of is a mismatch with the prediction
and for some reason they are not able to credit this central information and this brings us to the
concept of the zones of bounded reprisal so this zone is a an imaginary concept is something we we used to
explain what happens so it's like if you have a wide zone of bounded reprisal it means that
things that are not in accordance with your top-down predictions things that deviate much from these
top-down predictions can be can be handled because you are able to bounce reprisal so you have cognitive
mechanisms that help you to bounce reprisal even when you are facing huge mismatches
with regard to your expectations to previous expectations so that's will be
the main thing here so we propose that in gray days there has not been these changes in the brain
that allow them to bounce reprisal where things deviate markedly from when what they expect
or indeed when they deviate slightly from what they expect so they can accumulate complexity provided the
things they observe that are new are not um very different from what they expected and i think i
will stop here even i can make more precision but that is the basic idea i don't know if michael is in
agreement or he wants to add something because i hope i have my limitation with language too so perhaps he can help me out
that's not really but fundamentally i accept what hector is saying his idea
was certainly novel to me when he put it forward that we have to think about the observers not merely
the practitioners because anthropologists and archaeologists and indeed many people working in the
cognitive and psychological sciences have tended to put the emphasis uh in terms of skills on the person
who performs them and not the person who uh or not the observation of those skills which is so necessary
of course and i didn't realize this until hector pointed it out to me uh so necessary of course
for their transmission to take hold at all and this struck me as being a most important insight
uh so obvious that one wonders why one never thought of it oneself in the same way
that one wonders why it is that so many paleoanthropologists and archaeologists uh are more concerned
with the stuff than with why the stuff isn't there um these are such obvious problems they go back to
sherlock holmes and sir arthur conan doyle um but we tend to be obsessed with what we can see and feel and
touch rather than um with uh what sort of process might have um uh led to explaining both presences and
absences at the same time and this is where uh i find the whole notion of uh active influence uh so
important to uh tie in with uh evolution um it was professor christian himself who um enthused me to go
back to the lectures that i used to attend 50 years ago when i was an undergraduate uh that were given by
uh nicholas tinbergen of oxford uh i would steal away from the lectures of anatomy given by sir wilfrid
the grow clock to attend those of nicholas tinbergen and other people and uh i've come to realize just
how important uh lawrence's and tinbergen's and um of course van fish uh and von fish as um daniel knows
uh were and how worthy they were of getting 50 years ago nobel prize for physiology or medicine um
um 50 years later we're still trying to get to terms with the significance of their insights which
shows just how how difficult it is for us to absorb novelty but nevertheless um uh i'm no giant i'm a dwarf
we stand on the shoulders of giants not only lawrence and tinbergen fish darwin of course and um going back
to bayes in the 18th century one critic of our um sciarchive paper said that we were that we were um
pomo in other words we were uh pomo post-modernist no no we go back in a good scientific empirical
tradition and theoretical tradition back to the 18th century nothing post-modern about us at all i think
all of us would reject any suspicion that we were uh involved in post-processual and post-modernist
argument uh unlike many of our uh colleagues in what i call the social studies i like the late
lou binford an archaeologist of america some note i prefer social studies to social science which i think
can at times is something of an oxymoron um i suspect that um others will dispute that with me
however um i'm no i'm no giant i'm a dwarf it took me all my time to cope with something we were never
taught at school matrix algebra which i had to learn when i was doing my research on um prehistoric skulls
uh and from then to cope with bayes theorem and the approaches or the uses that can be made of bayes
mathematical statistics uh using um using uh matrix theory uh uh which i've gradually uh caught up with
uh and i can follow it but i certainly wouldn't be capable unlike professor friston of uh yeah of um
deriving it um but i can certainly understand the significance uh of something that i think a lot
of our colleagues in the humanities and social studies uh simply are not prepared to uh confront at all
i think they prefer much more subjective if you like post-modernist uh thinking to rational uh scientific
analysis well thank you
carl lost lost the screen can you see me i can see you i can see oh we we see you carl to um
um so i tend to be my eyesight is no longer quite as good as it used to be uh so i sometimes tend to
huddle over the computer it's all good it's all good carl maybe you could come in and um share
how this collaboration came to be or from your view from the inside or however else you'd like to
comment on what we've seen so far yes well thank you very much for the opportunity um i i i
also have to do a lot of huddling because of my failing eyesight. So just to reiterate,
what a joy it was to hear that presentation and Hector's follow-up. So this is, for me, an adventure
well outside my comfort zone. So I'm here as a passenger spectator and learning a lot. I didn't
know half of this stuff, even though I did a lot of biology and a little bit of evolutionary biology
as a young man. But this is intriguing and foundational insights into the way that we are.
So I'm going to make a few comments. It's going to be more of a stream of consciousness, but I qualify
this again. This is completely outside my comfort zone. I'm just talking as a lay person here or a
lay physicist, perhaps. And I'll just make a few observations. But I mean, Daniel, I've been
particularly interested in your synthesis because, of course, you have a, probably more than any of us,
the broadest oversight from the evolutionary perspective right through to the Bayesian
mechanics that is entailed by things like active inference. Just to forewarn you, I'm going to call
upon you to do the synthesis and to draw and join the dots that haven't already been joined, although
there's been a lot of top joining from what I can see already. So the stream of consciousness
comes really from this
commitment to ideas that are certainly not postmodern. I think I'd probably have to go back to Plato
and certainly sort of get stuck around the ear of Helmholtz and the like, you know, from the
from a physicist's point of view. And pursuing that, looking at the looking at the this sort of remarkable
snakes and ladders phenomenon from through the eyes of a physicist. And it certainly makes
complete sense that if we're looking at a process that would be described as a non-equilibrium steady
state that is slowly evolving, that could be, if you like, a mathematical image of the evolutionary process.
The definitive feature of these non-equilibrium steady states that have
the biological aspect is that they entail a revisiting of the trajectory to neighborhoods of certain parts of phase space.
So if I read phase space as basically the state of evolution or what what phenotypes are doing or what is encoded genetically in a very, very crude, broad level,
there can be no other solution to a particular trajectory that is apt for describing a non-equilibrium steady state than the occasional
a inherent recurrence of certain states of being, literally being close or revisiting neighborhoods of certain regimes of phase space.
So the the snakes and ladders image seems to me a very apt image to actually describe
pullback attractors, which are another way of articulating these kinds of dynamics or this kind of
kind of dynamics in the sense that they have this aspect of recurrence and they have this aspect of self-contained itinerancy,
which are the hallmarks of any system really that exists over a substantial period of time.
It would be interesting to think, can it be any other way? And I would submit no.
You know, if you have a physical process that is unfolding at multiple timescales and it is endowed
and can be recognized either historically or in the moment by being in certain characteristic states that literally
characterize the system in question so that it can be named, whether it's a species or whether it's your
behaviour or whether it's an artifact or whether it's a process, then it must be the case that it has this
it has this kind of utterancy where things come and go. So it will be interesting just to you in a
as a pure exercise for pure mathematics to support things like the Boncari recurrence theorem
into a snakes and ladders format and vice versa because I think there's something fundamentally true
that has to be the way that things are. And I see that in many fields and two immediately came to mind.
The first was current notions of the, not the spread of ideas or the spread of tools, but the spread of cancer
you know, the view that cancer, there are two views of cancer. There's a sort of 20th century view that you get
one cell in your body fails to recognize that it should not be growing and just keeps on growing and
you'll get these progressive and inevitable growth of the cancer set of cells and at some point they will
disseminate and seed themselves around the body. You get the pastases and secondaries
and the like and ultimately unless it's cured then it will it will destroy the phenotype. There's another
view which is is now becoming more prevalent which is a much more snakes and ladders view
and this view is that we're all the time generating little cancer cells but 99.9% of the time they don't
get a foothold. So that we're in equilibrium, hopefully on the right side of an equilibrium,
always playing host to little cancer cells. It's just that it's very rarely do they actually establish
themselves to the extent that they can get a foothold and reproduce to actually produce a
tumour or a neoplastic growth. And that struck me, it would be nice to put a snakes and ladders
sort of picture on the way that that particular biological natural system is viewed and it's
certainly very consistent with current views on cancer. The other thing, the other system
that seems to comply with this notion is not again the spread of ideas or the spread of tools or cultural
means but the spread of viruses in epidemiology. It's very interesting that there are certain
viruses for example that get a foothold and explode exponentially. We've had you know we've just enjoyed
or witnessed an episode of that with the with the recent Covid-19 pandemic but there are other
very very very similar episodes that don't get a foothold and they die out very very quickly because
they can't spread. And I know this personally because we were looking for data when modelling using
actually exactly the same maths that underwrites the free energy principle active influence. We were modelling
the coronavirus prices recently and we hope to get some priors on certain parameters by looking at
legacy historical data and it's interesting that there is data out there on very similar
viral epidemics but they died out too quickly to generate enough data to make sense of. So things
like MERS for example was certainly recorded but it went away before it actually produced enough data to get
a handle on it. So again you know this phenomena of sort of sight things repeating themselves you know
you know climbing up the ladder but then sometimes falling down a snake very very quickly so that
they you have to wait until the next occurrence seems to be a fundamental fundamental aspect of
ensemble dynamics wherever you see it either within the body in terms of neoplasia or in terms of
epidemiology and the spread and I use the word spread deliberately because of the you know that
that latter perspective on basically to copy or not to copy. So if you're copying then you then you're in
the game of spreading and if you don't copy then you don't spread. So I think just coming back to you know
the question you know what what what is it that determines whether a particular cognitive surprise or
a novel approach to you know a way of behaving or indeed a way of being catches on or not. And you know that
dialectic I think is you know it's absolutely intriguing. I should just say that of course
the all of this formulation rests very very sensitively on a separate of temporal scales you know and
you know we have to sort of be in the background there is always this
separation of scales that you get with evolution.
And in this particular instance what we are talking about is really whether certain things can survive
generationally in the spirit I would imagine of sort of evo-devo and cultural niche construction.
And then the question then is okay at a fast time scale of you know interactions between phenotypes
and what's going to make that sufficiently endemic to be propagated at a transgenerational time scale.
I think that's a really interesting question you know again it's a kind of question which
as a neuroscientist and certainly as a clinician you are often confronted with you know things for example
like epilepsy you know what is it that constrain that determines whether a particular epileptic surprising
dynamic discharge in a particular part of the brain can be propagated and disseminated throughout
the brain to give you a fit or as opposed to it sort of auto-vituating or you know quenching itself
because the neighboring cells are just not interested they just don't recognize that particular pattern
and it's inhibited. And I guess the answer I mean the I think we've already had the answer
both Michael and Hector have articulated it but I guess the answer lies in the mechanics of the spread
of ideas and shared frames of reference and whether it is too surprising to be incorporated into
your conspecifics or your community or whether it is learnable and can be incorporated or absorbed into
your generative models such that it can then be spread to the next person you know in the standard
sense of sort of niche construction. And Hector mentions specifically one key determinant of that which
is the um perhaps it was Michael but it was the um the ability to um change your mind um and you know the
ability to change your mind is absolutely fundamental if you just you know if you want to frame this in an
active inference context um just confronted with a cognitive surprise as it has been articulated a set of
difficult to explain um sensations or sensory evidence then there are two ways in which you can resolve that
surprise the first way is to change your mind and to adjust your internal generative models or your
do some basic belief updating on the inside to make sense of this thing and that might
in uh depend upon some experience dependent learning uh over a suitable time scale um so that you're
changing your model your generative model of the world to make it more apt to explain this novel
observation or an observation of one of your conspecifics doing this kind of thing um the other thing
the other way is not the um the perceptual response that the belief updating on the inside to make your
predictions more like the sensations it's to actually act upon the world to um to make your sensations
more like they were predicted so this is a fun this is foundational in active influence and this two
complementary ways of minimizing surprise or or prediction error you either change your mind or you
change the thing that you're surprised about um you're at every level at every temporal scale so just read in terms of whether i
um um i am able to change my mind about witnessing fire there are two ways i can say yes fire is a thing
and you know i can then incorporate or imbibe that into my world model and um become the kind of creature
that actually engages with fire or i can act to put the fire out and then i don't have to worry about it
both are perfectly appropriate ways of minimizing surprise and the difference what we read at a
at a very basic level um the um the thing that determines what i um whether i perceive or act or
whether i engage in perceptual or active inference um in the moment to moment depends exactly on something
which was um again mentioned implicitly earlier on which is the precision afforded your the sensory
evidence relative to your prior beliefs so as a physiologist um if you don't know this is you know
it was a beautiful there are beautiful illustrations of this so if we if you if we just forget about the
notion um at the moment of sort of long-term revisions or belief updating of our generative model over
multiple experiences to an instance of somebody making a fire um or providing me with a valentine's
kit of a handaxe and i'm just think now to um the moment to moment ways of making uh of sampling the
world and making sense of the world um it's the case that in order to move and in order to change the
world i have to attenuate the precision afforded my sensory information because if i didn't do that
i would not be able to ignore all the evidence that i'm not currently moving so the most beautiful
example of this i think is something called saccadic suppression it's when we move our eyes and we do so
about four times a second we actually attenuate the precision of the sensory evidence so that we
are able to actually move our eyes which basically means you can't see the optic flow induced when you
make a sharp or saccadic eye movement and yet 50 milliseconds after you've made the eye movement
you're suddenly now attending to the visual information that you can see so you can't you
can't actually see anything while your eyes are moving because you've got this sensory attenuation
which is basically putting the priors um you're in charge uh suspending attention to the sensorium while you
are acting um failures of that um can have quite horrible consequences so a failure to ignore the
evidence that i'm not moving and a failure to attenuate or suspend attention attenuate the precision
of sensory evidence or afforded sensory evidence um looks like things like parkinson's disease
so you know we think that um this precision is encoded by certain neurochemical transmittance particularly
dopamine a deficit of dopamine basically means an inability to um attenuate the evidence from your
um strep receptors or all the signals coming from the body and that you're not currently moving so if
you have the prior belief i'm going to move i'm going to sit up walk um drink from this cup you may have
that prior belief but it's immediately counteracted by and dispelled by very precise evidence you're not
moving so you can never actually initiate a movement and what you actually see clinically is basically a
psychomotor poverty or a bradykinesia the point i'm making here all reduces to something very very simple
which is the precision afforded sensory evidence and if you can't get that right and notice it has to be
estimated at every time scale either in terms of saccadic suppression or on a a 10 millisecond time scale
uh right through to um one might actually argue um um an evolutionary time scale and i make that argument
because um precision is it can also be thought of as a rate constant so if if i've got some sort of um
sensory evidence and some prior beliefs um and i now view my belief updating at any level whether it's
sort of you know my neural activity encoding my beliefs at the moment or whether it's my um my neuronal
connectivity or um you know encoding what i have learned or its neurodevelopment or indeed at an evolutionary
time scale the precision can be read as a rate constant so now what we're talking about is a certain
quantity that is absolutely crucial for whether i um adopt this um or incorporate um instill this novel
experience into my model or not that depends upon a precision or a rate constant which means that um one
would um if one wanted to ask the question you know why do some species have the ability to um um to learn
uh whereas other species don't then i think the the answer is quite simply in their ability to um to
optimize and adjust their learning rate either precision afforded the evidence at hand that drives the
learning um and i i i'm wondering whether there are a couple of ways to take that that sort of um
mathematical take on this on this really single really important quantity um and just to make it
intuitive i'm trying to get back to the copy versus not copy so if i can copy that means that i am um i'm
impressed impressionable what does that mean it means that i will accumulate new evidence very very
quickly what does that mean that means i have the capacity to assign greater evidence to or precision
to that sensory evidence and suspend the precision of my prior beliefs i'm not rigid in my thinking i can
learn because i am impressionable um what would that look like what would look like you were young
it would look like you have just been born and you are designed to learn because you you have yet to
build neurodevelopmentally your model of the world um which means that um averaged over a lifetime the
the degree to which you are likely to learn and implicitly enable the spread um of ideas um and you
know ignite this particular um episode of um your of of a new tool or a new a new way of doing things or um
um being um then it would look as if you are younger for longer so i'm just i was just intrigued i i
think i think michael you know was making an explicit reference to the fact that um that it may be some
there may be a key difference between certain species maybe the um the duration or the timing of the point
where you basically switch off your learnability you switch off your uh impressionability and you
become an adult and you bake in then and then from that point on you become old and wise and stuck in
your ways and instead of actually trying to change your mind when something changes you don't you become
not conservative in a political sense but you actually uh try to keep things status quo uh committed
to the social norms um but before that you don't you explore you go to discos you do bungee jumping you
you know make new friends um but if it's the case then that the the the spread of ideas depends upon
being a child at heart for longer then then that observation about at what point do we um get to that
epigenetically determined stage of neurodevelopment becomes absolutely crucial and just even longer
this is the final point um an even longer time scale i'm wondering whether the same maths can be
borrowed or the same concepts at least can be borrowed um to think about um this kind of evolvability
um uh from the perspective of people like stuart kaufman and like so selection for selectability
so again um if you're now reading these rate constants or precisions um uh in an evolutionary
setting what you're what you are talking about is basically the the you know the mutation rates or the
selectability um which of course itself can be subject to selective pressure so you know if you um if you
commit to this style of thinking about belief updating in a in a mathematical sense at many
different levels or different spatiotemporal scales or these temporal scales um then it may be that the
the the selection for selectability or the selectability in and of itself is um exactly the same
kind of quantity that is the you know the learnability and the you know being young at heart for longer
that just is the same kind of um quantity that is uh required right down to the level of uh
saccadic suppression and sensory attenuation that determines when we act to keep the world constant as
opposed to no we actually have to attend to this evidence and and update our beliefs um and um if
that's the case then um this notion uh well i just wanted to to close on on on sort of the importance of
um cultural niche construction um looked at um through the lens of these this um rate of um adaptation
precision selectability at different levels and how all of these couple to each other in a sort of bootstrapping
way and whether that would be your useful view of um the spread of the spread of ideas
um sometimes spreading and sometimes not spreading um can i just ask it that did we um did we or did did
you latterly um sort of leverage um sort of the well actually know this is basically setting up daniel
for his his perspective but i'm just wondering how much um people in um evo devo and uh evolutionary
psychology i'm thinking here people like cecilia hayes and uh cognitive gadgets how much they they
think about these um these issues and whether there's the opportunity or whether they have a snakes
and ladders like um view of things uh from the point of view of um evolutionary psychology and that's it
that's all i have to say thank you daniel your turn
thank you wow
barely know which side of that hand axe to flake
um the multi-scale learning is a great point and perspective we can just imagine the extreme cases
in the total acceptance of sensory evidence world then that thing defined by its revisiting
potentially infrequently of characteristic states that thing ceases to be that thing in that whether
that's seen in some positive um light a neutral entanglement light or a death-like light it will
cease to be that thing because it will have just simply informationally if not biomaterially accepted
the generative processes in positions and then the other extreme case would be no attention uh see no
evil hear no evil and in that case the trajectory from a bayesian mechanics perspective is massive it's a
uh trajectory with so much inertia that it can't be moved and that sounds like it would ever happen but
in fact when we heard from hector and michael that like upon seeing an innovation a great ape does not
take up that innovation they're prior on how to accomplish a behavioral outcome or even at a higher
order some functional outcome can be seen as massive the bayesian physical inertia of their top-down prior
dominates these potentially sparse or non-linearly related cues coming up from the bottom so simply by
not paying attention to the bottom-up cues
there is the imposition of this top-down mass and so that's a bayesian mechanical way to understand
well if we had no priors at all no prior no problem but then we dissolve but if we have um the titanic
prior then it's a fragile strategy and so if the niche were very simple and unchanging that may be locally
an adaptive strategy and on certain axes of phenotype where there can be regularities we do see those kinds
of strategies like a bacterium that has selected to live in a constant temperature geothermal niche
may come to entrench in its protein structure and in its gene regulatory networks and so on
an embodiment that sharpens and sharpens and sharpens its capacity to compete in that regularity
from a temperature perspective and therefore at the detriment of fitness in changing environments
so that's one aspect is seeing learning as this multi-scale
synergetic and ongoing renegotiation process of the updating across multiple scales
some spatial temporal scales of which there are no problems with talking about those using the
cognitive ontology like perception cognition and action but then some scales especially beyond the
physical mechanisms that those cognitive ontological terms arose from
states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states states
interoperable mathematics and statistics and analysis frameworks so we can just qualitatively
even in conversation start to see that as a starting point instead of needing to argue
up to that point of that being important for example in pursuit of transdisciplinary synthesis
conceptually epistemically or so that we could explain predict design control create
pragmatically how can we take that multi-scale insight as our starting point and then i think
that leads to a question in the chat which i will ask now mark fruchtman wrote early in the video
was the complaint that there was a lack of evidence as to why certain things occurred in the archaeological
evidence record how does active inference not suffer from the same issue and so it's a key
question thank you mark for asking and was the motivation for one of my underlying motivations
for even reading and investigating with this lens was great if we can describe everything and we have
this very interesting mathematics and so on how do we go from a technique and a method to
moving beyond some limitations of previous analysis techniques
we can go to dean or whomever else has a thought
we can i can throw something in but i'm not sure it's it's going to satisfy directly the question
um maybe somebody else wants to throw something about here i i do want to i want to indirectly answer the
question and i'll come and i'll loop into what i think might be satisfying part of it i think one of the
things that that in particular that to copy or not to copy paper emphasizes is the observer's perspective
so rather than just looking at that as a as something written down on the page taking up or absorbing that
position the observer's perspective i think what the two papers and one of the things that we tried to
highlight in and we're so grateful that michael and and carl and and hector were willing to let us look at two things at once
was the idea that the papers um both raised the specter of and i put quotes around this
the narrative follows what the implications of start with a story about seeing phenomena x actually are
now one of the implications of that is that when you have a story you can't have gaps in the plot so
people who are are really story biased and story forward they want those gaps filled in as quickly as
possible that's how we comprehend but the interesting thing is if we are actually actively inferring as
opposed to just seeing it as a subject matter or a topic we can take a game theory approach and in games
there will be random gaps like charles launders pierce says an exhaustive inquiry well if it's exhaustive
we're also going to need recovery and reflection and and so on so there will be gaps and so the snakes and
ladders metaphor to me is like okay perfect now we're starting with a game as opposed to the retelling or
the manufacturing of starting with a story so there's very different mechanisms in in the two approaches
right there are are there are very different assumptions in the two approaches and then the
question around modeling as per as perspective swapping kind of pivots on the stuff that michael was
talked about in terms of how is the change based model depth capacity either affording or not affording
that ability to play with time as opposed to being captured by it because in a story you've you've written
down what the sequence is it's now been applied now you can interpret that but in terms of that actual
effort of starting with a story it's now stabilized per se relatively speaking so
let's start with a game and carl's heard this before because i asked him a question about a year
and a half maybe two years ago is starting with a game is a prediction matter expertise strategy or a bias
starting with a story is a subject matter expertise strategy or a bias
a bias and you can understand why if you're if you're dealing with historical records
to fall into a default of okay well we have to start with the story but i think what hector and michael are
at least asking us to have a conversation around is well so what if we do bring this other way of viewing
the circumstances taking that game strategy and putting it on the same shelf as the story strategy
so again if you if you look at the assumptions around why gaps have to be filled in as opposed to
there will be gaps because the game is on something as simple as that and being able to hold the two
things up at once can sometimes at least tell you a little bit about maybe some of the
some of the conditions that you as the observer are inserting on what it is that you're observing or
example
was it sherlock who said the game is afoot
maybe right
yeah how the bus
okay yes carl indeed a michael or hector
how is this landing with with what you're thinking right now michael go ahead you always know better
then i can pick up from you
i'm not quite sure where to begin um perhaps thinking in terms of the evolution of both the brain and the
body in the genus homo uh we and possibly neanderthals also maybe we're going to be a little bit of a
maybe from as early as big quarters of a million or even or at least half a million years ago
seem to have undergone an evolution towards a bimodal growth spurt or growth growth curve
caused by the adolescent growth spurt following a period period of childhood slowing down of growth
growth which is unique in our genus to our genus and
seems to be related in adolescence to some changes in terms of the agility to react to complex
situations or not as the case may be but even before that in early childhood
i'm now talking about the first three or four years of life our infants seem to have exceeded
already quite considerably their cognitive ability particularly with regard to working memory when
contrasted against the present great apes in other words there has definitely been not merely an expansion
of the brain but in particular changes in the connective systems within the brain which clearly must have an
evolutionary physical basis in terms of uh structure both um uh inter and in particular intran
neuronal structure which when i began to study medicine physiology over a long time ago now 1960 um we could barely imagine
uh it was only in the very end of the 1950s i think 59 if i'm not mistaken professor friston can correct me
that uh at cambridge henry huxler was doing uh and i began to do inter neuronal studies on on accident potentials
uh we were doing them in the lab at oxford as undergraduates about four years later and um then
i was doing them under professor powell gleese at getting him a few years later still uh with a practical
application um because we were studying uh the chain the changes in these following orthocresal phosphate
poisoning um which had a structural situation in hens which we were working on similar to those in humans
who had suffered from a massive um outbreak of poisoning at agadir in morocco when a lot of
local people were sold american jet fuel oil rich in orthocresal phosphates for cooking with
and there was an epidemic of many deaths um which is well known in in medical history and so some of these
studies uh early studies uh even then were having applications which now uh seem almost paleolithic
when we think of the work which is being done on intraneuronal and also on synaptic connectivity
into intraneural neuronal transmission and the effects not merely
of genetics such as for example synaptic cooling but also of epigenetic modifications which no doubt
we shall learn a lot more about in the coming decades but which even now seem to be telling us
that the increase in um the kind of connectivity or um what's the word i'm really looking for
perhaps connectivity is not the best word uh within the brain is far greater uh than anything which
is possible within uh even uh growing chimpanzees let alone uh the adults or other great apes
and this must have evolved somehow uh probably in relation to the appearance
uh i suspect of the slowing down of childhood growth uh followed by uh the uniquely human uh homo uh
adolescent growth spurt which uh was must was completely absent uh one and a half million years ago
in early homo erectus uh according to um um professor christopher dean and others and which must surely
have been a response or the evolutionary change must have been a response to not merely
not merely some kind of magical physiological change but more more likely uh to
the effects of uh what one might call behavioral responses and fundamentally it takes us back to active
influence and to fundamental changes which are naturally slow uh to evolve and this is the part which is not recognized
by most of our colleagues who work with uh living organisms or living climates and for that matter
uh living uh human communities and individuals um their perspective is not that um i hope they'll forgive me for saying this
which those of us who've been brought up in the natural sciences uh naturally come to expect
they don't have the kind of cosmic time scale and cosmic spatial scale uh of things
and of their slowness and of their slowness and the imperceptibility of change which come naturally to
those of us brought up from school days in a different tradition and i think this is very important because
i think there is a big divide still between what um six years ago uh we knew as being uh named the two
cultures i think this divide still exists um as that uh critic of our paper who claimed we were post-modernists
uh clearly represents um the more uh shall we say um um intuitive relativistic uh view uh in which
there is something which uh some of them believe to want to call an ethnographical present which i think is
is a contradiction in terms otherwise it could be could have been no evolution in behavior but which
wants to compare uh instead of contrast uh as i would have it uh what goes on in a few generations let us
say in a community be it a small one albeit a large one today with what went on over many many generations
um as i said between 2 million and 200 000 years ago there would have been at least 80 000 generations
if each was 25 years long and even that is pushing it a bit given that adulthood in homo erectus
was very likely achieved before the age of 15 and reproductive success uh was probably or the next
generation was probably um only a few years away this is important because as professor christian
will not talking about cancer um our longevity um has allowed us to and of course i'm better hygiene and
medical knowledge but particularly our longevity has permitted us to survive uh in ways that were
unthinkable perhaps um in many parts of the world uh barely um well less than a hundred years ago
that wasn't merely thanks to antibiotics or even better hygiene um in but to increases in
uh standard of living uh going back perhaps perhaps um a few hundred years but let's not get into that
what i really want to say is that
next week i have to have a small um basal cell neoplasm removed from the side of my nose
which only at the age of um 80 or 81 became uh noticeable
uh indicating that some of these um uh diseases which we we now regard as being um part and parcel of
our uh humanity or the aortic stenosis which was i was diagnosed with with my first and only ever um incident
of um cardiac failure about a year ago and has been successfully treated thanks to uh uh modern catheterization
uh process processes that allow pro prosthetics to be prosthetics to be placed on heart valves by a long
catheter from the groin this kind of thing would have been unthinkable um a few years ago in fact i can
remember as an undergraduate and a medical student watching the first ever uh open heart uh operations
done by alf gunning um which was regarded in 1960 whenever it was 63 64 as being um something that might
never might never might never succeed and nowadays these operations on our heart adjuster as everyday
cancers in cardiovascular units around the world things are changing and they're changing at a
with an acceleration which we can only barely uh appreciate though even those of us who now outlived our
four score years and ten uh and are on the verge of uh of defunc defunction however um we have to
think in terms of the and this again is important of the exponential uh if you like rather crudely scale at
which things are happening and which are so influencing many people many of our colleagues in the
uh humanities and in the social studies and in indeed studies of animal behavior um including climate
behavior of course and this i think is detracting from an appreciation of the long time scale uh and the um
over which evolutionary processes have uh necessarily still take place i don't believe in goldschmidt's
uh hopeful monsters magical genes some people believe that there's a magical gene in homo sapiens
switched on our cognitive ability i think this is this is wishful thinking um indeed it's magical
thinking in my view uh however um i suppose my own training would leave me to want to say that but i'm not
there have been exceptions and one exception i should like to mention by name
is an emeritus professor of archaeology who is eminent uh in paleolithic studies at york university now
professor jeff bailey who over 40 years ago was pointing out the incommensurability of the timescales
of recent archaeology and if you like ethnography with those of the paleolithic and the pleistocene and human
evolution and this was not really well regarded at the time although it influenced me very greatly and
so there have been honorable exceptions um who have certainly um influenced me um we do as i say stand on
the shoulders of others we try to um make one or two uh small comments advances in both methodology and in
theoretical um influences and deductions and i think that the
uh we're finally coming to possibly begin to see how to bring together uh thanks to um especially
professor friston's insights and um methodological um
um um what i'm trying to say uh methodological proposals and advances uh we're beginning to see that it might
be possible to square the circle to bring together the uh evolutionary um very slow uh evolutionary uh
development of the hierarchical um um mind which characterizes argenus and
actual um processes which can underpin this undergird it um can bring together uh the
uh darwinian view which um darwinian view which um most of us espouse in the west uh with a few
exceptions which are too well known to be worth mentioning here um i'm sure daniel knows more about them than i do
um but um it's meaning to bring together
the theory of evolution of species by natural selection of and within species and the within part is
important and it's being to bring bring it together with what we can appreciate about human behavior
which is so uh different from that of the great eight and here i just want to make one final point
which is that uh in another paper which we um which hector and i were co-authors along with
um professor um right read of ucla um in um uh science and biode behavioral reviews last year we pointed out that
there has been too much in our view uh hopeful or wishful thinking about the human nature of great apes
certainly certainly their behavior is very
different from that of many other orders of mammals and not to mention other classes within
the animal kingdom however there is a big difference and i think this difference is best
um emphasized by going back to the growth curve of humans and of human behavior in relation to
our childhood in particular our infants are capable by about the age of three of putting
things of combinatorial combinatorial thinking in ways that are virtually impossible or outside the
scope of the behavior of most great apes most of the time and almost certainly in the wild and this
i think demands an explanation which is more than simply saying no the apes are really more like us
it's just that we don't recognize this no i think that there is a difference here and the time scale
uh has to be taken into consideration which it often is not and most important and this brings
up me back to my last point and the first one which is that finally we're beginning to get together thanks
to professor christians christians insights to seeing the possibility of tying together
the biological evolution and if you like um the psychological evolution certainly
uh i would say the neurobiological evolution uh which has characterized our genus and characterizes it
today um in a unique way and with that i guess my case
thank you michael
many many ways to go the dinner plate balanced on top of the stick and i think that's the cognitive moment
where the top-down constraints and opportunities of our enabling architectures which for a long time
is known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known
versa. And when we consider information spaces, we have similar connectivity patterns. Some are
like information anatomy, and some are more like information physiology in narrative or rhetorical
spaces. That becomes part of our extended cognitive selves and leave to others in the best possible
way those who want bright lines of what is a self. There are analytic frameworks that respect
continuities and discontinuities with an emphasis on the respect. The continuities, we want them to be
differentiable and integrated and generalized coordinates of motion and the continuous time
active inference models and the path integral formulation. And then the discrete time generative
model, which is also a map, not the territory, helps us understand saltatory maneuvers over multiple
timescales. And looking back at the literature and the discourse, discussions like, well, is evolution
gradual or general and jumping? These have been some of the biggest touch points. Are things slowly
changing or fast changing? Those are where certain lines were drawn. And the methodological developments,
Bayesian graphs, Bayesian graphs, and so on and so on, have provided a instrumentalist lens that,
as a matter of fact, does integrate these frameworks methodologically. That is a claim that hardly anyone
dissents from the same thing. And then what happens with respect to our past, present, and future,
when we realize that we're after the moment of intra and among disciplinary tension,
not pushing the rock up the hill anymore, or trying to bring somebody else along, but gardening in a space
that already is how we need it to be.
Could I make a comment, Daniel?
Yeah.
It just occurred to me that when we think of the formant frequencies that affect all of the harmonics
and other aspects of our vocalizations, whether speech, chanting, song, or even whistling, perhaps,
it is unlikely or improbable that these very many variants which occur in different languages
throughout the world with very, very different characteristics,
and which almost certainly had begun to evolve quite considerably by the time that early writing appears,
about 5,000 years ago. But it's still unlikely that these can be taken back into the past on a slow evolving timescale,
such that they can be related directly in a direct evolutionary line to the vocalizations, let's say, of great apes,
from a common ancestor that we have with them, six million years ago.
So if we accept this unlikelyhood, then it seems equally unlikely to me that we can talk about cultural transmission,
or technological transmission, in a slow, uniform manner, invariant manner, over the past, let's say,
two million years, from which we have information about different technical skills and technical abilities,
or at least, shall we say, technical possibilities that were exploited by our Argenus Homo.
And therefore, I would argue that it is equally likely that the unawareness of what people,
what individuals were actually enacting, the unawareness by bystanders, onlookers, or even the very protagonists
of those activities themselves, was a continuous, in continuous evolution over, let us say, 80 or at least 60,000 generations
in a continuous invariant manner. This seems unlikely, and it seems equally unlikely,
that the same is true of different linguistic, shall we say, abilities or aptitudes.
In other words, as Professor Friston has remarked in more than one paper,
it does seem that the advantages that were taken were taken not in a continuous manner, but in a discontinuous manner,
when particular communicative skills had developed in some groups, such as to be able to widen their social scope
and proactive influence, and had evolved by natural selection within a shared framework of adaptive prior beliefs,
favouring alignment of common expectations and joint activities affecting their ecological niche formation or development.
And this, it seems to me, is a very expedient way of looking at how things happened, or are likely to have happened,
whether we will ever be able to produce a theoretic in terms of a formal Bayesian proposal for this, I don't know.
I would like to think so, but I really don't know how, I don't have the competence to begin to do this myself.
But I think that it is, if it is possible, it will certainly be, to put it mildly, a challenge to those who tend to think that there is a rapid jump.
Well, a rapid jump took place, which, shall we say, a small gap, there is only a small gap that separates us from the great apes of the equatorial latitudes of the old world.
I think that that took a much longer period of time, and I don't think that one could, I don't think that to compare what modern, even, shall we say, in inverted commas, relatively simple or primitive communities do, or how they act, is commensurable with the behaviour of modern great apes.
Frankly, I would like to challenge this, and I would hope that it might be possible to produce a model which will permit the, a theoretic, which will permit the evolutionary process to be at least interpreted in an alternative fashion.
Sorry, I didn't mean to be long-winded.
I apologise.
The classical information is inscribed on the holograph.
In the classical sedimentary layers is...
Daniel, you're muted.
Sorry.
In the holograph, we have the inscription of the classical information.
And the quantum cognitive moment is the unpacking or the rotation of what is on the holograph into the information space.
And that, I think, was provocatively raised when you asked, what if this was all there ever was?
What if there wasn't a second-hand axe to find at that field site?
That's the interpretive moment.
And how we interpret it is everything.
So, in our final ten minutes of this continuous 53.1, if each of us could provide a kind of closing, just several minutes or any several thoughts on anything they'd like to add in to this session,
or any directions that they would like to seed or prompt for next week's 53.2?
I have something, Daniel, that we'd like to contribute before we close the session.
I would like to take advantage of Professor Freestone with us, because I have some questions for him that have to do with the free energy principle and the to copy and not to copy,
if you allow me to just formulate it.
And first thing I would like to do is that there were some lapses in my argumentation before.
I want to make clear that chimpanzees learn socially.
This is something we know for sure.
So, there is social learning and there is even cultures, as Professor Andre Witten in St. Andrews has proven, has demonstrated.
So, there are some cultural traditions. What is lacking is accumulation of complexity. What is called by Michael Tomasello, ratcheting up.
Okay. So, from one generation to the next, every generation builds upon what was produced in last generation.
So, you have a tool implement and you modify it, you make it more complex.
So, our technology is the result of many people accumulating their knowledge.
So, it's kind of a joined endeavor.
This, I wanted to make clear.
And what the models proposed, theoretical and other kinds of models, is that coping with fidelity is key to have this accreation of complexity.
So, what I wanted to correct is that the puzzle is that high rates of innovativeness does not relate in a creation of complex technology because there is a lack of copying with fidelity.
What is called true imitation.
For some, and for Russo and Birne, I think they call it impersonation.
So, I see someone doing something, I copy the means and the result.
So, chimpanzees are more prompted or likely to emulate, which is copying the end result, but by their own devices.
So, they can do different things to produce the same result.
And it appears that copying with fidelity is key.
And I'm cutting this long explanation.
I just wanted to correct this for the sake of purity of science.
And now my question for Professor Freeston, if you allow me.
There is something interesting that the team of Andrew Witten in St. Andrew's observed under this in our paper.
That there was one instance that I know of when there was this kind of accumulation of complexity in chimpanzees.
And the thing was possible because these chimpanzees that combine two different techniques to make something more complex.
It could be a kind of primogenious example of what we call this accreation of ratcheting up of behavior.
They did it because they had performed or enacted these behaviors before.
And this is for me is very intriguing because thinking of how in 2010 there is this paper by Freeston and other people where they talk of the generative models under the free energy principle.
And they talk of inactive inference like generative model or not, the structural representation is nothing that you enact, you entail with your whole body, so to speak.
Correct me if I'm not, Professor Freeston.
So I'm thinking that these guys, these chimpanzees that were able to have this complex tool product, they had enacted the behaviors independently before.
So I'm wondering if this enacting the behavior before allowed them to become surprised.
Because this would be, we go to the core of this idea of inactive inference.
Like if you have performed those things separately with your body, then the surprises kind of bounded.
And you can produce these more complex products.
I mean, I don't know if I was clear enough, but this is something that is intriguing to me.
Sure.
Karl, as your last thoughts, feel free to address that or anything else.
Well, yes, I'm just reflecting on that, I think, very important question.
I mean, it is certainly the case that all of the active inference formalism, both in neuroscience, but also in terms of, you know, ensemble dynamics and self-organization of collections of
things, rests upon a generative model of the consequences of my action.
Even to the extent you could argue from a theological perspective that all our perception is just in service of deciding what's the best thing to do next and literally how to move next.
Just acknowledging that only a very limited number of ways you can actually change the universe.
You can either move a striated muscle or you can secrete something.
There's not much else you can do.
And so, you know, it becomes very important in terms of your characteristic state of being and to have the right generative models that choose the right ways to move your muscles or to secrete things.
And that places embodied action or having embodiment and activism at the centre of the generative models.
And that certainly makes sense to me from the point of view of both a statistician and a machine learning enthusiast, that it would be much easier to revise or update a generative model in the sense you were intimating in terms of accommodating the next kind of behaviour.
You know, I'm not sure whether this is composing a sequence of behaviours, but certainly being able to incrementally embellish or adopt a behaviour if you had already a precursor that was inherent in the structure or could be scaffolded within your generative model.
So, I mean, the idea here is that everything that goes on the outside has to be in some structural and dynamic way recapitulated on the inside in order for you to control the outside.
And this, of course, this is at the heart of early formulations of things like the free energy principle.
In cybernetics, you know, Roshbiz could regulate a theorem with saying literally that and subsequent formulations in terms of laws of requisite variety that the degrees of freedom on the inside have to correspond to the degrees of freedom on the things on the outside have to be controlled mainly the environment.
So I think that's absolutely right.
If you have already established through having an internal model of a particular behaviour, a particular way of deploying my actuators and making sense of that and, you know, being able to infer it was me that did that and this is me doing that and this is the kind of thing that I do,
that you are in a much stronger position to learn or incorporate or to imitate something that you have witnessed to novo.
And mathematically, the reason why that becomes easier is that the cost of belief updating in its most general mathematical sense.
So I'm not talking about personal beliefs.
I'm just talking about any belief entailed by the structure, the connectivity, the plasticity or indeed, say, neural activity.
Any belief updating comes along with a cost and that cost is can be variously articulated in terms of a failure to generalise informationally.
Thermodynamically, it has a cost of I-Landauer's principle.
Thermodynamically, it's interesting that the cost is the relative entropy between your prior and posterior beliefs.
So this will be like a computational cost, a complexity cost.
What that means is to make these steps, be they gradual or be they big jumps, they can only be made if they're, to use one of your words,
if they are suitably bounded in terms of the complexity cost, which means the degree of belief updating,
literally the relative entropy or the K-R divergence between the implicit posterior and prior after the update is sufficiently small,
which means literally you're changing your mind in a sort of mathematical sense in the most efficient way possible.
So if you're already close to and have the right kind of generative model to do imitation of a de novo behaviour in virtue of the fact you've done it before,
that means that the complexity cost of actually committing to that and revising and belief updating your generative model
as now becomes within a tenable range, it becomes acceptable.
So that would certainly make sense if I was simulating that.
And we've been talking about ways of all sorts of different questions,
the questions in the chat, these questions and the plea from Michael,
how would you make this mechanics work in terms of resolving various hypotheses and evincing insights into how all of this works?
I think at the end of the day, you're going to have to simulate it.
And, you know, there's this a couple of this has not been done very much in the setting of the free energy principle or active inference, certainly.
But there now are a number of papers coming out within the past year or few months.
And, you know, it might be interesting to go to those.
And I'm thinking of, for example, a paper by Caspar Hesp's group that looked,
I think the final write-up is something like One Small Step for Mankind or something,
but it was originally entitled Ideas Worth Spreading.
So it's explicitly using the Bayesian mechanics of belief updating to look at how spreadable, how copyable certain beliefs were,
framed in the current age of the Internet and sort of tweets and the like.
And the same kind of theme has also been taken up by colleagues of Connor Hines and Maxwell Ranstead in terms of simulating epistemic communities,
where, coming back to Michael's use of the importance of epistemic spread and copying and imitation being basically an epistemic spread,
that's now starting to be simulated.
So I think we are on the cusp in the world of active inference, at least, on having mechanics out there that's actually realized in silica,
that you can start to intervene on a model things of this kind or that kind.
And speaking to Dean's question earlier on, you know, it strikes me that people in climatology must face exactly the same problem.
Is this missing data or did this thing actually go away?
And of course, it's a really important, really important question to answer.
Then in principle, you could do it if you've got a model of those legacy data.
But you have to have a model, which means you've got to basically have an in silico sort of digital twin of the way you think it works.
And then you can compare two gerative models or digital twins on the way it works and see which has the greatest evidence in light of the historical data.
That clearly hasn't been done either in climate change or your field.
But in principle, that would be the way to do that.
I'm sorry, I've gone over time.
Sorry.
It's totally fine.
My reflection on that as we again, anyone else who wants to have any last words is in the Par et al 2022 textbook, there's attention to two kinds of surprise.
It's plain surprise, which is an information theoretic quality, quantity associated with an observation with respect to its prior.
And the second being Bayesian surprise, which is what you just described, the cost of movement, which is related to the divergence of movement.
And I think in that difference between that was surprising and I surprised me or I have changed are two aspects of the scenario.
Because to just be surprised doesn't require one to change at all.
One can just say every day, wake up, check the news.
I can't believe that they're doing that.
You can just be surprised again and again.
And then there's the Bayesian surprise with the belief updating.
And that is really where the semantic advances of the Bayesian mechanics are just beginning to mature.
I hate the last word, but I hope it isn't.
So the propagations have been dropped in 53.0 and 53.1.
And Daniel and Dean have avoided being provocateurs so far.
What I'm really looking forward to is in 53.2, whether we can declare game on.
Because I think if we do, if we have that to look forward to, we can push the narrative to the end of the timetable.
And we can start to or continue to enhance the conversation that we initiated today.
So I just want to say thank you to all of you for all of the care and passion that you shared with us.
And I'm just happy as can be.
So thank you.
Thank you.
Any final comments, Hector or Michael?
No, just thank you for having us and sharing this time with us.
I mean, it was a great discussion.
Thank you.
Well, thank you very much.
It's been the most profitable session.
Excellent.
Carl, any last thoughts?
Again, I've enjoyed it greatly.
And, you know, it's a real pleasure to actually speak to all of you.
But in particular, Michael and Hector, you're actually using words.
So that's spoken words.
Very embodied.
Very inactive.
Lovely.
Excellent.
All right.
Till next time.
Thank you, everybody.
Bye.
Bye.




























Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.

## L6dhr5hUu8o

to copy or not to copy that is the question from chimpanzees to the foundation of human
technological culture recently appeared in physics of life reviews
let me see if this works yeah sorry so it all starts with a gypsum puzzle
and and the puzzle is why a highly innovative species like chimpanzees do not live in a complex
technological world so we know chimpanzees are very inventive they are very creative they are
insightful they can learn socially but what we don't see in the same extent or similar extent
we see in humans is the accumulation of complexity across generations so you can see here in these
images we have one of the more complex and demanding tasks that chimpanzees perform cracking nuts open
and they can combine different tools they can use it in the appropriate order so this means they are
very insightful and yet if we compare it with a rocket that can bring civilization to mars um it is clear
that the accumulation of technology across generation works very differently humans and other non-human
species so the the basic question or the one million dollars question is why does innovation fail to
translate into technological cumulative complexity in chimpanzees does it owe to a limited capacity to
copy with fidelity or what we refer as to imitation which means reproducing not only the end result that
would be emulating or emulation but also the steps that lead to that end result so according to this view
pillar to copy innovation with faithful accuracy hampers their intra and intergenerational spread and any
ensuing ratcheting up effects so plausibly when coping with fidelity is impeded innovative performances are
unlikely to live their protagonist and this brings us back to the discussion we had the other day in the
snakes and others paper where we said that after two million years ago early homo uh produced this almond
chain be facile flake stones and but these um kind of artifacts that we we we don't even dare to call them
tools were not copied by conspecific observers because perhaps they were not attributing to them any kind of
functional use so perhaps they were not seen as tools and were the result of manual inactions so
so to ratchet up complexity it is important that inventions that is tools are copied with sufficient fidelity so that
they retain the fundamental features or attributes that make them functional so following the steps of
demonstrated tool manufactured by an expert model to the letter is the simplest fastest and cheapest way to make sure that
the copies of the original artifact are accurate and here cheapest we refer to in terms of expenditure of energy
so if the copies are functional hence useful they keep circulating in the group community longer
and this gives increased opportunities for one or more individuals different from the original inventor to
add in complexity so for example one individual invents a wooden spur and 100 years later the smelting of copper
is discovered and another individual adds to it to this spur a sharp copper point and so on
so here is an interesting concept of ratchet effect that would explain in part why humans have built such
complex cultural and technological work so the idea of the ratchet effect is that no generation starts
from scratch instead inventions and cultural products created by one generation are kept in mind and
transmitted to the next generation this way every generation is better off supposedly than the one that
preceded it so here we can think of books books are a wonderful way of keeping information sharing it
across generations and among the same generation also so thus technological complexity and success in humans
is not dependent solely on the geniality of one or few individuals it is a joint endeavor where many
individuals contribute their specific expertise and skills to produce increasingly complex artifacts and again
we can think in um establishing a colony in mars no single human alive could achieve that alone or would have
the required expertise to achieve that alone but all together we can perhaps manage that so we need this
kind of shared knowledge and accumulated across generations of course
so why it is some behaviors or innovation are copied or not can be explained at the level of social dynamics but also
at the level of the brain or giving a more mechanistic explanation so explanation why copying of
shared behavior in chimpanzees does not occur with frequency have been often kept at the level of social dynamics
where factors such as social prestige dominance etc are said to be key to explaining whether or not an invasion is adopted by observers
and this approach relegates the brain to a subsidiary role
here michael and i will be attempting to identify what the minimum cognitive requirements are that can give rise to innovations
and their horizontal and vertical transmission
and we also attempted to differentiate the cognitive ingredients necessary for innovation from those
that need to be in place for the adoption of an innovation
so we wanted to establish a clear demarcation between the brains of the
ones that innovate and the brains of those who observe an innovation because we think this is important to
be analyzed separately
so in order to see which are the mechanisms at the level of the brain that would allow for one innovation
to be copied we invoked the lens of the free energy principle according to active inference under the free
energy principle it is through there being limited to a restricted number of states that is the attracting set
of the free energy principle that organisms minimize the variation of free energy of the internal states and
resist entropic dissipation minimizing variation of free energy reduces prediction sensation discrepancies
prediction errors that can be corrected by active sampling of predicted sensory inputs and perceptive
modification of predictions this is sometimes expressed in terms of perceptual inference that is changing
predictions to match sensations and active inference reactively changing sensations to match predictions
so
innovation in a way might represent a potential misfiring from other winning perspective
so minimizing variational free energy can be achieved reaction sent in creatures can act
active inference in order to fulfill their predictions and thereby reduce discrepancy between the latter and sample reality
being limited to a restricted number of states what we could refer to as the attracting set is therefore
synonymous with minimizing variational free energy and hence maximizing adaptive fitness
here innovation represent an anomaly and innovators are unorthodox actors or protagonists who entertain new courses of action or plans
new phenotypical responses that have not been previously entertained
and according to this interpretation of the free energy principle it is at the level of policy selection where
innovators stand apart from the crowd their policy selection is in a sense faulty insofar as their ensuing
behavioral outcomes are in mark contrast to those of their fellow actors who deploy orthodox responses that
reduce discrepancies between predictions and sensations thereby reducing the prediction error
and here we will talk of miss firing we don't do it in a kind of negative sense it's just to express that
these new behaviors these innovations necessarily will produce more surprise
okay seeing surprising things with this phrase i i'm kind of paraphrasing and the clark in a paper in
behavioral and brain sciences he referred to seeing surprising things to being able to lend credibility to
the sensory information that is not in accordance to prior beliefs so the family of probability
probability density is entertained by an individual is restricted to the systems the brains prior bias and beliefs
equivalent roughly speaking to its phenotypical repertoire
this means by definition that innovative behavior is both unlikely to be evinced in any given phenotype
and crucially difficult to recognize when observed by another
should an innovator's behavior diverge markedly from the repertoire plausible policies used usually by an observer
to predict another's behavior it may be beyond the capacity of the latter's generative model to
recognize it that is to make sense of it so large discrepancies pose a threat to the brain because one
updating involves making energetic demands and two risk reducing adaptive fitness by inappropriately
changing changing the generative models and here we need to think that the generative model has been
selected also in a specific econo so changing it might might have risks okay
so what is required for a brain to entertain generative models that involve unusual or bizarre behaviors
the hierarchical predictive interpretation of the brain or hierarchically mechanistic mind
an inference inference machine sorry implies that each level of the hierarchy of cerebral neuronal circuits
conveys predictions or conditional expectations that suppress errors at the level below
while concurrently conveying errors that permit the revision of the expectations at the level above
plausibly dynamical precision weighting enables the system that is the brain
to readjust the confidence afforded to top down expectations as opposed to bottom-up prediction errors
in other words in order to entertain a prior that an unlikely hypothesis might explain best some behavior
witnessed it is first necessary to relax the precision or commitment to prior beliefs
thus enabling new or implausible hypothesis to explain novel behavior and here i introduce
some things we discussed the other day professor friston talk of attenuation of sensory information in
relation to saccades which is kind of switching off this sensory information we are being aware of and that would be the opposite as being impressionable so
i'm quoting professor friston here if i can copy that means i am impressionable i will accumulate new evidence very quickly
i have the capacity to assign greater evidence or precision to sensory evidence and suspend the precision to my prior beliefs
this is something he he mentioned in the last uh active infant recording 53.1.1
and to end this introduction one concept we introduce in our paper which is central to our discussion is that of
zones of banded surprises so this is a new concept introduced to refer to the levels of mismatch between prior beliefs
or top-down predictions and sensory information that a species can tolerate
so first and foremost the focus of the zbs concept is on the observers and their ability to make sense of unobserved innovation
and coding and subsequent copying of innovation depends on the degree of disparity or surprise between
predictable behaviors namely those typical of the species and the perceptual incoming information about
novel behaviors if the zbs is white it means that the species can give credit to the information received
through its senses that challenges the prior beliefs in short a species can register encode and potentially
reproduce reproduce in the behavior of certain code specifics that deviate markedly from customary
prototypical behaviors the species is highly impressionable if we use the words that professor
fristen used the other day so if the zbs is narrow then a species ability to change prior beliefs to
accommodate new evidence regarding innovative practices observing goal specifics is compromised
i just to end up and avoid any kind of misunderstanding want to make clear that this our sound rebounded
surprise have nothing to do with the zone of latin solutions by tenure i'll be we are discussing similar
topics so the son of latin solutions that was introduced by tenure kai and tomo waselo refers to
solutions to a problem for instance extractive foraging that can be achieved by an individual in isolation
during his lifetime and hence is not likely to be the product of cumulative culture involving social
learning when observed in the wire and for those readers interested in this concept they can go to the
original paper i'm i'm showing here and also there is a recent paper by andrew whiteen who is professor in
in saint andrews that discusses this concept and that has replication by other authors so it might be a
good update for those interested also and with that i finish this short presentation and we can enter
discussion let me stop sharing screen i think okay now thank you hector i will bring up the notes again and
to michael carl or dean whomever would like to provide a first response please
well i don't really have a great deal more to add um i think
hello yes please continue what's happened here you're all good michael we're here michael hello can
you hear me yes we hear you continue yes we can i'm not quite sure what's happened here we seem to have
snakes and ladders up on the up on the screen um as i said i i don't think i can add much more to what
hector has just said i think it makes a very succinct summary of a bar paper and
i would like to certainly congratulate hector for making what seems to me a very original and perceptive
observation that it is the observers whom we have to thank for
uh copying and therefore for the handing down of technological achievements by early humans
whereas too often the emphasis has been made on the person responsible for making a technological
innovation uh but of course unless somebody copies that or at least unless it registers in the mind of
somebody else it is unlikely ever to get copied and although this seems to be a fairly a fairly obvious
observation it seems to have escaped most of those who have published on the matter hitherto and i think
this is a very original contribution on hector's pot which deserves uh to be complimented and uh
uh really that's all i wish to say i think i'd like to throw this open to other people and if i can
illuminate or elucidate any matters i'm happy to do so but i think this is really very much uh to put it
mildly hector's brainchild and uh congratulations
thanks michael you're very kind but this is our child so and you you know a lot you have a lot to
contribute so i mean i can only learn so but thank you anyway awesome carl or dean
go ahead carl right so i just wanted to um reiterate michael's admiration for that for both the idea
but also the very fluent um and clear articulation of it i was um it was nice for me to see that
uh presented so succinctly because the clarity of the ideas really um is really very evident um
it struck me there is sort of two um two themes that we could discuss which is the um the emergence
of more complicated solutions to accurately engaging with and modeling our world i think that was a
generic theme in the first part of the presentation but then very quickly we moved to this
kernel idea this core idea um that it the dissemination and the transgenerational propagation
that um could be read as some kind of um cultural niche construction in a sort of evo-devo context
depends upon being able to recognize a particular behavior uh and thereby copy and imitate i think that
that's that's that was the key thing and for me um just understanding the mechanics of that from the point of view
of um belief updating and active inference um was a i think a really useful thing and as um hector beautifully
uh articulated uh articulated the ability to recognize
something new and update one's generative model or posterior beliefs depends very sensitively on the confidence
or the precision that you ascribe the sense of evidence in relation to the precisions with which you hold your your prior belief
and i think that that's absolutely crucial and i i sort of um highlight that issue because it is exactly the same issue
that you will find when applying active inference and the free energy principle to um psychiatry and the different ways in which we can uh i can't remember hector what was your word misfire
uh in neither a good nor a bad sense but certainly there are certain psychiatric uh syndromes that could be regarded as misfiring and of course there's a very close association with innovation and creativity and manic depressive psychosis
as you know uh you know famed in terms of um various historical figures in uh in the arts um and that i think is you know again brings us back to this key notion
of getting that balance the balance of the precision of our prior constructs what we have accrued through experience dependent learning
and the precision afforded evidence that this is how the world is actually working and how i am actually working getting that balance right
um and that's a really difficult job and sometimes in in computational psychiatry we um we try to explain this in terms of a statistician
um in order to get the balance right you have to be able to estimate these precisions
and this exactly the same spirit that a statistician when making an inference doing a t-test has to estimate
not just the difference in the group means but also the standard error and it's often much more difficult to estimate the standard error
than it is to estimate the difference in in in the group means and that standard error is the inverse precision
it's the weight that you afford the meaning the significance of some quantitative difference say a prediction error
um so you see this theme that you know there are two parts to inference the first order part is just the
prediction error or the surprise but then you have to assign how newsworthy is that you have to actually
modulate that with its precision so you can multiply by the precision or divide by the standard error to get the actual
thing that matters that's going to change your mind um and there's a whole literature on um different
kinds of people in the context of neurodiversity that i have an impairment in being able or possibly have an
in being able to estimate that precision and i'm thinking here of the the poster child of this kind of
formulation which is autism um and the idea being that there is an early developmental failure to
attenuate sensory precision so they are rarely and continually during their early development
severe people with severe autism um unable to ignore any of their sensations um and as a consequence
everything is surprising everything is arousing everything is in danger of revising any um beliefs very
very quickly so they're highly impressionable to the extent they can't build deeply coherent models of
their lived world or indeed the other artifacts such as mum uh that constitutes their world so i i'm just
wondering whether you know a species that um has the same kind of latitude in terms of either biasing
attention or precision the sensory evidence versus accumulated prior beliefs would display the same kind
of misfiring so you can go from one end and autistic species will be overly impressionable it'll be too
evolvable it won't be able to remember anything from generation to generation the converse is a um
somebody who you you you can imagine from a psychiatric perspective um has committed unduly to very precise
prior beliefs about the way the world works and you can think of this in terms of compulsive
obsessional disorder or perhaps even depression you know the world is an awful place that is true
therefore there's no point in going out and you know challenging the evidence that the world is
an awful place so i'm just going to stay inside and feel um um isolated and not move or say very much
um so that would be an example who somebody is not very impressionable in fact their pathology
their misfiring prevents them from acquiring any evidence to revise their beliefs
so if you imagine a a species um that had that same kind of um second order misfiring on this
so this is not the misfiring of the innovative so this is a a failure to infer the second or cystics the
reliability the precision um the variance the entropy of the content of the things they're trying to
innovate or or make sense of you you're you're left with this notion of a a species that just
cannot respond to selective pressures for selectability they can't respond um by adjusting their
evolvability simply because they're fixed in their in their way so for the environmental
eco niche changes in any fundamental way they're not going to be able to um to respond to that
um so i think this you know there are many examples of this sort of key um uh this key if you like yes i
think it would be called a pathology in the sense that in a volatile environment um you would need to
optimize the precision afforded sensory evidence in order to make the best sense and understand and
engage with that environment and if you get that wrong there will be a pathology um and i think
basically hector's um uh formulation really drills down and really focuses on the actual mechanism this
kind of um this kind of uh pathology you know it's all about the transcultural spread of generative
models and and sense making um in terms of engaging either with artifacts or indeed with you know with
conspecifics and i repeat it's such a such an easy thing to get wrong as as evinced in in psychiatry you
know there are so many instances of um neurodiversity expressed clinically that i think reflects this this
singular dimension in terms of the ability to get that balance to get that balance uh right i remember
we discussed last time again in terms of impressionability and uh selection for selectability
and the like the same kind of mechanism unfolding uh you know in terms of evolutionary uh mechanics but
at the level that i think we're talking about today in terms of um you know evincing plan uh pursuing plans
um and novel ways of doing things that may or may not be um recognized uh due to the due to a failure or
not of getting um being able to suspend the precision of your prior beliefs i think that that was a
central um central theme i'll just close um with an interesting comment that in terms of the kind of
misfiring that um hector was implying basically a novel way of doing things um being the unique
province of those kinds of creatures that can plan possibly deeper into the future um there's a really
interesting sort of link back to this precision notion in the sense that if you try to simulate the
depth of planning of any sentient artifact then the degree to which they are able to look into the
future depends upon the precision of their beliefs about the succession of contingencies what will happen
if if if if this happens and then what will happen if that happens so just technically the precision of the
transitions amongst worldly states of affairs as you roll out into the future and again you have to estimate that
precision um so there's another if you like point at which precision gets into the game but in this
instance it's not the precision of the sensory evidence but the prior precision about the ways things
unfold and what will happen if i if i do that if you have a low precision there then you don't plan very
far into the future because you lose certainty and confidence very very quickly after just a few moves
whereas if you have very precise beliefs about the um the state transitions and the consequences
of various actions or sequential policies then you can roll out confidently much further into the future
and perhaps find that innovative innovative solution so again we come back mechanistically to phenotypes
that have differing degrees of precision that um the in this instance get into the game in terms of
the um bounding the um bounding the the the depth of the planning or the temporal horizons um that you can entertain
um when um when um scoring different plans in order to actually select the best action at the moment
so for me that insight is really useful because i can see how one might want you know how one could simulate
that quite easy easily in sort of toy situations so that those are my thoughts inspired by by excellent
hector's excellent uh presentation
thank you carl dean what say you
well if it's if it's okay i'd like to sort of step back for a second and um
um because we were privileged to be able to look at the two papers almost simultaneously i know
chronologically we've we've split it up into weeks but as readers we were able to kind of look at
both paper side by each i kind of want to take a bit of a hofstetter strange loop two-sided condition
mobius we've got that all those representations in our in a lot of our live stream introductions
so if we were to assume that because carl pointed out not everybody can can accommodate a two things
at once perspective if if we can assume that that doesn't overwhelm my question to the authors is do
they see their own journey as a one paper or artifact artifact morphing into the next or and as we
were pulled out and taken up by this relationship between epistemic and pragmatic values when up
taking an active inference perspective that's part one of the question part two is the former is kind
of a sequential mechanical technical side of things the latter is the combinatorial plus meaning entailed
and entangled so more more where am i relative so combined that's a relative depth of field as
setting as establishing morphing we want to call it that as active inference strategy is applied how do
the authors see or potentially see this perspective combining meaning the sequential and or the combinatorial
affective effecting not effecting but affecting what we believe because i'm a big i'm a big believer that
we can't just sort of strip the feelings part of this out i think that's whether we're talking chimpanzees
or whether we're talking the emotions of sliding down a snake those are those are are part of this thing that
we're looking at i'll just give one short note on that in the paper sophisticated affective inference
they simulated counterfactual futures projections about futures which are inactive inference action oriented
all futures are analyzed and inferred about with respect to policy selection by the agent
and one of the patterns already apparent in even the simple simulations were that even if a very small
fraction of counterfactuals have like death as an outcome or highly negative outcomes it can increase the variance
estimator on possible futures greatly leading to essentially ruminative behavior and affective anxiety
uncertainty around the legitimately warranted variance in possible outcomes so i see a key piece of this puzzle
to be entertaining progressively wider time cones of possible futures in a prospective capacity
and entertaining progressively wider time cones in the past of causal mechanisms
and somehow negotiating that affect barometer in the moment as the eye of the needle
hector michael where do you see affect coming into the snakes and ladders to copy and not to copy set
the
uh well may i make one or two comments um first of all in addition to what professor friston has told us
about autism and so on i think it's worth mentioning uh in the connection of the question that daniel has just
raised to say that there is clearly a difference in the evolution during the life cycle of
the early humans on the one hand and great apes and probably most human forerunners on the other
the extension of the human life cycle the extension uh beyond childhood and in particular as i mentioned last time
um the adolescent growth spurt which we have but which may not have existed uh in early homo uh even one and a
half million years ago i'm sure is relevant to making the evolutionary uh step between let us say
the surprise that perhaps a chimpanzee has if she observes a dead bird and then regards this as counterintuitive
uh because birds ought not to be lying on the ground throws it up into the air but this is a an individual
spontaneous uh reaction which is not um handed on as part of a behavioral repertoire amongst
the species and on the other hand when we begin to see
the reproduction of as it were counterintuitive uh behavioral sequences such as uh taking a lot of
flakes repetitively by hand from a piece of stone using another stone to produce an almond shaped hand axe
fairly regularly flaked on both sides something which is not found before homo appears in the
uh archaeological and paleoanthological record but which is not something that seems to be
a regular part of human behavior it is almost as if uh the individual who made that uh was doing it as
a kind of uh spontaneous thought of what might happen uh if i was to do this uh part of the deep
generation uh of the uh hierarchically mechanistic mind which professor fiston has told us about a deep
generation that however may have been a misfiring it may have been simply a personal spontaneous event
which is not easily uh recognized by others particularly if they're uh shall we say to put it mildly their
mental uh development is stunted due to the early adulthood and the lack of any adolescence adolescence
in particular uh which and uh of course um the development of the neuronal architecture of the brain which
in modern people continues until our mid-twenties if this was not to have occurred uh um as it does not of
course in um even in great apes then there would have been perhaps a problem here about the deep
generative potential of an individual ever being uh recognized such that um it isn't just what might
happen if i was to do this with a piece of stone but what might happen if i was to copy what that other
individual is doing with a piece of stone um and this i think is the stumbling block this is what has
uh led to the snakes and ladders picture which is what i think has led to a very slow adaptation
of technological uh accumulative technological um uh handing down from between generations or between
individuals of a generation and between generations and it may well have been the case that it was not
until dem uh demographical as well of course as uh biological paleobiological changes had evolved in
the genus homo that there was sufficient uh intercourse uh not merely sexual but social uh such that
um these questions continue to be uh asked ever more frequently and with the appearance of better and ever more fluent
communication uh would allow uh what we now uh regard as human culture um specifically uh human nature
uh which uh i think uh differentiated has differentiated us ever more from uh the the great apes um i just
those are my thoughts on the matter um
thank you michael carl or anyone else please
can you please um
can you please um speak to the question about affect and what michael has just treated as two um
so one way of um conceiving of affect and valence and um you know the emotional aspects of
choosing different plans or um making sense of my own bodily sensations um is to think of it in terms of
precision estimation um so one way of carving um one way of a very generic way of thinking about some
negatively effectively charged states of mind would be those states of mind in which there is irreducible or
unresolvable uncertainty so you know to put simply um to be uncertain about what is going to happen to me
or what i should do is to be in a state of angst um and that can be um linked to notions such as anxiety
um and you know with some extra nuances other um feelings such as you know um a low affect and indeed
if that is pervasive a low mood or or depression um but i think the key thing here and indeed many
people uh have developed a calculus of emotion based upon whether your average level of uncertainty is
increasing or decreasing or is high and low and adding these things together to get a an ontology of
emotional states from a purely sort of inference perspective there's another a body of thought and
um literature which links emotions to um the literally gut feelings interception um so the
certain emotional states are just hypotheses about the way that i am feeling um now the best explain the
myriad of extra receptive interoceptive sensations so i think there is a mechanics of affect in um
um certainly interceptive inference um and possibly more generally in terms of active inference
however there is another aspect of um things that we the the feelings that we might associate when we
feel um compelled to do things and i'm thinking here not about the irreducible um or irresolvable
uncertainty but about uncertainty that can be resolved i'm thinking here um when hector mentioned
um andy clark's treatment of surprise there is also the truism that we expect to be surprised um and
technically that lends um that can be explained in terms of the imperatives for choosing those actions that
will resolve uncertainty um about the way the world works so this is just an expression of novelty
so if we anticipate if we if we anticipate that we are going to be surprised um by some outcome what we
are saying is that that outcome is going to be informative and that it will reduce some uncertainty
technically it has a high expected information gain so i'm speaking here as a statistician that this
and using terms that would underlie uh the bayesian principles optimal experimental design that we
we do these experiments uh specifically in order to get surprising outcomes that are by definition
going to resolve my uncertainty about my different hypotheses so if we think about the
the uh the misfires that are innovations these are effectively by definition novel behaviors and they
are um the fact that people um or certain people and certain creatures engage in um novel um in novelty
seeking is entirely sensible from the point of view of the free energy principle because novelty um seeking
just is an expression of curiosity it is just an expression of choosing those outcomes that are going to yield
rich information that has um technically a high self-information or an expected information gain so
that this is another view of the um if you like the effective aspect that we do we are compelled and expect
ourselves and will possibly explain ourselves as being excited um in a positive way and the opportunity to resolve
uncertainty because we see an opportunity to do something novel what is behind that door you know what is inside this present
you know what would happen if i did that and that's an entirely natural um and by natural i mean
something that is easily naturalized under the physics of self-organization of any system
that has or entails an implicit generative model of the consequences of it of its own action so i thought
there was a lovely link between that kind of um um affect written into the um the the imperative to
seek novelty to seek surprises in the future um and what michael was saying about uh well yes in all the
order to do that you still have you still have you have to suspend your um your prior convictions
because if you a priori think you know everything there is no novelty there is no imperative for
expiration uh and you can just do the same thing time and time again but if you're in a if you can
recognize that there is reducible uncertainty and um choose those actions that have the greatest
expected expected um expected information gain then you will necessarily succumb to um novelty seeking
behavior and thereby discover those misfire innovations so uh and it may be that the you know
there is uh well the story that michael was telling uh was that we are built to be curious creatures
for much longer we are built to you know to be able to respond to novelty and to find those innovative
novel ways of behaving um uh um you know so that we remain um we we retain that childlike curiosity
um as part of our epigenetic epigenetic neurodevelopmental programming for much longer than
other species so i i think that sort of um matches very nicely with the sort of the basic thesis that
hector was proposing during the presentation it all comes back to getting the precision of your prior
beliefs right and suspending um very precise prior beliefs in order to explore hypotheses and that
exploration just is in terms of engaging in novel innovative behaviors that will um that you know
will resolve your uncertainty so i i if that's right it sort of engenders a question why is there
an evolutionary pressure for this kind of eternal childhood so um i want to ask michael and hector
because michael certainly brought in um language and cultural niche construction i i i my guess would
be that there will be a circular causality um between um the the the cultural eco niche and the phenotypes
are trying to adapt to that cultural eco niche such that they are required or the the phenotypes that have
the greatest adaptive fitness are those that retain a greater curiosity um in the context of the
culture in which they find themselves and part of that will be necessary to actually understand the
communication and the signs and the semiotics afforded by their conspecifics which could be read
just as language so my question is did this innovative does innovative tool use does it emerge
um um stochastically or um you know um at certain points along with communication and language um or um are they
or are they not correlated and if they are correlated in terms of you know um you know historically um what
are they are they're thinking about the direction of causality does the fact that you um remain curious
and innovative for much longer um lead to language that we can you know engage in novel communicative
behaviors or is it that we need to um remain curious and open-minded in terms of um thinking about or
entertaining novel plans and innovative plans simply because we have to make sense of a world that is
rich in information because there is language that is that has been culturally inherited or is it both is
there is a both top-down and bottom-up causation so so two questions language tool use and copying
and the um the coupling between the sort of evolutionary and uh phylogenetic um sorry the phylogenetic um
the um the um sort of phenotypic uh levels when it comes to things like language
well um i wonder if i could come in here uh daniel is it okay if i address uh cause questions yes in whatever order you like
um thank you um well in the first place there is a voluminous literature on the relationship between
language and the origins of tool making and tool use uh really and there's a lot of uh unresolved
argument about whether the two came together very early in human evolution let's say between one million
and one and a half million years ago, as I originally thought some years ago,
or whether in fact language as we know it, or shall we say fluent communication at least,
only developed much later, as I'm coming round to believe now,
and as Noam Chomsky has said for many, many years.
I don't want to get involved in that because really we would need two or three programmes
and a lot of literature to compare and contrast.
Rather, I would query whether we have an eternal childhood.
On the contrary, I think that physiological childhood is slowed down
and when the adolescent growth spurt arises,
after about the age of, let's say, nine years old,
at some times or perhaps somewhat later at others,
is when we see a major change in behaviour which is no longer childish,
but neither is it adult.
Of course, we needn't go into that.
We all know that adolescents can be very impetuous,
but they can also be extremely anxious.
And this brings us to the angst that Karl has mentioned,
and which I certainly felt as an adolescent facing the weekly Viva Voce examinations
in human anatomy in the dissecting room,
which in those days we all had to undergo,
at least in the United Kingdom,
as I can sure call the members,
and which always put me into a state of extreme nervousness
and has given me a lifelong worry about the lack of accuracy,
let alone precision,
in anatomical description and identification
and a concern with the statistical variability
in human anatomy or aspects of it,
or anatomy in general, not necessarily human,
and its relation to process,
in other words, to physiology.
And I feel myself much more,
despite having lectured in human anatomy,
much more aligned to physiology.
And I spent some time doing neurophysiological stuff
many, many years ago,
at Oxford and in Göttingen,
than in the classification,
this has to be that way.
And as we were taught, as medical students,
always think doctor about the most obvious
rather than the most obscure.
But we have to have the whole range before us.
And this brings in the whole problem of,
do we think in terms of very right or wrong,
concrete facts about stuff in general?
Or do we think in terms of the statistical range
of variability,
whether it is in terms of occurrences,
occurrences,
let's say related to Poisson-type distributions,
or to continuous variates,
which can be, let's say,
related to Gaussian-type distributions.
And unfortunately,
it was only much later in life
that I discovered that, in fact,
modern statistics allows these two approaches
to be compared and contrasted
in a uniform manner.
I didn't know that 50 years ago,
alas,
which shows my ignorance.
Still,
I would come back to the whole business
of the growth curve of humans.
This clearly has altered.
When we look at chimpanzees
and other great apes,
basically,
they don't have much of anything
approaching our adolescence.
They don't have this slowing down of growth
and then a recuperation of the velocity of growth
combined with,
most important,
not merely anatomical and physiological changes,
but also those of the mind.
The ability to innovate,
the ability to have lateral thinking,
or the ability,
which I have noticed in some young people
I've met with Asperger's syndrome,
to be able to concentrate
in great detail
on particular matters
which are extraordinarily arcane,
such as Sanskrit literature
in people
that are not of a South Asian heritage,
whereas
in dealing with other people,
their other colleagues,
they appear to be,
shall we say,
gauche.
And this is, of course, well known.
However,
and indicates the range of variables,
but it is the change
which we all undergo
in not merely physical,
but also intellectual ability
and inquisitiveness,
which can get us into trouble
when we are in adolescence
and as young men and women
given the
continual
and continuous changes
in our neuronal architecture,
at least until our mid-twenties these days,
which I think distinguishes
and has distinguished
the evolution
of Homo sapiens,
well Homo in general
and Homo sapiens in particular,
but I wouldn't rule out Neanderthals
or even Homo erectus,
and which I think
has been cumulative
and undoubtedly,
although we have no idea,
undoubtedly
enhanced
by
increased,
excuse me,
and ever more complicated
communication
during the past
probably half a million
and certainly
a quarter of a million years.
This curiosity,
what would happen
if we did this,
what would happen
if we did that,
but
even so,
things are not
rapidly
grasped.
and
we see
that in different parts
of the world,
particularly in modern populations
even that have been
long separated
from each other,
not everything
is developed
at the same rate.
A couple of well-known examples
are, for example,
the wheel,
which first appears
probably
on the Eurasian steppes
about 5,000 years ago
and was used for traction,
and then appears
quite independently
in pre-Columban
Miso-America
about 2,000 years ago
and was not used,
even though it would have been
very useful,
for even anything
as simple as a wheelbarrow,
but simply
to move around
images,
whether they were dolls
or toys
or gods
with no idea.
and another one
taken from the same
two areas
of the world
is the metallurgy
of copper,
which appears
about,
well,
perhaps over 6,000 years ago
in Eurasia
and possibly
2,000 years ago
independently
in the New World.
and yet
other things
happen too.
For example,
in Australia
we find
modern people
were making
hand axes
when these
had long ceased
to be made
by anybody
outside
Australia.
Some of them
may even be
only a few
thousand years old.
so
this
appearance
and
disappearance
and reappearance
is something
which
has not
gone away
and must
be related
somehow
to
our ability
to
this
deep
generation
of
our inquisitiveness
our curiosity
and indeed
our ability
to
not to see
the most
obvious thing
around us.
The desire
to see
only
one
simple solution
which so
irritated me
when
my teachers
in the
anatomy department
when I was a
medical student
believed that
there was only
one
right answer
as to
how many heads
this muscle
had
or
how many
vertebrae
there were
in this
or that
part
of the
vertebral column
let alone
in the skull
and we know
how very
variable
these matters
can be.
so
there is this
tension
between
the desire
for things
to be seen
in one
light only
in a
one dimensional
way
and
our
natural
inquisitiveness
this
deeply
generated
desire
to say
what would
happen
if it was
like this
how has it
come to be
like that
why is
everything
different
and not
the same
I can't
put it
any other
way
with that
I've said
quite enough
thank you
Michael
Dean
thanks Daniel
so again
this is for
the authors
this is
this has been
really helpful
to me
as observers
because that's
that's
highlighted
very
clearly
in the
papers
I see
both papers
speaking to
something that I
would describe as
condition set
meaning
in the papers
examples
limit the game
to
the game
metaphor
at least
to
this type
where there's
a limited
number of tiles
and a
clear
continuation
until a
conclusion
or
recognize
the limit
of the
species
to
nut
cracking
so
there's
a real
clear
idea
and
Michael
and Hector
have both
spoken to
so
what was
the
growth
limit
of the
brain's
capacity
etc
what I'm
curious
about
and I
don't know
if there's
Michael
or Hector
have a
real
clear answer
to this
but
I'm
wondering
what
and when
was
the
was maybe
the range
of time
that we
see
the
unlocking
or
or
or
sort of
combatorial
explosion
or not
what I
guess what
I'm asking
is
is there
a move
that we
can
clearly
see as
being
something that
differentiates
playing which
we know
happens in a
lot of
species
and gaming
because as I
said at the
end of
53.1
I wondered
if it was
going to be
game on
game on
and so
I'm
curious
what the
authors
think about
is there
a difference
between
playing
and gaming
meaning
that
there's
now
an actual
introduction
of
strategy
in this
so
maybe
another way
of asking
it
is there
a moment
when you
guys can
point to
it
and say
this was
kind of
when we
saw
a reducing
or maybe
a relaxing
of a
limit
forward
world
I wonder
whether in
fact
this difference
is really
quite as
great as
Dean suggests
and whether
it may be
have something
to do
with the
ability
in
working
memory
and
other
aspects
of
memory
in
dealing
with
or in
developing
logical
mathematical
ability
to
plan
or in
planning
and in
communicating
this ability
such that
the planning
is no
longer
on an
individual
level
but is
participatory
and therefore
again
in other
words
and perhaps
Hector can
answer this
question
but I would
suggest
that
this
developed
slowly
gradually
and
by no
means
in a
continual
let alone
a continuous
manner
in Homo
but not
in earlier
in a way
not in
earlier
and other
hominid
species
do we see
and this
I would ask
Hector
do we
really see
let us say
chimpanzees
or other
great apes
developing
the
kind of
logical
math ability
to make
very very
simple
combinatorial
associations
between
objects
or
behavioral
activities
and
developing
this
into
a communal
game
which involves
other individuals
in the group
because
as Hector
has remarked
on various
occasions
and informed
me
when we
see things
like
nut
in
small
groups
of
chimpanzees
it by
no means
is copied
by all
of them
let alone
copied
or emulated
by all
of them
and by
no means
even when
it is
with
faithful
accuracy
and precision
in the
manual
operations
that are
required
so
that
I would
ask
Hector
do we
see
these
associations
being
transformed
into
games
okay
that's a
tricky
question
I mean
what we
know
with
chimpanzees
is that
they have
promised
to do
these
second
order
relationships
which is
like
hierarchical
ordering
of
for instance
if I have
a set
of objects
I can
classify
them
attending
to the
color
for instance
chimps
could do
that
okay
if only
color
is involved
but I can
classify
them by
color
and shape
so this
is another
order
of
hierarchy
so I can
pick things
that are
square
and red
and put
them
together
so this
ability
to
abstract
a kind
of
ordering
category
so that
I have
relations
of
relations
like in
analogical
reasoning
when I
can focus
on one
dimension
or in
another
simultaneously
so I can
shift my
focus from
one dimension
to another
in order to
classify
things
this I
think
is
quite
human
like for
instance
the Wisconsin
card
sorting
test
so I
can
shift
from one
dimension
to another
to classify
objects
or cards
and this
is something
that teams
would have
more problems
to do
so they
might
classify
in a
first order
categories
like I
put things
that have
a same
color
they could
learn to
do that
that wouldn't
be a big
problem
but I guess
if I have
to use
two dimensions
together
to classify
objects
that would
have more
problems
because this
involves
considered
more
than one
dimension
simultaneously
I'm not sure
I'm making
sense here
this is
the Jonas
Langer
work
that he
did with
kids
and that's
a remarkable
work that
Jonas Langer
did
and then
there were
these people
in Rome
I think
it was
Poti
at the
lab of
Biopark
in Rome
that replicated
that with
chimpanzees
I think
it was
Spinozzi
who
replicated
it and
found that
chimpanzees
were more
compromised
in order to
have this
kind of
classificatory
relationship
relations
so
and I think
that's a
very remarkable
ability
that
we develop
so
I don't know
if I answered
your question
Michael
perhaps
that
comparison
of two
dimensions
color
and shape
and then
the
snakes
and ladders
overlay
that lets
us take
the hypotenuse
is that
abductive
jump
enabled
developmentally
and neuroepigenetically
by all
of these
different
features
which happen
over much
slower
timescales
especially
considering
the actual
millisecond
timescale
associated
with recognition
those other
changes are
so much
slower
but the
ability
to
move
diagonally
on the
grid
through the
rows
and the
columns
and turn
that into
movement
on a
manifold
is the
ability
looked at
from the
either
row
or column
perspective
to move
in both
at once
but by
condensing
those two
dimensions
into one
there can
be new
kinds of
cognitive
movements
and then
applying
that
cognitivist
lens
also
evolutionary
transitions
even
without
the
complex
cumulative
feedback
with the
eco-cultural
niche
merely
in the
abductive
moment
and just
one other
piece I
wanted to
return to
is that
every
variable
can have
a precision
estimator
or not
in the
generative
models
and active
inference
every variable
can be
fixed
and so
the model
can just
be
persistently
surprised
with no
updating
or
one can
have
any
kind
of
prior
or
hyper
prior
and so
on
and that
enables
learning
and that's
what enables
not just
estimation
of the
mean
or the
center
of gravity
the
expectation
of
but also
the variance
the whole
distribution
and then
it's
by applying
that kind
of
precision
on
everything
view
which as
Michael
brought up
is exactly
what modern
statistics
does
you can't
do
inference
with a
t-test
unless you
have the
mean
and the
variance
won't go
into any
more details
on the
statistics
but every
variable
has the
center of
gravity
mean
estimator
and the
variance
estimator
and so
we talked
about
precision
on
sensory
information
the
mapping
between
observations
and
hidden
state
estimates
and then
also
there's
this
action
oriented
precision
on how
things
will
unfold
and
you
might
be able
to
update
your
precision
on
sensory
evidence
by
seeing
something
different
but
updating
your
precision
on how
things
will
unfold
is
oriented
around
taking
actions
Daniel you
must have
some
questions
I can't
be the
only one
floating
questions
and having
my
zone of
bounded
surprise
being
expanded
here
I
have
questions
I can
ask a
question
or
Michael
or
Hector
or
Carl
please
feel
free
if you
hear me
I would
like to
pick up
with something
that
Professor
Christon
mentioned
before
and
that
was
kind
of
was
intriguing
because it
is true
that some
great
artists
like
Bangkok
and others
were very
creative
and also
I don't know
if it's
appropriate to
say they were
in the
verge of
psychosis
I don't know
if it's
appropriate
because I
don't have
any
statistics
but I'm
thinking
if being
innovative
is
this again
is misfiring
so I
would like
to
separate
two
things
one
is
how
innovative
you
are
and
I'm
thinking
in the
Econish
if you
are well
adapted
to an
environment
it's not
a good
idea
that you
try
different
things
all the
time
because
imagine
that you
have
some
place
where
there
are
nice
berries
you
have
discovered
a safe
path
to that
place
and
if
you
keep
to
that
path
you
go
to
the
berries
you
get
there
you
feed
so
that's
to
try
something
new
so
you
are
very
innovative
and
one
day
you
decide
to
try
another
path
to
the
berries
a
that the environment changes and if the environment changes significantly we are not well adapted
because we don't have alternative behaviors that are adaptive to the new environment
so i guess with this happens like psychological traits nobody has extremes so we don't have
people with extreme psychological personalities i mean we have pathologies but the selection has
favored kind of intermediate levels so i guess and professor friston can correct me on this he knows
more about psychopathology but i guess it happens with innovation that we need some kind of balance
and what this is doing for me is how humans escape that balance in terms of how they manage to be
creative and innovative at times because we are very uh we repeat many routines so but still we can
be very creative and we have selected so we have been successful enough to our econish and i'm just
thinking in this content factors idea so i think this might have played a major role the ability to have
counterfactors because perhaps instead of risking my life every time i innovate i can rehearse what will
happen and as professor friston mentioned before if i have a good precision i can imagine things that
will unfold if the genetic model is very deep i can think ahead many steps and see how i will fare in the
future so i can kind of rehearse things in my head before i put them into practice in the real world
and this might help me to be innovative but with a kind of bounded risk or control risk i don't know if
this makes sense but i think it must be some kind of balance between if i can rehearse thing in my
head i'm very good and predicting things that will um evolve or unfold many steps ahead i can see how i
will fare and then i can reach to be innovative i don't know i mean i'm very i'm being very speculative
here okay so i just want to make clear that i'm being very speculative
please carl yeah no i'd like to speak to that yeah i don't yes you may be uh speculating uh but i think
those um those observations are very veridical and very and very useful um i mean you've brought a
number of fundamental issues to the table first of all the importance of being able to plan um to have a
generative model and the consequences of actions is not the gift of all species and and in some
instances um in your words when the environment doesn't change you that would be an undue complexity
cost to carry around a brain with a generative model of the consequences of my actions if i don't need it
if i was a virus or an insect i i wouldn't i wouldn't need that it would be um it would be very
inefficient um so that sort of lends um brings you to a picture that our world is sufficiently complex
and changing at pace the um committing to um very simple underly expressive generative models is not an
option and one really important way of making them more expressive is to increase that temporal horizon or
temporal depth so that we can you know in accord with things like simulation theory roll out into
the future and and now um become the kind of phenotypes that can select among a number of plausible policies
um and you know i think that would be one bright line between lots of you know different genres and
different species you know that could be just um drawn on a dimension which is just the depth of
planning that my generative model will support um and we've talked previously about uh that being
constrained by the precision afforded in a given context um my beliefs about how i would roll out into
the for into the future so i think that's just you know from the from my perspective at least that's a
really important observation that um the depth of planning is a very important functional characteristic of
the generative models that are implicit in phenotypic behavior and possibly in terms of um what um what
kinds of models are subject to selective uh pressure at an evolutionary or indeed at your nevo-devo um
at a nevo-devo uh level um the the other the other i think key insight that you um you bring to the table
here um relates to um what affords the right balance between novelty seeking exploratory behavior um and
the risks that that would entail and i think you know um that from a purely um sort of mathematical
point of view is a really important observation um just to sort of join the dots with other ways of
understanding how the universe works um that um particular question um is very easily framed in
terms of constraints so the free energy principle that from which active inference inherits is um one
way of or is dual to um something called the maximum entropy principle under constraints so that this was um
brought to physics in the 20th century by um a foundational thinker e.t james who basically
rewrote physics in terms of probability theory and said that basically everything that um of interest
at least or physically um conforms to a constrained maximum entropy principle so that actually is just a
an expression um or for um um or tends the free energy principle in the sense that the constraints um in
from the point of view of free energy principle um are just what is brought to the table by a generative
model um and um the entropy um pertains to the entropy of belief so you've got this um this dialectic um
simply at the level of the physics of uh measurement and inference which means that i'm always trying to
explain any measurement and um such that my predictions are as accurate as possible but at the same time um
leaving having the maximum latitude so that i don't over commit in accord with occam's principle
so mathematically what that means is the entropy of my beliefs has to be as big as possible
provided i provide provided i have an accurate um the con given the constraint that my account
or my measurement has to be an accurate measurement so that that may sound if you like completely
unconnected to whether i choose to um wander away from the berry path and but in fact exactly the same math
applies to these quantities either the constraint entropy or the variational free energy in the future
and what happens is um you get exactly the same dialectic you have two pressures on the one hand
to comply with occam's um principle or occam's razor and on the other hand to um
um um to you to uh keep all your options open um which in a sense is exactly do i uh comply with the
constraints um um that i know i'm going to get my berries and i'm not going to be eaten my myself by a
predator or do i keep my options open and try that other path so this the this so dialectic is just bait
into the physics of any self-organizing system um and practically um you know it emerges in a number
of ways one way of writing down the free energy or the constrained entropy from james's point of view
expected given a particular policy do i go down this path or that path um is in terms of ambiguity and
risk to you are using exactly your words you know uh so the risk is just the relative entropy or the
divergence or discrepancy between what i think will happen and what i expect to happen to me so i
expect not to be eaten and that's the key constraint at hand here so it's not about rewards anymore we're
throwing away the notion of rewards and we're now replacing it with a multi-dimensional construct
which is all the constraints in the ways of being like having a certain temperature or not being very
cold or very hot not being eaten not being dead just keeping within my characteristic states so you
write down those characteristic states in terms of constraints and those constraints basically
preclude certain states of being and then i just compare well what will my states be if i do this
and how far away from um how far away uh is that anticipation from my prior constraints and that that
literally is called risk it's it's the kale divergence between your policy dependent um predictive
posterior and your prior preferences that have the constraints the other thing is the ambiguity um and
that simply reduces to um making sure that you make moves in a way that um in underwrites a um an
unambiguous precise mapping uh between um what you see and um what caused your sensation so you avoid dark
rooms basically you avoid the dark you do avoid dark alleys you don't go uh where you can't see what's
happening so that's the ambiguity so together the expected free energy is equal to risk plus ambiguity
um and um when read like that then the balance between the risk and the ambiguity or another way of
carving this up is in terms of expected information gain an expected cost or um um um its complement
expected value where the value is just the uh how to what degree am i complying with my constraints um
is um um enables you to to now write down the balance that resolves to a certain extent dissolves that
dialectic by the precision of your prior preferences your constraints so if you're the kind of creature
or child or insect um that has very precise beliefs about the kinds of outcomes i expect to anticipate
and i may have very precise beliefs about my body temperature for example but i may have very less
precise beliefs about where i am in terms of latitude i could be in alabama i could be in newcastle
london london i can still be me but i can't be minus uh you know minus two degrees centigrade and still
be me so some constraints are very precisely specified and other constraints are less precisely specified
so the risk um is you know um is a is determined by um the precision of your prior beliefs about your
characteristic states the precision of the constraints you bring to the table as a phenotype and
something that will be innate and completely sub-personal just wide into your homeostasis and
some will be learnable some may even be um sort of propositional you know we can talk about them um
but whatever they have to be that because they define basically what kind of thing you think you are
and how you act to act accordingly so the balance between the um you know whether to go down another
path as opposed to the berry path is going to depend upon this particular creature or phenotype
and specifically the precision of their prior preferences um in terms of what outcomes they would
a priori um entertain and if they have very very precise um preferences over not being eaten and there's
even a marginal small probability of being eaten if they stray from the current path then they won't
explore if on the other hand they have a slightly more liberal um expectation um about um being uh about
the encounters with a predator for example um then there will be more um there will be more
more likely to engage in novelty seeking and exploratory behavior so you know perhaps put this even more
simply you know this is the exploration exploitation dilemma written in terms of the physics of self
organization under planning um and you know and it all reduces again to precision and in this instance
it's the precision of the constraints that um articulated as the uh your prior preferences your
characteristic states your um the kinds of states that you you know you are um you believe characterize
you that if you stray from you cease to be you cease to exist uh basically so i thought i was i thought
that's i don't think what you said was speculation i think they're all fundaments of behavior and
actually um from an ethnological perspective you know they speak to the heart of the of choice
behavior um and you know why we do the things we do um and why it is always in the background the game
of saying do i explore or do i play it safe awesome thank you carl dean thank you muted daniel oh thank
you thank you thank you carl go ahead dean i i i would i just like to run with what carl was saying
this is mostly for hector and michael um
here's a here's a here's a case in point all the collective wisdom on the side of a volcano can
suddenly be arrested and yet there is still a pompeii today i wonder what you gentlemen think that says
about certain species zone of founded surprise
dean does this refer to the materia the fixed materiality alone of the ruins of pompeii of which
no more will ever exist in the archaeological context being able to be unpacked into this collective
wisdom i'm just curious because we are talking about regular irregularities and regular irregularities
these these seismic events occur in the timeline and i'm just curious what we think then as we reflect on
that and still adopt that kind of risk mindset as i said i just want to run with what carl was was
suggesting and i i don't know that i don't know that there's an equivalent i don't know if i if i if
if chimpanzees would do what humans have done like see the evidence and still
you know park themselves right in the path of of danger i'm just curious what they think about that
in terms of the the timeline aspect of this
is
hector
or michael go ahead
i think you're muted now hector
sorry my microsoft um so it's a it's a kind of difficult question and i'm not sure if i
understood correctly um but as you're referring to the tone of bundle surprise and linking what what
professor christian said before if i'm to take a new road which is i don't know what awaits for me there
okay but if i'm very good at making guesses or inferring what might happen based on information i have
gathered before so i'm good at anticipating what might unfold okay because i have this complex machinery
let's call it working memory which is a construct i have a powerful working memory so i can entertain
many possibilities and there is something that kind of ringed a bell when
professor of wisdom was talking of precision which is the concept of metacognition
so metacognition refers to thinking about my own thinking right so
i and you have to clear um to clear aspects one is
how sure am i about my knowledge for instance i'm sure i know
something even when i cannot remember this is the tip of the tongue effect so i can be or i can
give you an answer and be 100 percent sure this answer is correct i can be 80 percent short 50
percent sure so i can evaluate how much sure i am about something okay so this i think it brings a
bit like precision so if i make some expect plans and i think what might unfold i can be very sure this
will happen or not and this probably has to do with my metacognition so how sure i am about what will
happen and that might help me to decide whether i go or not um and coming back to your son of
under surprise i'm not sure if i'm digressing but perhaps i can preempt the surprise if i have a good
precision or good metacognition so if i'm sure that i can rehearse things in my head and see how they will
unfold they won't be that surprising later so i i'm just speculating perhaps this ability to have
content factors to have these kind of rehearsing in my head and this depth of generative models can
be empty surprise and here i'm speculating clearly so i don't know if i answered your question about
pompeii because i'm not sure that i understood but just bring some some ideas that might be useful but
again they are speculative
it'd be nice just to link that notion of metacognition and having um beliefs about beliefs you know the
precision of a belief about the likelihood of being eaten by a predator um i think that's what daniel was
speaking to before when he was talking about um the hierarchical depth of models and their increasing
complexification um one really important way of making making a model uh more expressive and context
sensitive is to induce a hierarchy of exactly the sort that hector was talking about in terms of this
metacognitive aspect but not just um content but crucially again coming back to the um the confidence
and the uh and the precision um i think that's a really central concept but i was just thinking you
know if you had to commit to what kinds of epigenetically specified constraints you would
um associate with the genome what in what space would they would they would they live um and my guess
is that most of it is about the constraints and within that it's going to be the constraints on the
precisions that there are certain sort of innate ranges um of outcomes that i will entertain um and
in in in in principle at least you can actually just write down an entire generative model in terms of
of constraints and in terms of precisions in the sense that and if the generative model is universally
expressive and everything goes then you can sort of carve out an apt uh structural form that um for that
um generative model despite shrinking some of or 99.9 of this overly expressive generative model uh to zero
with very very precise uh constraints so uh well perhaps i'll turn this into a question you know if
if you uh uh trying to simulate um artificial life in its most generic sense if you're trying to simulate
tool use for example the emergence of tool use in a synthetic population um and you had to actually write down
what could be passed via um genetically or epigenetically to each subsequent generation
what what kinds of things would you specify
that's kind of my question in the same in the same sense how do we where where do we draw those
arbitrary lines i mean it's the it's the thing that comes up again and again as we continue to sort of
see the next the next sedimentary layer of papers discussing this right and but the but the fact that it
can be moving and the fact that it it isn't con there is a rate constant that you mentioned in the last
live stream that has to be um working functioning and effective and then there's still this question
of so so what is our our what are we attending to and what are we still available to all at once and how do we
organize that in a way that it most closely as you say precisely it that that's the best way to
describe it what's really going on and that that's that that seems to me at least to be a moving target
just one quick speculative mapping as well first the um instead of just stacking bricks with content on
content on content intercalating layers of content estimation with metacognitive estimation is what
allows the extendability of the multi-layer predictive processing type architectures it's actually like
the back and forth or the back and forth or the interplay between the content estimators
and the variance estimators that allows that model to not just be described in terms of its center of
gravity but also in terms of its full distribution and then to carl's question about what is being passed
down genetically and epigenetically and thinking about those terms even generically like in the context of
perhaps source code and a configuration file or some other mapping of like what is inscribed from a
classical information genetic perspective and then what is contextually and more rapidly transmitted
there's an interesting angle i could see it this way or potentially the opposite but there's a shorter term
epigenetic firing rate and then a slower updating of neuromodulatory like genetic possibilities kind of
opening and closing valves over a slower time scale and then of course these are nested within another one so
what is what is neuromodulatory this can also itself be a firing rate in other ways but just focusing on this
direction the uh inscribed constraints are like the width of the aperture and then the actual flow of the
the photons through the lens is an instantaneous firing rate that's happening way faster than the aperture can be
dilated or not and so merely the fact that there are multiple concurrent time scales and the associated
interplay of their rate constants tells us a lot about this kind of learning architecture
what we do with that understanding is the action question and related to our preferences and precisions
however it seems pretty key that to alternate estimates about content with metacognitive type estimates
and to package that set of two belief distributions mean and variance to package those
also as one so it can be handled as a composite one
and just to point out that um learning rates are the manifestation of that second order specification that
uh precision so you know they are the same thing you know at every um at every time scale
right so you could you could articulate the um the developmental stages for example the um
the not use word rejuvenation but certainly you know the the um the changes say in late adolescence
um as a programmed learning rate or learnability that can be read at some level as a precision because
the precisions are just the rate constants that link the state to the rate of change of the state
um and that basically is just a a learning rate at many many different levels so i think there's a
a sort of uniform um way of putting together these different notions some useful notions here um um
uh from machine learning are um sort of the notion of learning to infer you know so i was just thinking
about my an answer to my own question and clearly you can't write down a generative model that's going
to be able to um get up and go to school in the morning uh all you can do is to um create a self-organizing
blob that has exactly the right learning rates so that it is has exactly the right learnability so that
it can acquire a generative model and learn through experience dependent plasticity that model
of its little lived world of course that little lived world has been constructed by other grown-up
babies so you know we get back to this circular causality that evolution is trying to provide you
with the right ability learning rates precisions and structural constraints on your generative model
but your generative models from evolution's point of view are actually creating the environment that has to
be learned so there's to my mind there's this you know a very beautiful circular causality here that
you know as fast as you're uh learning um you're actually creating new worlds in which to learn
you know i guess we've seen that at the moment with the advances in technology and the like
which brings me back to my question about the sort of the top-down versus bottom-up causation
um you know what is a good model of this world what is a good phenotype
in our final 15 minutes or so here how do we move beyond the 53.2
the other way to the author's view either to the author's their directions and excitements about
the work or anyone's exhortations or raising of possibilities for other ways it can be developed
in our final 15 minutes or so here how do we move beyond the fact that we can see that we can see

and i wonder if it's worth bearing in mind that
increasing technological not necessarily complexity but at least variability
this may well have permitted a reduction in selection pressure on the
phenotype and evidently affecting
uh both the genotype and epigenetic
uh variability i say this because i would like to draw attention to the the graph which i
presented last week which was taken from professor philip tobias's work on early humans
showing an increasing range of variation in the cranial capacity of
uh bipedal hormonids from the osteopathy signs through to homo sapiens suggesting a reduction
in um selection pressure for particular um well for the size of the brain basically
uh i find it hard not to relate this to the advantages that slowly accrued to uh tool use and thereby of course
the variability and variation of tool making um thereby reducing the risk
the risk or some of the risks uh existential risks
that otherwise
plague or have plagued other homininans whether extant where the ancestors of extant
great apes or indeed the earlier forms of
uh bipedal hormoninans or psilopathy signs panthropus um kenianthropus uh etc
uh well who knows but it's it's perhaps um
uh not totally irrelevant that this uh variability
uh has grown over the past couple of million years and is now very wide as i mentioned uh last week
this i think is in contradistinction to the the way in which selection pressures have been highly
um discriminatory um discriminatory in for example producing let's say the wide range of
darwin's famous galapagos finches yeah just to give a well-known example
thank you carl
um coming back to this theme of um selection for selectability um and the notion of um precision or
learning rates cast in terms of um mutation rates so you're my favorite example of and i'm sure there
are better ones nowadays when i was reading around this subject my favorite example was um the story
told by ernst to mayor about drosophila fruit flies being reared in volatile versus non-volatile
environments so you're rearing generation after generation at a fairly fixed temperature and then
an equivalent uh set of generations where they varied the temperature um you know a few degrees plus and
minus um and what they showed was that the mutation rate of the drosophila in the volatile
changing environment was greater than the mutation rate the genetic mutation rate in the less volatile
population or transgenerational populations which i thought was a beautiful example of selection for
selectability itself that you know that um increased variation um certainly or it's you know phenotypic
expression of implicit uh increased genomic variability was itself an adaptive response to to the rate of
change of the environment so my question is is there a similar sort of picture or view of um variation in
either phenotypic or genetic um characteristics in um over a longer time scale in in sort of um human evolution
uh and if there is is there any evidence um that there's going that there is in the past century or so um
perhaps this is a bit of an ambitious uh ask but uh is there any evidence that the the the there has
been a sort of phase transition in the variability and the evolvability and the associated um phenotypic variation
the empirical or an empirical research agenda would be to make a hierarchical active inference model
and perform dynamic causal modeling on different variability characters across levels of phenotypic and genotypic
integration and have that model in use
but a very provocative and interesting question carl
and to what extent is it happening with our cellular architecture and to what extent
are these processes happening with our niche given these unique cumulative cultural generative model
generative process thinking through other minds increasingly the production of artifacts that enable
not just offloading but outsourcing
not just offloading these do represent unique cognitive niches and so
it will be quite interesting to investigate
perhaps if we each want to have some closing round thoughts
perhaps dean with the first word thank you because you know i hate having the last one
i'm just curious gentlemen thank you first again for for your generosity i'm just curious now that
you've dipped your toes in this this uh active inference institute live stream world what are
your what are your impressions is was it was it it was it helpful at all
and i think it was a very useful and mostly very fun i mean i've enjoyed a lot to have this discussion
with all of you so it's been very enjoyable um and just for the future um i'm just wondering
if there is such a thing like pre-empting surprise based on these counterfactuals i guess maybe it's
already written and discussed and it's all clear but i wonder that this might be an interesting
idea to to explore if i can preempt the surprise before i act i mean before even acting but that's
kind of maybe that's resolved already anyway it has been fun thank you all honestly
thank you that makes me think about saying i don't mean to surprise you but that's actually
going to increase it's like oh boy has someone been injured but what is the show not tell
of preempting surprise so that with a linear string in time there is the path from the old berry patch to
the new berry patch such that it appears to be within a nested hierarchical model the path of least
action to follow though in a less nested model it would be quite surprising
michael or carl you're kind of closing thoughts or questions as we bring this set of 53 to a close
well i'll let michael have the last word um and uh just speak to uh you what you just said in uh
hector's um comment i i think there's a lot of interest in that in in that notion you know sort of
trying to uh preempt uh surprise i mean a simple reading of risk minimization you're just basically
not engaging in policies that are going to result in surprising outcomes where surprise
is is just the violation of uh prior preferences um so at that level i think that's that that's
that sort of um um almost a truism um but there is an interesting um there's an interesting sort of
implication of that which leads to notions of um the way that we choose to behave epistemically in
terms of avoiding information that would be very surprising um sometimes articulate in terms of optimism
bias sometimes in terms of wishful thinking but the kind of paradox that you get when we are base
optimal creatures and yet we don't want to open the letter from the gp giving us our most recent
cancer results or we don't want to open that letter whether we failed to get that job or pass that exam
or indeed the anatomy dissection viva and there are certain things that we avoid there are certain
surprises that we avoid or split another way there are certain ways of pre-empting surprise by avoiding
knowing stuff that we might find surprising um and that's that's an emerging literature now which which
takes you a little bit outside your your your comfort zone but it's a fascinating literature
because you you'll find things like trends in cognitive science and and the like uh in answer to
to dean's question about um these sessions because this is not my first session so but um i this but
this does exemplify it yeah it's for fun and we're amongst friends and indulging ourselves and those
people who care to listen to us so i think the next thing to do is is the next horizon although i do
think dynamic calls and modeling of um evolutionary um trajectories is an excellent idea i i suspect the
heavy lifting now is to get the ideas that we've been talking about out there i think that's what
michael and hector have to do basically it's just keep keep on telling the story and in my experience
usually takes about five to ten years before people start listening
thank you carl michael with the last word
well there have been these sessions have been fun and most uh illuminating there is a lot to be done
on the matter of whether there have been phase transitions in the evolution of what one might call
evolvability in the genus homo over the past two million years there are big arguments amongst human
evolution specialists between whether there was a unitary evolutionary um uh whether a unitary evolutionary
model is acceptable or as uh lumpers like myself would like to believe or whether in fact there was a big
um bush with a lot of dead end separate uh unsuccessful um species like homo florisians um homo uh lusoniansis
or even perhaps neanderthals uh with whom i've had a lot of contact uh having excavated about 15 of them
um and these arguments are highly relevant to the matter of uh uh cognitive evolution and indeed uh as
to whether uh the record of artifacts and tools uh can indeed uh inform us and i believe it can about uh just
how um and how slowly i would say uh evolution proceeds proceeded
um of course the splitters believe it happened in in leaps jumps and leaps um i'm rather convinced
darwinist i believe that things happen very very slowly and that we have to concentrate and with this
i can conclude uh on the especially the neuroepigenetic um uh modification of uh genetic expression
uh as uh affecting not merely morphology and physiology but also i would say um cognition and uh in the
matter in hand of course um uh the ability or or not to uh that our supprisals um affect uh onlookers and other
people uh permitting um let's say modification of behavior uh in a very wide in a far wider uh with far
wider results than those that occur in uh many other uh species um including some of those of our closest uh
our closest permanent um relatives and thank you very much for organizing this session daniel and dean
it's been it's been a pleasure to take part i'm sorry that i have this terrible uh appearance but i
i really can't do much about that at the moment
i hope well last will be a few days
thank you all michael at least you have an excuse i have no excuse at all
all right till next time long live the mean long live the variance thank you bye everybody
thank you





















































Thank you.