## 8dPps0qLrp4

SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone.

I think we are live.

This is Active Inference Livestream 13.0.

It is January 3rd, 2021.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone, new and old listeners.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to active inference.

You can find us at our website, on Twitter, our email address, YouTube page, or Keybase public team and username.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work in the live chat or in comments.

And all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

Video etiquette for livestream, mute if there's noise in the background, raise your hand so we can hear from everyone, and use respectful speech behavior.

So happy 2021, everyone.

For the scheduled Active Inference live streams in 2021, we're going to do every single Tuesday from 7 to 9 a.m.

Pacific time, which will include daylight savings time changes.

And for schedule and participation instructions, just go to this shortened link here.

also we're going to do several special sessions for example coding sessions or discussions with external people from the other communities and just if you have an idea for an event that you think could be interesting or you would like to moderate or just suggest you can let us know or you can send a tweet and tag that person if you know them and then we can set it up but the regular active inference live streams the group plan discussions

are at again that shortened link and it has instructions for how to let us know you want to participate in any of these events and the first two weeks of january so these next two weeks we are going to be in uh reading this paper by adam saffron and colin de young and then you can see whatever papers are most updated for the next several months at that link

Today in Active Inference Livestream 13.0, the goal is really to set context for 13.1 and 13.2, so kind of like a read-along for the paper if you want to participate in the discussion or if you want more context on it.

And the paper is Integrating Cybernetic Big Five Theory with a Free Energy Principle, A New Strategy for Modeling Personalities as Complex Systems by Saffron and DeYoung on October 16th, 2020 at this SciArchive link.

And the video, just like all the point zeros are, is just an introduction to the ideas and the context.

It's not a review or a final work.

The punchline of the paper is that we can combine psychology with the cybernetic theories of CB5T, the Cybernetic Big Five Theory, which we'll discuss, and Free Energy Principle Active Inference to have a better understanding of psychobehavioral dynamics in humans and other systems.

The sections of 13 will be as follows.

First will be the aims and claims of the paper, then the keywords abstract and roadmap,

then go through the figures and the table, and then conclude with several questions that people can ask themselves, whatever level of familiarity they have with the ideas.

So in 13.1 and 13.2, we're going to be discussing this paper as a group, so save and submit your questions and get in touch if you want to participate.

Okay, the paper is as said on the previous slide.

The aims and claims of the paper in the author's words are, from the conclusion,

We have begun to outline how artificial agents based upon free energy principle and active inference might be used to test cybernetic Big Five theories, theoretical propositions regarding the functional significance of the dimensions in the Big Five trait hierarchy, which is from psychology.

Here are the implications and why it matters from the author's conclusion as well.

If deep correspondences can be found between CB5T and FEP AI, as we suggest is likely to be the case due to their common cybernetic foundations, then this integration may allow personality modelers to obtain new understanding with respect to functions and then to parlay that understanding of function into new hypotheses about mechanisms in the brain.

And, finally, identifying the configurations of personality mechanisms that correspond to effective cybernetic function may yield insights into how personality imbalances can lead to mental disorders, thereby furthering the aims of computational psychiatry and other attempts at developing theories of human mental health and well-being.

So that is what they have set out to do, and by the conclusion, that's where they want to have gotten.

And these .zero videos are meant to be a sort of bi-directional on and off ramp.

For those in the Active Inference community, it's a chance to see the fields that Active Inference is adjacent to.

And for those who might be learning about Active Inference for even the first time,

it could still possibly be a way to learn about this broad area from wherever you are as far as familiarity with these keywords, which include active inference and the free energy principle, but also generative models, cybernetics and the cybernetic big five theory.

And then there's a few related keywords as well.

so first active inference and i uh got some interesting feedback and just thought about it over the new year and i think it's a great exercise to always start with just what active inference is just like how evolutionary biology which is in the area i'm in often talks will begin with the principles of natural selection because they're then going to be demonstrated in the subsequent sections so even just having a high level summarization allows an individual to personalize their approach to

portraying what active inference is in the context of a specific system or question, just like an evolutionary biologist doesn't need to re-justify all of natural selection, they just draw upon those principles and outlines and then apply them.

I'm going to start with active inference in the words of the author whose paper we're reading.

And they wrote, work within the free energy principle paradigm has yielded a normative model of behavior called active inference.

The active inference framework describes processes by which free energy is minimized and provides close ties to other frameworks such as expected utility theory and risk sensitive control.

Further, advances in deep reinforcement learning appear to be converging on the kinds of solutions that are predicted to be necessary for bounded optimal decision-making and learning in the free energy principle and active inference framework.

and another quotation that they have about active inference is the development of the active inference framework has made connections between free energy principle and cybernetics more obvious as it highlights that organisms are motivated not only to predict their perceptions accurately but also to influence states of the world in order to ensure that perceptions correspond to goal attainment so that's two really nice quotes on active inference from the authors and here's just a way that i kind of laid it out here maybe we can even try

a new one every single time, or something similar.

Active inference is a framework, which means that it's a cluster of scientific theories, which are ideas that make specific testable predictions, hypotheses about the world, that's a theory, and tools.

So that includes software toolkits and vocabularies and shared narratives.

So it's a framework.

It's beyond just a single hypothesis, but there are important hypotheses that are more or less central to what it says in specific cases.

It's a framework that integrates action and perception.

So action is whatever the behavior of the system of interest is.

So if we're talking about a certain bacterial possibility and affordance that a bacteria can undertake, then we're talking about action being our measurement of something that's, for example, moving or being secreted in the world or emitted from a hidden state.

And perception is sort of the obverse of action in some way, and it relates to the sensory capacity of the system of interest.

and as we've talked about in other discussions there's something like a interface being defined with the organism and the environment so that's how we're integrating internalism and externalism reductionism and holism all these things are coming together because by defining the interface that one is studying the blanket of some type you're at the same time delimiting the system from the external part so you're not assuming that there's another level of boundedness like a closed system beyond the refrigerator and the kitchen

you can now just model it as your inference on a certain boundedness given the measurements and the structure of the system little digression it integrates action and perception downstream of the free energy principle free energy principle is a statistical physics approach to modeling complex multi-scale systems so it uses several different threads of physics and

For those who are just learning about it, there are a lot better resources than here to hear specifically about the mathematical details in this discussion, but we hope to be able to provide easy entry points for this

aspect of the discussion as well and it's about how far from equilibrium systems work so things that are passive like let's just say a cloud of gas accreting in some galaxy somewhere it can appeal to just gravitational forces to describe the dynamics through time however there are systems whose dynamics through time like

organisms, their dynamics through time do not resemble that of passive bodies.

And so there's these active systems.

And what is it that these active systems, these negantropic systems, organization in the world, how is this happening?

What is life?

That's where that element comes in.

But those are the systems that we want to understand, design, predict, and control.

So active inference is a framework that integrates action and perception downstream of the free energy principle to explain how far from equilibrium systems work.

What about generative models?

Generative models can be contrasted with descriptive models.

Descriptive models go from data, which are observations about the world, or results of an experiment, and go from data to then the modeling of parameters about the world.

So given the height of these 50 children, what is the mean and the variance of height in the classroom?

And so statistics can be seen as a specific kind of dimensional reduction about measurements in the world.

For example, you have 50 measurements.

That's a 50 dimensional vector.

And then it's being reduced onto a mean and a variance component.

So two numbers.

It's like a bottleneck that only two numbers get to pass through.

So it's a dimensional reduction.

And then you hope that those dimensions capture the average variance.

uh value of the trait or whatever and the variability so that's going from data to the model dimensional reduction generative models go the other direction which is from the model's parameters

for example, the mean and the variance, to the expected data.

Given a mean and a variance estimate for height, the two numbers, can we generate sets of predicted measurements that are consistent?

So generate a draw of 50 children.

And so even if it's 51, it's going to be just changing it a little bit, and the average is going to recapitulate those two numbers, but it's going to be possible to generate hundreds or thousands or counterfactual worlds given this generative model.

Generative models are useful for statisticians for a lot of the same, but also some of the different reasons that they're different or that they're useful for organisms to have generative models.

So here's some of the similarities is that in both the statistician and the organismal case,

it allows the system to use a lot of its previous knowledge on sparse data sets, because generative models might only need a slight cue to tip their likelihood from something being very unlikely to totally likely.

For example, hearing the sound of an ambulance outside your window means that it's extremely likely that there is an ambulance there, even though it's also possible that there's one at other times.

It makes it extremely likely.

And one kind of model that's used that's a generative model in a way just to understand without the control theory, without the cybernetics, how a generative model is useful statistically is what's called expectation maximization.

And this cycle, expectation maximization,

The data or initial estimates are input into what can be thought of as one layer of the model, which is just the estimator of the observed data parameters.

And parameter is just, in the computational sense, any single variable that's going to be stored.

So these are the data.

This is the actual 50 children and their heights.

And then there's a maximization step, which asks what is the maximum likelihood of those underlying hidden parameters, which can be a different dimension than this one.

And then there's a generation step, which is the expectation step, which data are expected or expectable, I guess, I don't think that's a word, but that's kind of it, given the hidden parameters that are in the world.

And so this can continue until it converges.

And this could be about static things in the world, or it could be about dynamic things in the world.

And the expectation maximization could also be on causal things in the world.

And when that inference is going to be about action, that's where action enters into the loop, because instead of just having a data set and trying to converge on the best descriptor, it's trying to converge on a policy that could involve hidden aspects of the world.

So let's go a little bit more into detail in this generative models and processes, generative models and generative processes and active inference idea, because I don't think this person's blog has been on here, Solopchuk, tutorial on active inference, some really nice images.

So here on the left is this idea that a generative process which has a true hidden state s is emitting observations which are modeled by some p function but its observations are being emitted from the world and the niche is really the generative process that leads to those observations like the sky emits the sun and the moon or the ecology emits this rainfall or something.

Then on the other side of the blanket, we have the organism, which is embodying and enacting a generative model of those observations.

So that's like your brain predicting what the retina would see.

Well, how do we know that the brain is predicting what we would see?

There's no blind spot.

It has usual, under healthy conditions, equal clarity everywhere and equal color vision everywhere.

And that's just not concordant with the actual distribution of cells on the retina.

So really, it's like upgraded resolution at your periphery that's an illusion based upon the generation of the assumption that things are actually equally clear outside of your perception.

So it doesn't have the same actual experienced...

characteristics as what you'd expect in the retina.

Just, you know, interesting things, and you can imagine that for other senses too.

So the organism's enacting this generative model of those observations, and then the surprise or the residual of those predictions is kind of getting passed upwards into these models.

And that's changing how the model of the organism in this Bayesian framework here

is modeling these observations.

So the organism has a generative model or is a generative model, depending on how you think about it, of the niche, which is what facilitates action.

If your model of the circadian rhythm is 18 hours and it's 24 hours for the real thing to happen, then your niche, your temporal modeling is off and it's going to be pathological and maladaptive, or potentially not.

That's where selection comes in.

So here's another representation from that same blog that shows how now from that inference process described here, where the organism has a generative model of inference on those observations in the world.

So I'm predicting what observations on Bitcoin price I'm going to see emitted by the true generative model.

Now, I don't know what the generative model is, but I can see the observations.

The organism has preferences for certain observations.

So here the darker circle is representing preferable observations.

So the observations in this case are interoceptive, which is really nice.

And the organism has a preference for, let's just say in this categorical example, one outcome of the observations over the other, the gray one.

And now we can make a 2x2 matrix with the two possible observations of the world with a preference over them and the state of the world which can't be directly perceived, which is whether the stomach is empty or full.

This isn't a physiological debate, it's just that's the simple case here.

And that relies on this A matrix, which is the probability of observations of the world

which is the data given the states which can't be directly experienced, which is the stomach.

That's the A matrix.

Then the B matrix maps a policy and the prior states to the way in which the hidden states are expected to change through time, and you can evaluate it for different Bs.

So here there's two possible U's, which are policies, eat,

or do nothing.

So under each policy, eating or doing nothing, which are represented by two different matrices, B1 and B2, the state at time t is like the current moment, and the state at time t plus one is the state at the next moment.

So there can be mappings between the present and the future

conditioned on policy that's the probability basically of the state uh right now given the state in the past and a policy so that's phrased from like past to now and this is about now to the next step

And here is the graphical representation through time.

So t minus one is the past, t is the present moment, and t plus one is the future.

So the actual state of the world is evolving under a certain dynamic, and it's emitting observations, and then under multiple possible policy trajectories, policy parameters or different policies that can be enacted and embodied,

what is being estimated is this relationship from how previous states of the policy influenced or were associated with this true state of the role of the current moment in this layout and how that observation then influences the updating of the policies in relative comparison for the current moment moving forward under a generative model of action in the niche by the organism.

All right, big five, psychology.

So the big five are dimensions of variation that are statistical and usually from self-reported surveys that are based upon basically personality differences in the population.

So it's a dimension of variability in populations, kind of like the trait of heritability from quantitative genetics.

So it's a measure of variance explained on a certain population sample.

It's not a causal model of traits, nor is it a fraction due to genetic causes, even though that fallacy is made throughout the literature.

So the Big Five is based upon the use of statistical methods, basically correlation matrices and principal component analyses, on survey data that finds patterns across questions and participants.

And the acronym for Big Five is OCEAN.

So here's an example of how the big five are calculated and then what the oceans stand for.

So what will happen will be that a bunch of participants are asked a survey or are scored through some way.

And this survey may have a hundred questions or a certain different number of questions.

And that corresponds to a hundred dimensions of data.

It's an a hundred dimensional vector per person.

So the total survey study design can be just the columns are the people and the rows are the questions and how they answered.

And so that's a simple matrix that can be given all the data of that entire survey.

And some statistical techniques are used on that matrix.

and like a principal component analysis and it according to the psychology literature falls out into these five large axes of variation so when we do the pca the algorithm is not told specifically which questions are expected to be correlated with or negatively or positively with other questions

But because there are actual statistical regularities in certain pairs of questions or sets of questions in the real world in terms of how people answer things, for example, a question and its negation should have a negative correlation, as well as other relationships in the world, it's possible to find the structure of some of these dimensions that map very well on these dimensions of variability in the data.

And so the five big axes of variation are openness to experience,

the axis between inventive and curious versus consistent cautiousness conscientiousness extroversion agreeableness and neuroticism or ocean and uh i uh hesitate to go too much into the adjective side because those are always very english language dependent and really it's about the structure of the data in the real observations and here's just a few other issues with uh the

topic of big five which is that there's often population and survey specific covariance structures though some structures are quite well correlated across different surveys there's often a normative or a culturally narrow understanding of what personality is or how it manifests and how it represents itself and also there's just this fundamental difficulty in attaching the natural language words to these differences in the manifold

One way though that we can kind of get at what these dimensions really are is by looking at the questions that are very highly correlated with each of these axes.

So for openness, a few questions, I drew three questions from each of the letters.

Is I'm quick to understand things.

I like to try new things.

I have a good imagination.

c conscientiousness is i'm always prepared i pay attention to details i like order extraversion e is i am the life of the party i feel comfortable around people i start conversations a agreeableness is i take time out for others i feel others emotions i make people feel at ease neuroticism n is i get upset easily i have frequent mood swings and i worry about things such as in my life and

One interesting note on this paper and definitely a little fun fact is that

one can do a vector decomposition on the big five to reveal these additional aspects of personality beyond those five principal structurings.

That's a coarse graining to a very high degree, and this is going to go one layer chiseling down into the statistical variability structure.

And this paper, I was searching in my library for it because I thought it was an interesting one and I remembered it, and it turned out that it was actually the author of this paper.

um from 13 14 years ago with jordan peterson yes that jordan peterson and it draws somewhat on this idea of vector decomposition but statistical vector decomposition and just as refresher uh two vectors can be added kind of head to tail and they end up at the same place no matter which way you add them just like regular numbers like two plus three equals five and

3 plus 2 equals 5.

So they took the five big dimensions and broke them down.

The blue and the red arrows, the up and the down, they don't represent anything about the trait characteristic.

It's just using the same example of vector addition.

It's breaking down a statistical dimension into another axis of variability, which is a pretty cool technique.

And it's going to relate in the paper that we're going to discuss to the ways to get at very fine grained aspects of the high dimensional space that represents action propensities.

Cybernetics is, it's not the first time we've had cybernetics as a keyword on the ACT-IMP stream, but each time we do want to kind of see it a little bit differently.

So the image on the left is a brain with a bunch of wires and kind of represents this crossover mind machine mapping.

Is it an analogy?

Is it an interface?

Is it a vision?

Is it a prophecy?

All these different things that mind and machine can be is kind of captured in cybernetics culturally.

But also on the right side is a more formal systems diagram approach to cybernetics, which describes kind of first and second order cybernetic systems.

And here is from this CyberSoft post down on the bottom.

um they wrote the basic idea of cybernetics is that complex systems such as living organisms societies and brains are self-regulated by the feedback of information by systematically analyzing the feedback mechanisms which regulate complex systems cybernetics hopes to discover the means of controlling these systems technologically and to develop the capability of synthesizing artificial systems with similar capacities

There's a few other parts about cybernetics that are interesting because it has had quite its own history and it's related to complex system study, but there's some interesting history.

So here's a few more quotes from this article.

They write, the word cybernetics was coined by the MIT mathematician Norbert Wiener in the summer of 1947 to refer to the new science of command and control in animals and machines, which he helped to establish and develop.

The word was derived from the Greek kubernetes, meaning steersman or ship pilot.

Unknown to Wiener at the time, Plato had used the adjective kubernetes

in the Gorgias to refer to the science of piloting.

And the French physicist Marie Ampere had derived the French word cybernetique directly from the Greek to refer to the science of government in his classification of sciences.

And so the word cuber leads us straight to governor, the regulator, guide, and pilot of steam engines and states.

It thus lies at a powerful metaphorical intersection of political economy and technology, social and material order, and the regulation of animals and machines.

And then another quotation that was pretty interesting from the end of this article was, When Donna Haraway challenged feminists and leftists to embrace the language and metaphysics of cybernetics, what was she aiming at?

Was the cyborg just another metaphor for hybridity?

If it was, then why was she so insistent on adopting not only the terminology of cybernetics systems and information, but its whole ontology?

No, this was not mere rhetoric.

This was...

This move was political, and it was savvy, wise, and insightful.

For Haraway shows us it is not just the world, the environment, that is cybernetic.

We are cybernetic.

We are cyborgs, cybernetic organisms.

We are hybrids made up of organic beings and mechanical parts.

And the only thing that ties us all together, you and me, you and other parts of you, is information.

Fundamentally, cybernetics is a new ontology.

Andy Pickering has called it an ontology of becoming.

So pretty cool quote.

Cybernetic Big Five Theory, CB5T, is a line of research pursued by one of the co-authors of this paper, primarily Colin DeYoung, and it uses cybernetics, as the name might suggest, to integrate the dynamics of personality and get at potential mechanisms amongst other things.

And the highlights from the 2015 paper, which is cited in the 2020 paper,

They write, cybernetic Big Five theory is a new integrative theory of personality.

Personality traits reflect parameters of evolved cybernetic mechanisms.

Characteristic adaptations, which is a term from cybernetics, are goals, interpretations, and strategies in updatable memory.

Specific mechanisms are identified for traits in the Big Five hierarchy.

Implications for pathophysiology, psychophysiology, and well-being are discussed.

And this was a figure from the DeYoung 2015 paper, but it's actually drawn from Jordan Peterson's 1999 book, Maps of Meaning.

And here's how it is in the book slash paper, where at any given state, there's the current state of the world and strategies are being implemented to attain desired states or goals.

Then anomalous information is always entering the picture from chaos, entropy, the unknown.

At some point, the current state of the world, given the strategies and the desired goals, can no longer keep the integration process maintained.

The center cannot hodl, and there's a disintegration process.

That leads to a state of chaos and entropy in the unknown.

followed by a reintegration, because you can only have a reintegration from disorder to order, you can only reintegrate.

Even if it's a very similar state, because it's still an accessible one, even if it's a similar one, it still is a reintegration.

And if the world state has changed, that means the niche is different, which means the reintegration must be different.

So I thought it was kind of interesting to map this onto a few other ideas from Act-Inf and other things that we've talked about in the streams.

So first, there's the dividing line between order and disorder, which correlates to basically the blanket, the interface, the whole thing we're talking about with the self-organizational systems.

Because that boundary between the agent and the niche, again, is not just an informational one, it's also an info-thermodynamic one.

So the agent is where organization is happening.

For example, the person in their apartment is eating food and they're organizing biological matter, radiating heat.

They could be getting more organized, making more organized tissue of any kind, depending on their hormonal state.

And then depending on that, the room is going to be warming up and there's going to be heat released in the supply chain.

So that's actually like a thermodynamic boundary as well as an information one.

And we can think about these preferences over different observed outcomes of the world as being akin to goals.

Peterson's framework here is still very reward oriented rather than precision oriented.

That does enter the picture here.

We'll get to that in a second.

The strategy is like policies, which truly are strategies, and the current state of the world and the interpretation are like hidden state estimates, which could be like, is my career stable or will things be okay with this thing of the world?

So given current understandings of the world, which can be accurate or not, helpful or not, two by two, and given strategies being implemented, which is like the field of affordances and active inference, are organisms attaining their preferred states, their desired states of the world?

and in the framework of peterson as well as an active inference anomalous information is continually not just occasionally entering into the picture so it's always a question of resiliency and of self-organization around anomalous information being integrated because no model is going to be perfectly predicting it's about incorporating the variability into a healthy and resilient model and here it's like surprise being passed from the environment through the interface to the organism

and the organism can disintegrate and enter into potentially a pathological region or a strange attractor state that could reintegrate or re-stabilize in a new or a different niche into another different state policy preference combination and this encounter

with chaos which could be the dark night of the soul or the hero's journey or alchemy or phase transitions of the self that's an interesting thing to think about with the self-organization and the reorganization reintegration of societies cities teams relationships individuals

Another thing that is mentioned in the paper, but it wasn't a keyword, was SPM, which is Statistical Parametric Mapping, SPM.

So here's from the SPM website, whose URL is on the bottom.

It says, SPM 12, first released 1st of October, 2014, but previous versions of SPM have been released for many years, and last updated on the 13th of January, 2020, so almost one year old at this point.

is a major update to the SPM software containing substantial theoretical algorithmic structural and interface enhancements over previous versions.

Cool.

What is SPM?

SPM is a software package that has been designed for the analysis of basically brain imaging data sequences, but it turns out that that's a quite general question for a lot of reasons, which we'll discuss a few of right now.

So what SPM does is it starts with a series of images that are from various types of experimental designs.

It could be from similar or different cohorts, or it could be different kinds of time series from one subject.

um and the current release is designed for the integrated analysis of fmri pet spect eeg and meg so the most common interfaces for neuro imaging are incorporated uh despite their usually extremely different error profile and actually uh representing quite different aspects of the tissue being imaged and over different time scales with different accuracies so

It's quite a general question to integrate different kinds of time series into underlying generative models of extremely specific types.

What is the statistical parametric map?

It is the construction and the assessment of a spatially extended statistical process.

So a statistical process that happens through time and space.

that is used to test hypotheses about functional imaging data.

So there's like the map and the territory, that's the mapping, is kind of that two layer, the data to the underlying model, that's the mapping.

And then it's a statistical parametric mapping.

So like a p-value comes from a z-score or a t-score or some other type of variable, that's a statistical parameter.

And so it's going to be like an underlying statistical test, and it's related to a lot of different kinds of data.

And this SPM textbook from 2007 is quite a mathematical read, maybe it or a later Wikipedia version of the SPM toolkit.

Could be interesting to have a math set of discussions, but we have this one at home and it's a classic.

It's a true, true classic.

Here's just a summary of what SPM does so that the key aspects can be seen.

And this is what, for years before becoming more popular in the machine learning and theory of everything and philosophy of everything,

universe uh many years before that he was and still is the most cited neuroscientist and the huge reason for that is the many many papers that have gone into this type of development and then also its use as a toolkit broadly by many communities so the way that it begins with the spm is taking in the data which represents slices of

different underlying objects.

So it can be measured in various different ways, whether it's all the measurements simultaneously, or whether the slices take time as they slice through a system.

And that is first done, there's a first processing step that's basically a realignment to a standardized brain atlas or a person-specific brain atlas, for example.

So you can take a static image that has much higher resolution and align dynamical images, or not,

to this more static high resolution image, which can help a huge amount.

That is then processed through smoothing, which is like this thing called a kernel, which is like, you have a fabric, which is the data, and there's gonna be like a finger and it's gonna move across the data and reweight the data

according to some smoothing technique and this represents a gaussian kernel so this is just blurring the image to ease out a little bit over the noise at a certain spatial and temporal scale that can also be related to specific instrumentation related biases that are known like non-linearities in the response

And that is this process where the data are processed into a cleanly comparable format, spatially and temporally and statistically renormalized.

Then there is the specification of a design matrix, which there's so many of these in the SPM textbook.

It's really awesome and they look really beautiful.

And the design matrices are...

very broadly types of things that you want to consider in your analysis, whether it's something you know about the patients, like their age or their pathological diagnosis, whether it's something you know about them and you want to include it in the model or not.

uh as in as something you're predicting or including in your prediction of something else or whether the design matrix includes other more esoteric components that are often discussed in this spm textbook like these time kernels that design matrix and the smooth brain image sequences are

put together into a general linear model and it's funny because you hear a lot of uh disdain for linear models but this is linear models in a extremely rigorous and non-linear way that can lead to

these parameter estimates because it's like a linear model on a space that's been warped by this prior and updates in a multi-scale way.

So that's really the interesting part is it takes renormalization to the next level and then applies general linear models in an extremely specific way, though I don't understand all the details.

That relates to what is called a statistical parametric map, which is here like a heat map of the score of that voxel.

So that's like the Z score.

So like a Z score of two or two standard deviations above the mean.

or one or whatever it happens to be.

It's like a z-score, positive and negative.

And then there's a variety of approaches that can be used to then, on this statistical parametric map,

draw p-value distinctions on this and it turns out that that process of setting a p-value threshold and saying whether 80 of the brain is used in a task or one percent or correct for one person's structure but you're trying to detect the structure that area is an extremely nuanced field

pun intended and it draws on this random field theory and there's several chapters in the spm textbook that do random field theory and it was just like quite an interesting approach to statistics that is uh really being implemented here all right the abstract of the paper is that cybernetics is a study of goal-directed systems that self-regulate via feedback a category that includes human beings

Cybernetic Big Five Theory attempts to explain personality in cybernetic terms, conceptualizing personality traits as manifestations of variation in parameters of the neural mechanisms that evolve to facilitate cybernetic control.

The Free Energy Principle and Active Inference Framework, FEPAI, is an overarching approach for understanding how it is that complex systems manage to persist in a world governed by the second law of thermodynamics, the inevitable tendency towards entropy.

So the authors have framed the conversation as being firstly about cybernetics, first word.

That's about action selection in complex systems that self-regulate and use feedback, big field.

then within the context of the cybernetic big five theory which this is a psychological theory that draws heavily on cybernetics we are going to consider the neural mechanisms that facilitate and have evolved to facilitate this kind of cybernetic control then the free energy principle and active inference framework are introduced to explain a similar set of topics behavior as well as this resistance of dissolution far from equilibrium systems

Although these two cybernetic theories were developed independently, they overlap in their theoretical foundations and implications and are complementary in their approaches to understanding persons.

FEP AI contributes a potentially valuable formal modeling framework for CB5T, while CB5T provides details about the science and structure of personality.

In this chapter, we explore how CB5T and FEP AI may begin to be integrated into a unified approach to modeling persons.

We'll need another acronym, won't we?

So, the roadmap.

The first section is a cybernetic approach to personality and has the first figure, which shows some of the causal processes that are related to the functioning of personality of the individual.

The second section is the free energy principle and CB5T.

Third is predictive processing and personality neuroscience, active inference, generative models, and personality modeling.

There's two figures in that section which draw upon the graphical models, some of which we've seen some of the structure before, and also the SPM demo.

Then in section six talks about personality traits from the perspectives of CB5T and FEPAI.

And there's a representation of the personality trait hierarchy.

And then the final three sections are the meta traits, the big five personality traits, then a conclusion on the levels of analysis in personality modeling.

Table one then has some of the analogies between or mappings between CB5T and FEP AI.

so figure one in the paper is a drawn from another paper and it relates to the causal processes that are involved in the functioning of personality within an individual and so it's a pretty uh loose

chart saying that both genes and environment play into these relatively stable parameters of cybernetic mechanisms so that's saying somebody who has uh these are uh cybernetic underlying features like given a certain attractor state some people may spiral towards it or spiral away from it or stay in a certain stable orbit to it and that is the cybernetics of biological systems

that maps onto personality trait architectures statistically in matrices because there's this underlying statistical regularity in the world.

And that leads to a feedback system, with Stigma G perhaps, of characteristic adaptations and life outcomes.

And that's why there's correlations between life outcomes and personality traits.

And it's hard to determine cause and effect and all these other aspects of it.

Figure two is pretty nice.

It's the author's redrawing, I believe, of the graphical model structure that we've seen a lot of.

But I wanted to read a quotation from page 21 because they laid it out very nicely.

They wrote,

Generative modeling in FEP AI can be complex, but the basic setup involves specifying agents and their situations as systems of interacting variables and parameters.

These variables take the form of mutually referencing matrices, whose entries specify probabilistic mappings between different portions of the generative model.

Nice.

as we previously described a single objective function of expected free energy is used that's g to determine which policies are selected according to whichever actions are in to determine which policies are selected that's pi

according to whichever actions are anticipated to minimize overall prediction error.

An example FEP AI generative model may include the following matrices where each mapping is conditional upon the probabilistic mappings from preceding matrices.

A matrix is the likelihood mapping

from latent world states to sensory observations, or how sensations are interpreted via perception and imagination.

From the agent's perspective, this would correspond to answering the question, what is likely to have caused my sensations?

The B matrix is the transition probabilities, or how dynamics are expected to evolve from one moment to the next.

From the agent's perspective, this would correspond to answering the question, how do I believe things are likely to change through time?

Three, C matrix.

The C matrix is the prior beliefs over policies or outcomes or which states an agent predicts itself occupying.

Via mechanisms of prediction error minimization, these prior expectations constitute the attracting states of the system and function as preferences.

From the agent's perspective, this would correspond to answering the question, what do I want to happen?

And thereby doing slash enacting it through active inference in the ways described above.

From a CB5T, these preferences are an agent's high-level goals.

Four, the D matrix.

The dematrix is an agent's belief regarding its initial position within the decision environment.

From the agent's perspective, this would correspond to answering the question, where am I likely to be in this kind of situation?

Or where am I likely to have started?

And five, the E-matrix.

The E-matrix is the baseline prior over policies governing policy selection in a habitual or a heuristic fashion.

From the agent's perspective, this would correspond to answering the question, what am I likely to be doing right now?

And thereby doing slash enacting through active inference, but with actions deployed in a fashion that ignores uncertainty with respect to the likelihood of goal attainment in a particular situation.

From a CB5C perspective, these habit priors would constitute a major class of characteristic adaptations.

Pretty nice.

Then you have the states and observations, and then the beta and the gamma, which is the precision estimators, which is the confidence and the temperature parameter over that confidence.

So very nicely laid out by the authors and always cool to hear it a different way and framed as a catechism, which is actually like, what does each matrix represent the question?

What is the question that reflects how each matrix is answering something in the model, doing something in the model?

Figure 3 is an illustrative figure accompanying a generative modeling demo that is prepackaged with SPM 12.

This particular simulation involved modeling curiosity with respect to a task with unknown rules, where agents attempted to maximize valued outcomes while also needing to discover the latent task structure.

And the generative patterns of the data that are part of this integrated generative model in SPM include the inferred rules of the world,

the top left the patterns of the task choices here and the neuronal activity anticipated to occur based upon mechanistic process theories associated with fep ai bottom left and all these three so unit firing firing rates local field potentials and dopamine responses as a function of these things happening under this rule and choice

So it's policy, behavior, and neural or underlying responses, which can be of various categories, from the neurometabolic, like dopamine, to the firing, the local field potentials.

So it's quite a broad modeling framework.

Figure four is the personality trait hierarchy.

And they write, note that the structure indicated here is the between person covariance structure of traits in the population, not a within person causal structure.

So in other words, these connections reflect ways that you can partition axes of variability, not like there's some sort of downward cause.

So that's sort of the challenge with this naming of these things is that they're all kind of like adjectives.

They all seem like they're equal adjectives.

I mean, some might have a more negative or positive connotation or preference for some people, but they're all just adjectives.

And yet, really, it's a specific statistical structure where the connections don't really reflect relationships.

They're subcomponents that are...

distinct under another subcomponent of a population variability.

So it's really better just to think about what the real question is and what this statistical structure is doing because the adjective part, I just don't really know how good of an approach that is.

And then also the piece of the niche is that eco, evo, devo, so ecology, evolution, and development are what structure those stability and plasticity metatrates.

Because the ants that we see today, for example, they've been on a lineage that's been successful since the beginning of ants and back even further.

So it has had to maintain some parameter values which have kept pace with changing local context.

So that's what structures these really specific top level traits because it's actually the process that structures the entire landscape that all these things are playing out upon.

Table one shows some mappings between the key concepts in CB5T and their definitions and the free energy principle or active inference terms or related topics.

So cybernetics itself is about governing systems that self-regulate via feedback, and that's related to many of the cybernetic underpinnings and also information theory and entropic aspects of FEP.

Psychological goals are representations in cybernetics that get enacted through action.

And FEP, they would say that that is a Bayesian belief about the expectations of how prediction errors are gonna be minimized.

So that's preferences via policy selection.

Psychopathology is a persistent or maybe a self-diagnosed or not failure to move towards one's psychological goals due to failure to generate effective new goals over different timescales, let's say.

And that could map in the FEP to a persistent inability to minimize prediction error.

And there's a lot of interesting work on that.

In the second part of table one, personality are the reasonably enduring psychological individual differences, although also it would have to do with the ecological niche because it can't be defined abstract from the relationships and the experiments.

And then the FEP active inference correspondence would be these enduring attractors,

that defines systems as weakly ergodic processes.

So states that some systems revisit, but others don't.

So some people return to a YouTube channel or a TV channel or whatever, and some people don't.

And some people never enters into their orbit.

And so that's why it's always conditional on what is being received from the niche.

Those personality traits are those probabilistic descriptions of stable patterns within personality.

And their correspondence suggested for the FEP is the minimal message length

or the maximally informative descriptions of agents as generative models.

So this is like the parsimonious description of the agents representing their niche.

The characteristic adaptations are the stable goals, interpretations, and strategies specified in relation to basically the niche, and that relates to this whole policy and adaptive component of FEP AI.

So that's basically it for this video.

And a few questions to return to at the end, questions that are often asked.

What would we really get at with a good framework here?

So what would a good framework enable?

what are the unique predictions and experiments of this model so what is our knowledge gain what are we getting out of this specific integration paper and how is it going to influence not just how we think about the world but how we act in the world in terms of which experiments are now optimally informative even if those experiments the data already exists maybe it's just an analysis but that's still an experiment

Another question is what's the next step for active inference?

Maybe we could bring active inference models to bear using some of these new tutorials that are becoming available on large psychological databases and see if there's an active inference or a cybernetic descriptor behavior that explains more variants more parsimoniously than the big five structure does.

Another question is what is the goals of this research?

What do different people want to see happen and

What are the goals of the research?

And also, very importantly, what are we still curious about?

Because there's going to be 13.1 and 13.2 where we, as a group, discuss this paper.

And then we'll have more papers to come, so it's okay to be curious about it.

Any level, anytime you're listening to this, live or in replay.

But yeah, just...

leave a comment on the video or join us in the discussion if you listen to this at the right time and it's good to hear about what you're curious about because in this video I really just tried to run through the figures and give some background or some definitions so maybe some parts were a bit too much or too little for some people so as always it's just throwing it out there and let me know

can improve so thanks for participating even listening is participating we provide follow-up forums to live participants and we request your feedback suggestions or questions and just stay in communication and hopefully we will see you another time so thanks for listening and i'm going to stop the live stream

## QG2gOoX4XdA

SPEAKER_05:
Hello everyone and welcome to the Active Inference Livestream.

This is Active Inference Livestream 13.1 and it is January 5th, 2021.

Happy New Year, everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

The Active Inference Lab is an experiment in online team communication, learning and practice related to Active Inference

feedback you can find us at our website twitter email youtube or keybase teams this is a recorded and an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and keep in mind video etiquette for live streams

for 2021 we are going to be meeting every tuesday regularly at seven to nine a.m pacific time and then we'll plan other special sessions as things come up and for different time zones you can go to this link and see a spreadsheet and here we are in the first week with the first paper and next week we'll be discussing the same one

So hello, everyone.

Thanks for coming on live.

And thanks, everybody who's watching.

Let's introduce ourselves.

Please give a short introduction or check in, especially if it's your first time on the stream, and then pass it to somebody who hasn't spoken.

So I'm Daniel, I'm in Davis, and I'll pass it to Colin.


SPEAKER_10:
Colin DeYoung, and I'm in Minneapolis, Minnesota.

I'm a

Professor in the Psychology Department here at the University of Minnesota and excited to be here.

I'll pass it on to Stephen.


SPEAKER_09:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

I'm doing my practice-based PhD at Canterbury Christ Church University and pleased to be here as well.

I'm going to pass it to Shannon.


SPEAKER_01:
Hey, I'm Shannon Crooks.

I'm in South Dakota, so also in the snow, but I'm based at the University of California in Merced, doing my PhD also.

I'll pass it to Marco.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Marco.

I'm from Holland.

I used to work on active inference in London, but now I'm just enjoying the progress from the sidelines.

I'll pass it to Ayrton.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you.

My name is Ivan.

I'm from Russia, from Moscow, and I'm interested in free energy principle and as it related with systems engineering.

And I pass it to, excuse me, what is your name, my friend?


SPEAKER_05:
Dave, let's go to Dave.


SPEAKER_08:
Hi, Dave Douglas.

I'm retired from information technology.

I live in the Philippines and I did about equal amounts of graduate level work in computer science, linguistics, and psychology, but have only a lowly BA.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Let's go to blue and then Adam.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, good morning, everyone.

My name is Blue Knight and I am an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico.


SPEAKER_06:
And Adam, welcome.

Hi, I'm Adam.

Sorry I'm late.

I am based out of Bloomington, Indiana.

I'm a postdoctoral researcher.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Well, welcome, everyone.

Thanks so much for coming on, filling out the Hollywood square that we have here.

For these warm-up questions, it'll be great to hear from everyone.

Just raise your hand if you have a thought.

I'll just put up the first two.

Totally just raise your hand as you want to add something.

first would be what is something about human personality or emotions that you would want to see captured in a good model or understanding or education and then also what is something that you liked or remembered about the paper and um

think there was a few memorable parts of the paper just while people are raising their hand uh i think just the idea of going from a statistical understanding of the big five as principal component dimensions to being the outputs of a cybernetic system is really an interesting topic so

Maybe if anyone wants to raise their hand on this one or Adam or Colin, maybe how do you go about introducing the need for your kind of paper to an audience?

Like where do you start out with the interesting part about personality that you want to capture in your model?


SPEAKER_10:
Well, shall I jump in then?

Yeah.

And when you say raise hand, do you mean this little button here or do you actually just wave at the screen?


SPEAKER_05:
Probably with the button.


SPEAKER_10:
All right.

That works.

So one of the things that I noticed in your summary of the paper was something that I often encounter from people working in other scientific fields, which is a certain degree of skepticism about the Big Five because of their origin in

uh, natural language.

And and because, you know, when you see a diagram that's like a hierarchy of personality traits, you know, in a figure there, I was careful to note that that is not supposed to be a diagram of causal structure in the individual.

There's this interesting problem where we use the same visual language for causal models of boxes and circles and arrows and for statistical models in which we're looking at the relationships among variables.

But obviously those are not directly translatable.

And so the way that I would pose the basic question that's of interest here is why do certain traits of people tend to cluster together?

I think that that's really the core of what I'm interested in and what we're interested in if we're talking about the sources of personality.

A lot of personality research in the last 40 years or so since the big five emerged as kind of an organizing consensus framework,

has really been focused on questions of prediction.

Like if we have these assessments of people's personality tendencies, what kind of outcomes does it predict for them?

Also, potentially, like what are trajectories of change and development of these things over time?

But I'm interested in the question that is a lot less studied, which is where do these patterns come from in the first place?

And so I think the way to think about the kind of statistical element here is simply that there is an observation that if we have a large set of descriptions of people's personality, and it doesn't have to be from the natural language, that was just one good source for a relatively unbiased set of descriptions of people was to go into the dictionary and just pull out the adjectives that could describe people.

Um, but we see a very similar pattern of, uh, factors like the big five.

If we start with a lot of say existing personality questionnaires that weren't designed to measure the big five, throw them all together, you still get the big five.

Um, so as long as we have a sufficiently large set of descriptions of personality and we have ratings on them, uh, they tend to cluster together in reliable ways.

And as long as they are valid, as long as when we say that somebody is talkative, that really does mean that they talk more than other people do.

And there's a lot of evidence for the basic levels of validity of personality ratings.

Then the question is, why is it that people who are talkative also tend to be more sociable, also tend to experience more positive emotions, also tend to be more physically active, also tend to be, let's say, more interested in excitement and dangerous, risky pursuits.

So we've got a whole bunch of things that cluster together, and the question is why.

And so that was a list of

low level traits that are grouped together within extraversion.

And that's just a statistical observation.

Those people who tend to have more of one of those things also tend to have more of another.

And so I see fundamentally the question that I'm interested in is what are the underlying mechanisms that vary from person to person that drive these patterns of co-occurrence of particular characteristics?


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you for that, Shannon.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks for that really nice sort of overview introduction.

I was sort of wondering, going through this paper, you talk about what are the differences that can be ascribed to individuals and their individual personalities that lead to traits like extroversion or what have you.

But what if there is nothing

unique to any individual that gives rise to a personality trait.

And I wonder where does culture and social interaction fit into this kind of model?

And that's just a question that I'm interested in throughout the next couple of hours that we're here today.


SPEAKER_05:
Nice.

Good question.

Anyone?

I put up also the third one blue.


SPEAKER_03:
So something as I was wondering about, like, as I was reading the paper was, you know, the big five personality and like it's, you know, grounded in genetic influences, right?

But like attachment theory and like there's like a bunch of work that's been done in mice, like showing like, you know, the nurturing of parents and, you know, whether you're attachment avoidant or attachment anxious or, you know, attachment secure.

that's also something i think would be fun and interesting to um model in in the free energy kind of way like put into this framework and i think it has like some cool um


SPEAKER_05:
you know impacts for like team building and and how um you know like whether i don't know i just think it would be it would be interesting and maybe um impactful in in this kind of framework cool and blue to that point i just saw a paper this uh morning from anna sunica at all and axel constant the first prior from co-embodiment to co-homeostasis in early life about this transition from like a truly in utero embedded being to

different types of physiological dependencies social and cultural so it is interesting to think about all right we have an individual orientation around the big five it's about the individual in relationship to different types of settings but then how do you capture that element of niche construction or of group dynamics or of these other aspects that are relational i'm just curious colin or adam like where does the uh

How does that enter into it, this idea of the cultural influences on personality?

Because someone's personality might be manifested in a really specific setting because of their local context.


SPEAKER_10:
I could just say something about that that is relevant, I think, to both of the two questions that have just been asked.

which is just to keep in mind that these personality traits are descriptions of persistent patterns of people's behavior.

And we know that they are genetically influenced, but we also know that they're not entirely determined by genetics.

They are also determined by environmental influences.

And so the way that I think about this is that you have these mechanisms that are allowing people to function, and some parameters of those mechanisms must be reasonably persistent to produce these persistent patterns of behavior.

But the things that set those parameters and that tweak them if there's change in personality over time can be both genetically programmed and environmentally programmed.

Right.

So there are things there are events that happen to people, for example, their relations to their primary caregiver and attachment that shape what these settings are going to be persistently in life.

And so I think there's definitely room for thinking about environmental inputs to these systems and shaping of these parameters as well as genetic ones.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

And Colin, at this point, you raised earlier about graphical models and just drawing a connection among different variables.

Is that a causal model?

Is that a statistical model?

Are those different?

What if you're talking about causal entropy or you're doing a causal model, like a structural equation modeling, or even if it's a linear regression, it's going to be interpreted as a causal influence.

And they'll put in the discussion, oh, it could be a different way.

It could just be correlation, but it's really hard to disentangle that.

Yeah, Marco.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, thanks.

So first of all, I haven't fully read the paper.

I kind of recently got out of a pandemic slumber.

But it sounds very interesting from what I've read and heard so far.

And as for the first question about what I'd like to see, it might be a bit in the far future.

But I think ideally, this would all connect sooner or later to the work on neurophenomenology.

The kind of ideal vision I have is

For example, now we've been talking about genetic priorities and environmental inputs, but I think the beautiful part about cybernetics is the kind of reflexive action.

And so consciousness or phenomenology is basically a mediator or moderator of the way that environmental inputs kind of influence our continuing progression of personality or traits and characteristics.

And so ideally, I would love to hear if it's possible to make a synthesis of, for example, the work from psychoanalysis, psychotherapy, everything that kind of explores and navigates these particular mechanisms from a first-person kind of view, how to navigate the experience of being engaged in the world.

And I'm just wondering about Adam's or someone else's thoughts on how to possibly connect that phenomenological description of mechanisms and processes with the more formal basic models that we're now exploring in this kind of work, if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, very nice.

Adam, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_06:
Hello, can you hear me?


SPEAKER_05:
Yep.


SPEAKER_06:
Great.

So I guess

uh try to address a couple of things um so yeah uh yeah marco just thrust us into like the deepest possible territory like right away um and so i guess i'll briefly comment on that uh second but the it's the first thing in terms of um social context and uh niche construction and the more intersubjective aspects and contexts um sensitivity and personality uh

Active inferential modeling is really well equipped to address all of that.

In this paper, it was more, the focus was just kind of exploring what Colin and I both perceived to be a very rich set of correspondences between the free energy principle and active inference and his theory of cybernetic big five theory.

But in modeling work, you can bring in all of those details and explore them in their particular.

I'm currently collaborating on a project where we're trying to model things like extraversion within these social choice tasks.

And so how you show up, it's going to be a function of both the task environment and you as this interaction that's going to evoke a given style pattern.

But you'll have these parameters, these hyper priors are over the different aspects of the generative model

which through iterated policy selection and updating will basically concentrate their probability mass in different ways and result in different parameterizations and then different emergent behavior.

And what you can see happen is you can get these basically attractors form as this process proceeds over time, these behavioral attractors where the concentration of your prior for engaging in the world in a certain way

causes you to enact a given pattern, which causes you to even more update in that direction.

Like your, your D matrix, like, where am I in this environment?

You know, what do you expect to be perceiving your A matrices, all the different like components that you'd use to try to model the parts of an agent.

These were all your priors of these will get updated.

Well then cause the pattern of an action, so on and so forth.

And that over time, this could cause you to,

be in this attractor where you have this enduring stability.

How enduring?

It would depend on a variety of things.

So I guess that's one.

So in this process, the social context, who you're interacting with, that would make all the difference in terms of how the kind of ball rolls down this epigenetic landscape, like how you end up carving out a given pattern for this agent.

With respect to

uh, neuro phenomenology and just the, uh, actually getting the richness of experience.

There's a sense in which all active inferential modeling is already in a way, um, kind of personality modeling.

It's like, you're kind of getting into like, um, uh, these enduring, um, you know, the, the cybernet

whether you're thinking of them as these like cybernetic parameters for this fundamental process, or just your ability to describe the essence of the system, its normal form description, this maximally encompassing description of the modes of where you expect to find the system as a kind of probabilistic density in some kind of multidimensional phase space.

If you have such a,

attracting network structure that you can describe.

In a way, you could call that the personality of the system.

But cybernetic big five theory kind of goes further and it's grounding this in terms of, well, why should we expect certain modes over others?

Why should we expect this that relates it back to this fundamental cybernetic cycle of goal pursuit that any agent has to do?

So with respect to neurophenomenology and

it seems like the attempts to get at this within active inference, things like, uh, sophisticated effective inference, the, the models of, uh, metacognition where they're beginning to model like kinds of mindful processing of reflecting on your, um, your confidence.

And then this influencing your, uh, you, you having an actual model of your epistemic status, you reflect,

you're reflecting on this and this influencing how you sample influencing uh how confident you are in different ways um influencing what policies you end up deploying these things that to the extent that they allow for phenomenological richness they could be brought into an agent model and you're beginning to do a connection between neuro phenomenology or a process theory of that would dock with phenomenology

and personality modeling.

So those are some thoughts.


SPEAKER_05:
Nice, thanks.

And to add on that, Adam, because that was really well said, it's almost like some of these past papers we've been discussing were the neutral infrastructure or the architecture or the tools to have agents that can have memory or can have affect or can perceive valence or get worried.

So we talked that in a very neutral framework, like it's a parameter in the model.

However, in the real world, as Colin was getting at, there's these extremely deep correlations with different outcomes of systems.

People who like to text more also like to video chat more or something.

And that might not be surprising, but these trends are very distinct.

And so we are getting at this generative model idea, personality as a generator of outcomes in different niches, so inseparable from the niche.

And

It's just an interesting way to see how the cybernetic big five has come from a more psychological area.

So it has that sort of toe of the neuro phenomenology and the real correlations in the world.

And then there's the neutral framework that sort of maps onto that.

We have Steven and then Colin.


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, I like what's been said about neuro phenomenology.

And I'd also say that one of the things that's good about this work with traits is it's starting to bring work that's coming from what you could say, realist settings, codifying it and then finding the patterns.

And it's given us more material coming the other way.

We've had some work around a lot of work with affordances and niches.

and then obviously you've got the models which start to create dynamics and show and then you start to see where these two things meet but i would also say micro i've been looking a lot of micro phenomenology and the actual structuring of experience and attention and i think that um what can be interesting is these traits if these traits can also get brought down into micro phenomenology and

ways of like how is the structure of the environment body mind happening and and where are their times because what I think with a lot of the trait works is it does have a normative assumption about the type of life someone's in around which you then standardize and then get these patterns but you do find if you take people

into some other types of space or other types of attentional state, be it a more grounded state, maybe a performative state, maybe a space which is less Western, so to speak, less goal orientated, that might shift.

So this might be like, this is where that is when people are at this normative mediated, sort of normative like calculated way of getting everyone at the goal directed norm for a Westerner.

and then can these different components to that be sort of treated and also looked at how do they vary as we move like not just as the five but in you know as individual kind of tap ways to tap into affordances when do these change more or less when we bring people into another type of way of a regime of attention or another set of affordances which is outside the normal for our cultural


SPEAKER_10:
goal-driven way of being in the west okay colin and then marco i just had a couple of thoughts about phenomenology since that's been a theme um recently um first of all i think one interesting thing to think about in relation to uh trait

approaches is that when we do assessments of personality using self-report questionnaires, which is not the only way that you can do it, of course, you can have other people rate the personality of somebody.

And we tend to see very similar results if we use other people's ratings versus self ratings.

Although there's also evidence that there's some incremental validity there.

In other words, you know things about yourself that other people don't know, so that there's some unique validity to your reports.

But other people also know things about you that you don't know, so there's also some unique validity to other people's reports on your personality.

But as long as we're talking about the self-reports, then that is at base a kind of

you know crude phenomenological measure right because you're saying what are you like what is your experience of yourself like are you the kind of person who's anxious are you the kind of person who likes art you know and we get a long list of people's responses on these things and then we uh infer their general patterns of uh behavior from them and so i do think you know one of the things that i've always been interested in is that personality is not just patterns of

behavior from a third person perspective, it's also patterns of experience from a first person perspective.

And so when we look at the contents of personality questionnaires, they involve descriptions of emotion,

and types of cognition and patterns of motivation that can all be experienced phenomenologically in the first person as well.

And so we're using this kind of first person representation and understanding of ourselves to then try to infer these general patterns of behavior that have validity from an objective third person perspective as well.

And then just in terms of drilling down to this kind of micro phenomenology idea,

we do know things about particular patterns of processing that are associated with different personality traits.

So for example, we just published a paper showing that extroversion is associated with the tendency to be influenced by reward in an implicit learning context.

So you're doing a task where you're making this like discrimination between two very similar options

And you're rewarded more for getting correct responses to one option relative to the other.

Well, what you see is that people's behavior becomes biased toward that option, but the degree it becomes biased is actually correlated with extroversion.

And that's part of how we have support for the theory that fundamentally what causes all of these different extroverted behaviors to cohere is sensitivity to reward.

And so you can think of that from the third person as like, here's a process of reward mapping, but you can also think, well, what is it like for this individual?

This is the kind of person who's going to be more perceptive of possibilities for rewarding interactions for incentives in their environment.

So I think you can always sort of flip back and forth between taking the phenomenological and the more third person perspective on these things.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Thanks.

Marco?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thanks.

Actually, kind of ties into that, because I was kind of wondering if you could share some thoughts on the relation between value systems, such as pragmatic value or affect, and epistemic salience and curiosity with this model of personality.

For example, I did read that you said the fundamental components are the goal, the interpretation, and the strategy, right?

And I would guess that value is more about interpretation, so that you have some kind of scalar or some other dimension by which you can compare certain current real states and expected states.

And tying into that, I guess it's a separate question, but I think I guess I'm going back to the personality and phenomenology, because maybe you could share some thoughts on to what extent personality can be seen as a natural consequence of the cybernetic imperative, where consciousness has basically instrumentalized to be the regulator of the entire mind-body system, as it were.

Because I guess I have some image, a picture of regimes of reflexive attention, right?

So there must be some cybernetic system or set of systems, ecosystem fuel, that's regulating or controlling the entire mind-body system or large portions of it.

But that in itself then has to necessarily, by pre-energy or active inference, have to have some kind of imperative to decide or policies to pick on how to engage with that bigger mind-body ecosystem, if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_05:
Beautiful.

Thank you.

Adam, and then anyone else.

Darn it, Marco.

That was awesome.

Yeah, it was epic.


SPEAKER_06:
It was epic.


SPEAKER_05:
Adam, and then Sasha, and then we'll leave the warm up.


SPEAKER_06:
So I guess a few things come into mind.

So I really like this idea of thinking of your consciousness as a kind of modeling for the sake of cybernetic control.

And with hopefully, you know, some degree of not perfect, but some degree of fidelity for modeling that which is modeled because good regular theorem to regulate a system, you have to have a decent enough model.

And so there's a sense in which towards this end, being able to have your modeling process reflect on itself

and model itself, that could be a very useful thing if you get it right, and a very bad thing if you get it wrong.

And so related to things like, and it could even be that, you know, these parameter two needs for these, they might stripe it across like multiple levels of abstraction, something like curiosity.

So you could have like a kind of curiosity that has a phenomenology in terms of like the way,

physicists would describe it as like a phenomenological description of behavior.

That's just like showing the emergent behavior.

And this looks like a more curious system in the way it's like sussing out state space.

Then you might also get to like, uh, the curiosity in terms of the, uh, what it feels like to be curious and what those, those motivations, those free energy gradients are going to try to annihilate those different sources of desire of pull, um, what that's like experientially.

Um, and,

So yeah, it seems like something like curiosity would be reflected at multiple levels of organization, maybe even with some weird shifts in terms of the way it shows up across levels of analysis.

A few other ideas that are coming to mind would be, there seems to be a sense in which, so we're talking about someone reporting on their experience.

You can think of these reports both in terms of the perceptual inferences that are going into them, and then the reports as a kind of action, as a kind of active inference.

And each of these aspects, you know, for instance, like you could set up a generative model for each of these, and you would have, for instance, a given kind of matrix to describe the perception, like given a given set of

observations, what's the state that you then infer.

And so this could be like some aspects of like, so what is an agent?

What is a person noticing in different circumstances?

And so this is like, what is it in particular that is entering into their experience?

Where does their attention go?

You could also go have like their attention, not just in terms of a sort of like a salience, but a kind of like active curiosity and a sampling from the environment as a kind of mental act.

And so this then will influence like what's getting fed into the stream of experience and what it's like to be a particular kind of agent, particular kind of person in a particular kind of situation.

Those are some thoughts.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

We'll return to that idea about being in the niche for a particular kind of agent.

We'll do Sasha and then Colin with the last word on the intro.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Yeah, thank you.

Really great conversation.

I've already reduced my uncertainty on a lot of the questions I came in with.

Thank you, Colin, for explaining that behavior is not the same thing as personality, because that's something I was starting to wonder.

So it's relevant that personality contains as part of it the self-report of the individual's experience.

And then I like what you said about your most recent work.

That sounds really interesting and kind of falls in line with active inference as reducing uncertainty about our environment.

And so it seems that extroverts and introverts have a different sensitivity to information.

sensitivity to precision about their world, where extroverts are more sensitive to reward and

updating their generative model from the external inputs, like mainly I'm thinking social, but of course it could be other things.

So that's interesting how it fits into this model of active inference as well.

And I guess my last thought is, is there another level up here where we can talk about people who are also sensitive to precision

about personality tests and others, quantified self, whether there's a metric for that kind of like self-reflection part of it.

And if that, I think sometimes that can seem a bit like

a self-fulfilling prophecy or like, I know I'm the kind of person who does this.

So I expect this personality test to tell me this where you're actually not sensitive to new information.

You just want a kind of confirmation on what you already think.

So, but yeah.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

Interesting stuff, Colin.

And then we're going to move to the next section.


SPEAKER_10:
Okay, so quickly, then just a couple of thoughts on the last couple of comments.

So first of all, you raise something Sasha, that is important, which is that personality tests are certainly fallible, right?

They're not a great form of measurement, they're just the best form of measurement we have for assessing people's personalities.

And the reason for that is that it's really hard to get at an assessment of people's persistent patterns in all of their, you know, different

aspects of functioning with anything other than relying on people to tell you about it, right?

You could try to come up with, you know, like some complex set of tasks and people come into the lab and do all these things and you videotape them and somehow that's gonna, you're gonna extract all the information about their personality from that by a carefully chosen set of things that you have them go through.

you know, it'd be a huge amount of work and you'd be learning less about what they're like in general than just asking them a bunch of questions.

So, you know, this is always a perennial problem.

It's like, well, there are these difficulties of self reports, people have biases, they, you know, they are motivated to think of themselves as being more desirable in various ways than they are from a, you know, social desirability perspective.

And so what can you do about that?

And yeah, there are certainly studies of, you know, the degree to which people are accurate in their personality assessment and like the degree to which if they assess their own personality, how much does that agree with other people's assessments of their personality and larger discrepancies can be predictive of things sometimes of psychological problems.

Um, so there's, you know, there's a whole area of studying that.

Um, but I think I like this idea of people who have curiosity about their own personalities.

And that kind of leads into something I just wanted to say generally about personality, which is that definitely extroversion is related to this kind of curiosity about things that are potentially rewarding.

But if we think about curiosity more generally as a sensitivity to the reward value of information per se, so just essentially the motivation to improve the quality of our interpretations of the world in terms of that language of interpretations and goals and strategies.

Then there's a pretty clear sense that curiosity of that sort of general form is the core of one of the big five traits.

So the openness to experience and intellect dimension of the big five is really focused on people's curiosity and

hunger for information, essentially, whether that be more about aesthetic and perceptual information related to openness to experience, or whether it's related to abstract information related to intellectual issues.

So that seems to be one of the really core dimensions of people's personalities.

So I do think there's a very clear way to connect that into this idea of foraging for

for information and seeking out increased entropy for the sake of reducing entropy over time, you know, which is what learning is essentially.

So there are good connections there definitely.


SPEAKER_05:
Interesting.

And Adam, just one quick last note.


SPEAKER_06:
So yeah, quickly, as before we temporary close off the phenomenology thread,

it seems like there's a really rich kind of bi-directional relationship between personality science and active inference.

And that with personality science, you actually have this, like they're all basically these, from the personality modelers I met, they're all these very like integrative generalists approaching this hairball of a problem from as many ways as they can

and basically bootstrapping themselves to validity and reliability.

And so they've come up with a really rich literature of phenomenon to populate the phenomenology.

And active inference provides the sort of like places where you want to kind of dig in deeper onto like, well, what is the exact like causal mechanism?

So like cybernetic big five theory was probably like best in personality science of,

getting at causal processes of like how you're, where are these traits coming from and what are they actually doing for the agent?

So now you can bring an active inference and describe agents of cybernetic systems, run simulations, generate things that would correspond to different aspects of personality, like for instance, the dopamine system and curiosity.

You now can modify your parameter over policy selection and see what then unfolds with respect to both

overt acts or mental acts like attentional shifts um so just one final thing before we go the next part is uh there's some uh in the paper we start to talk about this idea of like a peace struct

or like this kind of object that could be used in something like computational psychiatry for kind of pooling data over multiple people to like come up with basically a general personality model that you can deploy for different agents.

We might want to go into the weeds on that later to the extent we can, but the thing I want to get at is that one thing to model an active inference is

we are all personality modelers.

It's like we are all necessarily like super forecasters trying to predict the future.

We are all also personality modelers trying to predict each other and ourselves.

And part of this would be towards the end, well, what kind of agent do I think I am?

What do I think my personality is?

Like, what do I think is going to be either more situation, like what's going to be enduring?

What's going to be, you can have personality be enduring, but variable.

So what's going to be

Uh, how variable are these aspects of me?

How likely are they to endure?

These are the questions you have to ask of yourself and other agents in order to govern the interactions and the best of your ability.


SPEAKER_05:
well said adam it really just highlights how much people even though we say things like well we don't know even given someone's personality we don't know what they're gonna do it's like yeah but you know what language they're gonna speak and so in the broad scheme of things you've actually reduced your uncertainty quite a lot and if you're not 99.9 aligned with that agent who's like you in the niche sharing an interface with you that

conflict or adversarial relationship, or just risk surface is going to spiral.

And so it's all about this interface.

Yeah, Marco, if you want to go ahead.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thanks.

Sorry, I didn't get that far in the paper, but that sounds really interesting.

I just briefly skimmed the section on it.

So it sounds like the P structure is basically allowing for a heuristic contextual dependency.

So you have the generic generative models of your being, and the P structure kind of links the current context to the generic kind of models, and that allows for the variation over different situations.

I mean, I'm emphasizing the heuristic nature of it,

Because personality basically can be seen as a very useful heuristic for how to act in the world.

Does that make sense?

Or should I just read more in the paper?


SPEAKER_05:
No, I think that's really a great connection there and a setup.

I think in figure two, or when we see the graphical model, maybe let's think about where the structure would play in and then emphasize its role as a statistical construct that reduces our uncertainty about regularities in the world, just like every other kind of statistical modeling framework does.

And then...

I think we'll be able to come back to that peace drug question.

But what a fun warm up section.

Good times.

So today we did the introductions and warm up, and then we'll have the sections of this paper, which maybe if you're listening, you've read or not.

And that is the Integrating Cybernetic Big Five Theory with Free Energy Principle, a New Strategy for Modeling Personalities as Complex Systems by Saffron and Young, both of whom are on this call.

So in this set of slides, we do have a bunch of the abstract roadmap, some other stuff, but I think there are so many interesting threads we've raised.

Let's just try to walk through all of them in no specific order, but really think about what topics do we wanna highlight for next week when we talk about the same paper and how will we get deeper into some of these threads that we've raised today in the discussion.

So here's the aims and claims slide.

And Adam or Colin, what was just your intention with the paper?

And after doing it, where do you see the next implications of the paper or the next research directions for what you kind of want to do in that direction?

And if that verges into some of the figures, just mention it and I'll go to that figure.


SPEAKER_10:
Well, I think that our basic motivation for doing it was just that we had already been talking together about topics of mutual interest and the opportunity to write this chapter came up and I thought, oh, this would be a really fun thing to a good excuse to do something with Adam and kind of get our thoughts together and actually written down and out there in the world.

And so, you know, I think.

He and I probably have slightly different incentives for where this is going next.

He's more interested in the processes of modeling, whereas I'm more interested in generating knowledge about the specific mechanisms and brain processes that underlie different personality traits and risks for different types of psychopathology that are tied to different personality traits.

Yeah, I think, I mean, to me, this is just a really nice way to kind of connect my thinking about personality with this, what seems to me to be a really generative perspective with the whole FEP framework and what's happening with that in science in general.

I'm sure Adam has some other thoughts about that too.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, go for it, Adam, but that was very interesting.

Colin, thanks.


SPEAKER_06:
I mean, for me, that was primarily the thing.

Colin and I were already going into the weeds together and having fun with it.

And so then basically IARPA brought together this meeting of personality modelers to create this book, Modeling Persons and Situations, basically seeing the extent to which personality science could do predictive modeling of agents.

basically they want to recapitulate the plot of Westworld as far as I can tell.

So I'm actually not joking, but except I am.

But yeah, this is my primarily interest would be just what the heck are persons and what can they be and how can we understand them and who am I and what do I want?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

And also one thing we haven't raised is who or what is a person.

There's personality as being the statistical regularities of agent in niche.

So that's just like a person in an exoskeleton.

You could have some sort of model for that or a person with other types of constraints on or something like that.

But then there's the idea of like, what is a person legally?

What is a person culturally?

And all these ideas are coming into play with modeling legal persons and physical persons and statistical regularities that include our digital affordances.

All of that is becoming integrated.

Our digital persona is that included in these emotive models.

There's just a lot of really interesting stuff to think about there.

So then just copied on the screen for people who are looking is the abstract and pause the video there.

And here is the roadmap.

Then we'll have the figures.

And then there's just one kind of interesting general question from an audience.

But in the roadmap, just if you have any thoughts on the layout or the authors could give a point if they wanted to about why they arranged it the way they arranged it or which parts they thought were important.

If somebody was just going to read one section or

Any thoughts on that?

Otherwise, we can just go to the figures.

But OK, let me know if you want to return to this.

Otherwise, it's just the headers of the paper.

All right.

So here's figure one.

And Colin, this really returns to your point from earlier about the graphical models.

What do connections in graphical models represent?

And that's very related to a general question of like, what do variables represent?

Principal component one, what does that represent?

What English word are we going to put on that?

You know, MX plus B, linear model.

What are we going to call X?

What is the slope?

What is that going to be called?

And then how does that play out graphically, whether in an equation or whether in a drawing like this?

So I would love to hear your thoughts and then anyone else can raise their hand on this one.


SPEAKER_10:
OK, so I made the basic distinction earlier between a statistical model of covariance, like a structural equation model.

I think it's really important not to call structural equation models causal models because they're not.

It drives me crazy when people refer to causal modeling and all they're doing is a set of regression paths.

What that is fundamentally is trying to recreate patterns of covariance in data

And if you have special kinds of data, like with temporal priority or where some variable has actually been manipulated, then you actually interpret causal effects from covariance structure.

But just in and of itself, there's nothing inherently causal about structural equation modeling or regression.

This model here, however, is different.

This is actually intended as a conceptual causal model.

So these are not just looking at correlations between different variables in a population.

This is thinking about the actual causal processes that produce the functions of an individual agent, specifically a human being.

um and so what this is this is just sort of like a way to encapsulate an overview of the way that my theory defines personality traits and characteristic adaptations which are the two elements of exhaustive elements of personality in the theory and so the idea is that you know we know from decades of research that both genetics and the environment contribute to people's personality traits and the idea is that

Personality traits are patterns of behavior.

That's why they have their own separate box here.

There's sometimes a tendency in personality psychology to say, well, what the trait really is, is some underlying thing that causes people's behavior.

But I think that that leads to confusion because what we actually measure when we measure personality traits is a description of regularities in the person's behavior and experience.

So I think it's important to keep that clear.

But then the middle box there, the relatively stable parameters of cybernetic mechanisms, is trying to say something about where those patterns of regularity come from.

And so the personality traits are not some underlying causal process that generates personality.

They are just the patterns.

Now, they themselves do have downstream causal effects, however, because let's say I'm the kind of person who talks all the time.

well, that's gonna have consequences on the world around me, right?

And that will maybe lead me to develop different patterns of adaptation to my environment, to have different outcomes on the people around me.

It's gonna lead to different outcomes and different adaptations.

So that's the final box there.

And then there's identification of feedback loops here.

So the idea that you are, generally speaking, the flow is that your basic personality traits caused by these basic settings of parameters that have a strong genetic component to them influence how we adapt and what we pick up on and what habits we develop in any particular situations.

Habits is a good synonym for characteristic adaptations.

But sometimes there can actually be feedback.

So let's say, for example, that I'm an introvert, but for whatever reason, I get into a job that has an important component is selling things, right?

I get into sales somehow.

So I'm going to have to develop, at least in that context, the ability to act like an extrovert if I'm going to be successful in my job.

And maybe I get good at that, right?

So I've got a characteristic adaptation to my particular niche, which is that at least in this context, I'm good at acting like an extrovert.

But this acknowledges that there's a possibility for that to feed back and actually make me more sensitive to incentive rewards in general.

And so I may actually find that I'm not just more extroverted in this particular job context.

After five years of doing this, maybe I'm more extroverted in my life as a whole and all these other contexts.

So that's the one of those feedback loops.

And then so you see that there's the environment can directly affect the kind of ways in which we adapt to our environment, obviously, but the environment, but genetics, any effect of genetics on our specific adaptations must feed through the effects of genetics on these general mechanisms, these parameters that underlie our functioning.

And so, you know, if anybody has any other questions about that diagram, I'm happy to


SPEAKER_05:
That was a great explanation.

And just to emphasize one point there, and then we'll go to Steven.

You said that the characteristic adaptations in life outcomes are exhaustive.

And so that really is like we can partition them into the adaptations are the things that the agent carries with them, the synapses that have changed or the scars they bear, but basically what is not their surrounding and the life outcome is the niche.

So then there's this stigma G where the agent is doing niche construction.

So this is from a different non-active inference, non-niche construction framework, but finding resonances and finding concordances here, because that's kind of what we talk about.

It's like the learning of agents and then the way that influences their niche.

And then you had this idea of acting as if, like the example with the person who's being forced by their niche to implement, I'm a kind of person who says hello in this way or things like that.

And then that also relates to what Stephen was saying earlier about drama and about performance.

So maybe Stephen, do you have a thought on that?


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, I mean, the thing I like about what was mentioned here is how personality traits can...

be adapted to context like someone's a salesperson if there's a useful example and then how that obviously starts to then change your whole broader way of seeing things and one area i think might be interesting and i've been there's the work of harry hest who's revisited

the sixties, we did a lot of work on behavior settings.

So he looked at a whole load of children across the U S and he looked at how their behavior was when they're in a school or in the cafe or different places.

He found the difference in behavior.

between settings for the same child was bigger than the difference in behavior between personalities of children, i.e.

the same child was changing its behavior radically based on the settings.

And that work kind of got lost, but Harry Heft has sort of been really pushing that again.

I think that can tie into this is maybe there's personality traits, I suppose, you know, how much stability there is, but could behavior settings

be kind of like that kind of more dynamic version of personality traits.

And I think active inference makes that more possible to even have that conversation rather than the more sort of static psychometric data, which is kind of top down and kind of, you just have to accept.

It feels like this is, you can get in there and play with it a bit more from different directions.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks for sharing that, Stephen.

We'll go Colin and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_10:
Yeah, so that's a really a really good point, Stephen, which is that there is there are differences that people have to specific situations that are distinct from their broad patterns of consistency and personality.

And that's a long running debate in personality psychology going back to the late 60s.

And the resolution to it basically is that, yes, there are these relatively stable ways in which people respond to specific situations.

And that's what I'm trying to capture with the idea of characteristic adaptations.

But then if you go across a bunch of situations and you take the person's average, there are also persistent averages that differ from person to person.

and that would correspond to the trait.

So you can have both of these things in the same set of data.

And Will Fleeson is a personality psychologist who has really been instrumental in collecting the data to show this very basic feature of what are we measuring when we measure a personality trait with something like a questionnaire where we're just asking somebody for this sort of general impression of themselves.

And so what he's done is used experience sampling methods where you have somebody's smartphone

And it pings them like five times a day and asks them like, how have you been acting for the last half an hour, for the last hour?

And then you get them to rate their behavior on a set of descriptions or categories.

what you see is that, as you said, people have as much or even more variability within their own behavior as there is variability in terms of their average behavior from person to person.

And yet nonetheless, those averages are quite stable.

So if you do this for one week, you can get a whole, you'll get a, he calls them density distributions, right?

You basically just get a,

And they're usually fairly normally shaped.

And you do that for one week, you get this whole pattern.

So sometimes the person's acting very introverted.

Sometimes they're acting very extroverted at ranges.

But there's a peak.

And that peak is very stable if you do it again in another week.

So the person goes through another week of behavior, and again, they're varying very widely in their behavior.

But if you look at their average level of that particular behavior, it's quite stable over time.

And then he's also shown that that correlates quite highly with the ratings that we get from these general personality questionnaires.

So the questionnaires really are tapping into this sort of general average tendency of specific behavior, even though, of course, the behavior itself varies widely from situation to situation and over time, both due to situational affordances and due to whatever is going on internally in terms of the goals that the person is pursuing at that moment.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Let's go, Marco, then Adam.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thanks.

It was actually really interesting.

I apologize.

I'm going to add another interesting thing to connect to.

So someone mentioned, Steven mentioned the kids in the classrooms and the context.

And I think development might be also very interesting here, because personality might be relatively stable across a lifetime.

But I think, hopefully, we can agree that personality also enriches.

And in that process of enrichments, and I would also say empowerment,

There's, I think, you could say a shift between the balance of endogenous and exogenous influence on an agent's behavioural adaptation to its niches.

And so there's a change in the scope in which the personality has a relatively large influence on the way they adapt.

And I guess I'm just asking about thoughts on how you might picture that kind of process of how

Personality might actually in the beginning largely concern itself with how to engage with the world such that it might internalize that which it normally co-ops from the environment.

So normally you offload a lot of stuff to behaviorally adapt, which might explain the variation due to environment.

But then over time, as it does so, it internalizes certain heuristics, certain patterns, certain policies, and learn from environments to kind of enrich its personality and then extend the scope of influence from their personality.

Yeah, I don't know if that makes sense.

Yeah, cool thought.


SPEAKER_05:
Adam, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_06:
So a few thoughts from before and then some thoughts on Marco's thoughts.

Um, so the fleece and description of, uh, personality as a kind of, uh, density, uh, distribution, um, I think, and the issue of, um, the stability of personality and the variance of it, um, with, within individuals across context, which is part of the reason the book that was this chapter was part of was called a modeling persons and situations, but, uh, taking these ideas together.

we're kind of in the same territory of these fundamental questions in the free energy principle of what is the ontological status of a non-equilibrium steady state distribution bounded by a Markov blanket?

What's the granularity over which we can find this thing that we're identifying?

Colin will be able to speak more to this, but this idea of there are ways of describing that,

your degree of variability across contexts is itself something that can be stable.

And this could be itself part of your personality.

To now kind of loop back to what you were just describing, Marco, I really like that idea.

So it's like you're starting out in a situation where

through this interaction between you and this context that you're entering into in certain ways based on your own expectations and the expectations of people in the environment and the structures that are there built up from this, there's a certain stability.

And then you both, you, this stability ends up shaping you both just as a consequence of like,

this is the thing for you to predict, but also in the active inferential sense and as you're saying empowerment, this is what's going to help me get better purchase.

I'm reducing my uncertainty with respect to realizing the value of existing.

And so this idea that your personality being kind of internalization of structure and maybe at a certain stage, almost like a kind of amortized inference in terms of, which I got from you,

Yeah, I really like that idea a lot.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Adam, Shannon?

You're muted, Shannon.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Going on this developmental thread and the paper that you brought up this morning, Daniel, Anna's new paper on the first priors when you're in Reduro as a baby.

I haven't read it yet.

But the idea that like when you're in a neonate in a body, you're literally relying on someone else's interoceptive states and biological states to regulate everything about your interoceptive and biological states.

And then you're born and you're still kind of relying on the caregiver's interoceptive states or their behavior when they're holding you or coming to comfort you.

Um, this I think could relate to what Marco was saying about how your personality develops.

So first, if you have, if a personality is something like a collection of effective states and behaviors, and an infant is completely sort of reliant on the environment and the social environment to regulate its own personalities.

And as you grow through toddlerhood,

You slowly are able to control this yourself.

Like you can maintain your own body budget a little bit more, um, learn how to, how to get your own blanket if you're cold or like self-soothe and then you grow older and maybe you're taught how to make music and learning that this is a new way that you can explore your personality or create it.

Um, and I don't study development also.

Sorry if this is wandering, maybe Sasha can pick up on it.

But I feel like this can kind of connect if instead of looking or not instead of, but in addition to looking at averages, but looking at like a time series of personality development over time.

And like you could do at any point in time or at any range of time, some sort of like what would be the active retreats model of your life in infancy and toddlerhood and

you know, rowdy teenage years and as adult, and you'll have, you'll find these like steady trajectories at the same time.


SPEAKER_05:
let me connect that to a few other points so adam raised this question of what is the level of the thing or how do we identify things from empirical data specifically so that we can use it in active inference type or free energy principle type models do we use renormalization group or principal component analysis or some type of adjacency matrix some type of markov blanket what are those things that we're actually going to be modeling

and that reminds me a lot of a theory called ant actor network theory by bruno latour and then also on the ant wavelength colin was mentioning how there's so much variation within individuals but also stable differences between and that reminded me a lot of my graduate school work with ant colonies

where day to day, the variation across all the ant colonies was extreme.

If it was raining, they would do one thing.

If it was very dry versus if it had rained the day before, those were massive determiners of colony behavior.

However, across days and even across years, there were stable markers of colony behavior.

and there were characteristic ways in which they responded to the environment.

So it is possible to have a type of measurement and understanding of a system, which my advisor established through long-term observation, where you can actually model this development through time, as well as within a population, which doesn't erase individual differences.

It actually is the framework by which individual differences arise.

And then Shannon just so beautiful with the music being introduced, like a thread of personality.

and then that can be used to explore these regularities.

Adam and then Steven.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi.


SPEAKER_05:
What was the paper that people are mentioning about like first priors?

I'll post it in this Jitsi and we'll put it in the YouTube chat, but let's continue without worrying about this paper.


SPEAKER_07:
Okay.


SPEAKER_09:
Go on.

Oh, sorry.

Shall I go?

I was just going to put in one thing.

I like when it mentions here relatively stable parameters of cybernetic mechanisms, those kind of dynamics.

I think that links also to this idea of how that might change during our life and thinking about our lifetime.

And one thing that I'm very interested in is when trauma comes into play.

PTSD and other types of situations.

And, you know, it can really shift the state of someone.

And polyvagal theory kind of talks to that, where you've kind of got this sort of social co-regulation that we have as humans, but we also have our kind of primal kind of fight or flight or our gut sort of fear responses and how those things change.

are in a way they another type of like pattern behavior which becomes incredibly stable too stable like you can shut down or you might get into rage but then over the period of

the day or life, the challenges, it may be unregulated about when they appear.

So someone might sort of be a certain way and then they flash into rage, you know, and then they come back into, and their personality is radically different.

And I think this is, so there might be interesting to bring in that as a kind of a,

what happens when that relatively stable state itself flips, you know, um, so that the, the, and it might say your, your, your mechanism might not be cognitive, but it might be in that kind of, um, polyvagal system.


SPEAKER_05:
Yes.

The body influencing phase transitions in personality or behavior, Adam, and then Colin and then Marco.

You're muted, Adam.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.

I think Colin should probably speak to what was just brought up in terms of what actually happens with people.

But in terms of a high level of abstraction, it seems like there's this sense in which you can think of personality as a kind of core screening and a kind of renormalization.

in terms of it existing as a phenomenon.

And epistemically, it's a kind of coarse graining afforded by this renormalization, this kind of throwing away of variability as you form these higher level attracting states that you can ignore them within the scope of a certain type of modeling that you're engaging in with respect to having certain objectives of trying to predict certain things.

whether you're a personality modeler trying to predict someone else or trying to predict yourself or whatever.

So within this, looking for this like optimal level of epistemic grip in terms of like the granularity of your description, you could describe these cybernetic control parameters as being part of the causal process of what's responsible.

And then if you take the system and you perturb it, there's going to be a range where like the order parameter changes and you can get these non-linear, maybe phase shifts where you're now in a different regime.

And it may look like a very different kind of person because the personality structure as a stable attractor network can then become destabilized.

And so that would be like a high level in college probably speak to like what actually happens with people.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Yeah, Colin, go for it.


SPEAKER_10:
So you get these phase shifts in behavior, but they're often due to persistent sensitivities in the underlying mechanisms.

Right.

So let's take also PTSD.

OK, what you have there essentially is some kind of traumatic event is an intervention that resets the sensitivity of the threat systems.

And so that corresponds quite well to the big five dimension that's labeled as neuroticism, which is an old fashioned word.

But in this context, basically just means sensitivity to all different kinds of negative emotion.

And so obviously that's heightened in PTSD.

And what that means fundamentally is that you've gone through some kind of traumatic event.

that led to your, it wasn't just learning about a specific event, right?

What it did was that it reset the sensitivity of your threat system as a whole.

So now you are perceiving threats and reacting with defensive negative emotion to much more minor situations than you would have previously.

And of course, even in terms of risk for PTSD, we know that people who are higher in threat sensitivity to begin with are more likely to develop PTSD.

So it's not like it comes out of nowhere typically.

But nonetheless, there's obviously this change.

And there was a recent really nice meta-analysis of personality change following therapy and different types of psychotherapy, whether it's pharmaceutical or talk therapy or cognitive behavioral therapy.

All of these lead to changes in personality and the trait that changes the most, as you might expect, is reductions in neuroticism.

Right, so what we're talking about here is the ability to shift these underlying parameters that are not constantly manifest in the same way.

So when we say that somebody is high in trait anxiety, for example, we don't mean that they're experiencing anxiety at every minute of every day at a high level, right?

We just mean that they're more likely to be anxious more intensely in more situations than somebody who is low in trait anxiety.

But nonetheless, then if we really wanna understand the dynamics of the system, we need to understand those phase shifts from like feelings of safety to feelings of anxiety at any given moment.

And I think that's what you're talking about.

But in order to understand how that works for a given agent, we also need to understand these persistent patterns of the sensitivities that lead them to have these shifts in different situations at different degrees than other agents.


SPEAKER_05:
Very cool, thank you.

Marco, then Blue.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, this is really interesting.

So trying to tie back to the earlier talk about the role of affects to this aspect of drama.

So I think it's mentioned before by the two authors that we could validly see these complex systems as composed of

different micro-personalities distributed over scale and levels.

And similarly for affect in the sense written about by Kasper Hespen and others.

So Adam Saffron, Adam also mentioned renormalization, right?

So I think that ties in also to a lot of different things like stigmatgy or equilibration.

And I think perhaps it's... I had a thought I wanted to share is maybe

maybe the clustering phenomenon of personalities might be a natural consequence of something like renormalization or equilibration, if there already is a certain heterogeneity, if there already is a certain kind of asymmetry in a certain factor, a certain basic mechanism of the cybernetic systems to shoot it throughout, then that naturally should cluster, because then they are more likely to cooperate.

If it remains

heterogeneous and disordered or not co-organized, then it's inefficient.

But then you have this thing with trauma, which I think would disrupt the process, right?

Because if you go back to the components you pointed out, interpretation, goals, and strategy,

then that's basically the key things about a trauma, right?

You're in a certain situation that just demands an extreme change in your interpretational beliefs or models, your goals for the particular situation, and the extreme pressure to have the right strategy to get out of it.

And I think maybe the side effect, right, the byproduct of that momentary extremeness

is that it basically expands its influence.

And so it becomes hypersensitive by nature.

And so the ongoing, the always ongoing process of equilibration, of everything co-regulating, becomes disrupted by that one participant, the traumatic complex, if that makes sense.

So instead of a lot of different personalities kind of equilibrating with each other, kind of polycentrically, it becomes a monocentric equilibration.

If that makes sense, it's a bit rambly.


SPEAKER_05:
Lots of very interesting points.

Thank you, Blue.

And then Adam.


SPEAKER_03:
So just to kind of take the trauma aspect maybe to the other side of the spectrum and just in thinking about our own perception of ourself, right?

So how we hold on to our own personality versus is it congruent with what others think of us?

So I'm thinking, how does this really relate to meditation?

In meditation, there's the idea of getting rid of the asmita.

That's the thing that builds the ego or the construct of I. As we eliminate this construct of I and also staying in the moment, we're not necessarily trying to build an accurate predictive model in a meditation state.

So when we have this, it's like this dissolution of free energy or what is happening in the meditative state that can also bring about a drastic personality shift, I think, as we get rid of the I and learn to be non-reactive as opposed to traumatic reaction that's non-linear acceleration.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Adam, and then Marco, then Colin, and then anyone else who wants to raise their hand.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi.

So I'll just try to address a couple of the threads.

I'll come to meditation at the end, I think.

But it seems like a lot of the principles of personality in terms of their generality

could be really interestingly modeled, actually using things like ant colonies, like in Daniel's work.

And you might even find, interestingly, like even similar mechanisms at play.

So like in a recent paper, starting to do active inferential modeling of ant colony behavior decisions and foraging, Daniel mentions like, you know, that there's like, was it the foragers have more dopamine?

So you could see things like,

the functional significance of dopamine actually as its way of parameterizing a cybernetic system as being potentially similar, although potentially switching across scales, where in the individual ants and maybe even in the personality of the colony as a whole.

And there would be actually this interesting interplay between the personalities of individual ants and the personalities of colonies.

And this interplay, which might not be an exactly a one for one might actually even be a kind of, um, uh, a complementarity where certain characteristics being present on, um, this broader level, this, this more encompassing Markov blanket, where the individuals are part of a super organism or just the organism, um, from the perspective of natural selection, because the colonies that were just selected, uh, as Daniel says, um, but so the person out of the colony.

let's say, would then interface and interact with the personality of the individuals of which it's composed, and potentially in a training way, but potentially not.

To loop around, you might even be able to, at the level of colony, talk about things like the affective tendencies.

What is the affect?

the valence, the emotions experienced by the colony as a whole in a given instance, what is its general mood, and then what are its patterns of mood across different situations.

Now we're kind of going into what we more call personality territory.

And you could even think of things like, to kind of bring in some of Marco's idea of the nature of trauma in this dynamic system sense, you could traumatize the colony.

And does it then, at some point,

You would expect some sort of like elasticity or what's the term, like hysteresis?

I don't know, not that, but it would be, you perturb it and then it would have some sort of adaptive potential to come back from the perturbation because that's what we're trying to do is keep existing in the way we are and see some adaptive potential.

But you push it too far and then you might not get back this adaptive attracting structure.

You might get stuck in a different regime.

Um, and you could think of the same things, uh, similar things as this could be a way of describing things that happen within the, within, uh, individuals.

Like, so there's, um,

You can think of that maybe on multiple levels of abstraction, but I'll stop for now.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks.

Yep, I just switched the slide to figure two.

So Colin and then Marco, go for it.

And maybe we can introduce the P struct idea or just how does Active Inference specifically help us address some of these questions?

But go ahead, Colin, and then Marco.


SPEAKER_10:
OK, well, what I'm my thoughts are about a couple of the last comments.

So they're sort of more related to the to the previous slide.

And then go ahead.

That's fine.

So in terms of both this discussion of what's going on in trauma and what's going on in meditation, I think one of the interesting things to think about, again, is the distinction between the personality traits and the characteristic adaptations.

Because in both, there's the capacity for both of them to be shifted.

Marco was talking about the way in which in a traumatic event, your basically pre-existing goals and interpretations and strategies are dramatically invalidated.

And that then means that the system doesn't know how to pursue its goals.

In fact, it may not even know what its goals should be.

And obviously, that's extremely disruptive and dysregulating.

And so one of the challenges in the immediate, of course, is to figure out what you should be doing, what strategies you should be using.

but then there's also this capacity for that traumatic event uh to shift the underlying sensitivities of the system to what is perceived as disruptive in future right to sensitize to to things that disrupt um and that is you know obviously an adaptive response to say like if you're in a dangerous environment you should become more sensitive to uh to danger and the traumatic event just basically taught you that the world was a much more dangerous place than you thought that's part of what is

tragic about it because you have this persistent sense that the world potentially is much more dangerous even than it is or that you should experience it as being.

But then you have the same kinds of dynamics going on in meditation where trying to reduce your reactivity, that's like trying to shift some of these basic parameters of the system so that you react less easily, you're disrupted less easily.

And then the kind of non-I idea, the recognition of the illusory nature of the I, what that's about is basically not being overly attached to your model of yourself.

Because the model is the model.

It's not yourself.

So if you are overly attached to your model, then you're overly attached to your conscious understanding of what your goals and your strategies are and what you're like.

and meditation is basically trying to get you to recognize those ideas that you have a they're just a they're just your model they're not actually the way that you are and b they're contingent on your situation and so you should be willing to let them go as your situation changes and as things evolve

And so it's essentially creating both a pattern of greater flexibility in the capacity to adapt, but then also the attempt to down-regulate the negative reaction to disruption, right?

Because if you have more confidence in your ability to adapt, then you should be less defensively reactive to disruptions because you can be confident that you'll simply adapt to whatever the new situation is.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks.


SPEAKER_10:
Marco?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thanks.

Yeah, just piggybacking on that, because that was really nice.

So my thoughts on meditation.

Very good and important question, I think.

So going back to the image of having all these different distributed micro-personalities or sub-personalities,

I think meditation can be seen as allowing them to manifest and arise, as it often is called, and manifest their expressions, which are always going on, to also reach, as it were, the global workspace or consciousness or the conscious attention.

And so what you're doing then effectively is broadening the collective of sub-agents or sub-personalities or sub-systems such that that equilibrated process improves because then you have a bigger scope, a bigger domain of possible inputs to an ongoing process of inference.

And importantly, this is then of course, without need for explicit modeling.

You don't need to explicitly label a certain rationally or verbally explicated belief, right?

It's an exercise in the deepest sense of it.

Importantly, it's effectively a reflexive niche construction because meditation is systematically to basically attenuate external inputs.

You sit in a very neutral position, you're in a calm environment, external input is minimized.

And so all the inputs, well, it augments the inputs that is endogenous, coming from within, which of course is then going to translate or transfer to normal waking states.

because it concerns all the possible endogenous influences on your ongoing cybernetics.

And so it's a reflexive shift, right?

And yeah, I don't know what I was going to say.

Yeah, so it's basically just a cybernetic game.

So from what I have seen, my limited experience with meditation and reading upon it, it's all systematic cybernetic games.

It puts you in a situation that forces you to train the process to underlie cybernetics concerning the purely reflexive, which is, of course, beautiful because there's almost no opportunity for that.

It's an extremely exclusive state of being

that exclusively force you to attend to these indulgent processes.

It's kind of the cybernetics of the cybernetics, if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_05:
Great points there.

It's why so much meditation begins with thankfulness.

And just to give actually one behavioral example, let's think about the example of a circus elephant, where when it's young, it has a heavy chain and it can't break away.

And then when it's older, a simple thin rope can keep it connected.

So at a first pass, one might say, well, why doesn't it just break away?

Why doesn't it engage in a policy of breaking away?

and the habits the e the priors over the policy the field of affordances may not even include that as an option so if certain types of actions are down regulated so to speak by 100x before any evidence comes in then it's going to be interpreted within a prior that down regulates or basically downweights the relevance or the likelihood of certain types of actions happening

But also, there's this element of the preferences where it may, through whatever mechanism, it's not an exact metaphor here, the system, kind of like a Stockholm Syndrome situation, the system can actually internalize a preference for certain states that may or may not be consciously available during regular states of consciousness that lead into

the implicit processing of everything within a framework that results in behavior that's not aligned with something else which could be external niche pressure or peer pressure or it could be disconcordant with one's own narrative of themselves and then meditation is interesting to think about as far as isolating these different types of parameters in the model and different kinds of meditation lots of different ways to do it adam


SPEAKER_06:
Hi.

Hard to follow up on all that.

Some of the way the threads came together for me was it seems like across varieties of meditation and why would you do such a thing?

And ultimately, to bring back Marco's point about empowerment, it's you want to

be more capable in some way, having a better grip on existence in a particular kind of way.

You want to have more degrees of freedom with respect to the way you're engaging with the world.

And there's a sense in which you can think of different types of meditation as either as allowing you to navigate through cybernetically free energy landscapes,

which can, and also adjust the nature of these landscapes such that they are navigable.

So you can think of something like, and to bring back in like something like trauma or something like the elephant getting stuck, you can think of this as like a getting stuck at a local optimum of a potentially jagged free energy landscape.

And so if you can, let's say reduce the,

some emotional regulation capacity, the ability to defuse from experience and keep the gain on positive feedback loop cycles of thought and emotion from getting as high as they might, you might be able to make the free energy landscape less jagged.

The differences from point to point, it's going to be, you're not going to have these wild swings.

And so this might give you greater latitude with respect to pursuing more complex policies.

And

Actually, I hope at some point we start to discuss some of Colin's work on well-being, because I think it docks, there's a lot to be said there.

But one thing on this one podcast, Colin was mentioning, like you can think of one of the benefits of mindfulness, which is like in pursuing any kind of complex goal, there's going to be a sort of trading off you're going to have to do against different things on route there.

And so if you can like temporarily let some of your characters say adaptations slide, let some of your policies like not be as important if they're not being, you think they ought to be realized, but they're not within some sort of like hierarchical policy selection, well then you can pursue, you can hit targets you wouldn't otherwise, you can meet your mountain car, you can get to the top of the mountain in the mountain car problem.

So,


SPEAKER_10:
yeah nice cool colin and then anyone else i just wanted to to point out that that's that's the essence of non-attachment right you're not attached to particular policies and that means that you don't get hung up on a sub goal when you should be shifting policies because what you are trying to pursue is some larger goal there's sort of you know there's the stereotype of uh meditation at least you know zen meditation for example buddhist meditation that

you're eliminating your goals right you have no desires but that's not that is a that's a caricature right because it's not that you have no goals it's just that you're not attached to particular low-level goals you might be uh you know you probably remain attached if you're a good buddhist for example to eliminating suffering for all beings and so it's not like you're not goal directed and you know you probably maintain

maintain life by eating and things like this.

It's just that you're not attached to the particular policies that you might be using to achieve these higher level goals because goals are just nested.

I mean, there's a way in which there's a goal, but then the policy is also just a goal.

It's just there are nested goals all the way down to the terminals, which are specific motor operations or specific cognitive operations.

and so non-attachment is basically becoming more flexible in which sub goals you are willing to consider and to use very nice blue so i wonder if it's like


SPEAKER_03:
It's more that it's not attachment to the policy, but that actually is the policy and it's not attachment to the specific generative or predictive model.

I wonder if that's like, because the policy has been the policy of non-attachment to the model or ultimate model flexibility.


SPEAKER_10:
You could call it a meta-policy.


SPEAKER_03:
Meta-policy, right.

Secondly, I wonder about the idea of staying in the present moment.

Is this some kind of free energy equilibrium?

Not necessarily minimization, but if we take the generative model and the predictive model, if we take the value to zero, is meditation, staying in the present moment, just this ultimate state of


SPEAKER_05:
of equilibrium in in free energy like infodynamics well interesting point about the hyper prior the bayesian hyper prior and also that's why a lot of meditation processes involve rhythmic or the cessation of other inputs because it allows the interoception potentially to proceed in a different way isolation tanks or other altered states of consciousness so let's do keeping comment short because we have a few minutes left adam and then marco


SPEAKER_06:
In terms of, there's this one paper actually that just came out recently about a model of meditation with respect to the temporal depth and counterfactual richness of your generative modeling that just came out.

I'll try to find that and send that.

But I think that would speak to this idea of staying in the present moment.

Also this idea of staying in the present moment also makes me think of this

Mark was like kind of intimating that you can think of meditation as a kind of a game task or almost like a kind of like, uh, maybe, maybe play even, uh, but it's this building capacity, um, that is building capacity.

Okay, we'll come back, Marco.

For a building of capacity through relaxing some of your priors and so letting you to be informed by policies with respect to mental acts that you might not normally deploy and you might not normally notice what is entailed when you deploy certain types of mental acts.

So things might come to mind

that wouldn't normally, that would place you now into a different state of affective inference.

And so I think if we wanted to do modeling of this, of something like meditation, we would want to use this sort of imaginative policy selection described by something like sophisticated affective inference.

And that would begin to get us there.

The exact way, and one more thought before we move on is,

One more thing I was actually wondering with respect to meditation, I've talked about this some with Colin, is above the traits and the personality hierarchy, you have these meta traits of stability and plasticity.

And stability is this shared variance over, and Colin actually named these, it's the shared variance over neuroticism, inverse neuroticism, agreeableness and conscientiousness and plasticity.

is the shared variance over extroversion and openness intellect.

And interestingly, the stability seems to be basically the inverse of the general psychopathology factor P by and large.

But I think thinking of mindfulness and meditation with respect to building capacities for both stability and plasticity, which helping to basically place this.

So you can think of stability as

your ability to follow through on and protect your policies or characteristic adaptations.

And then plasticity would be your tendency to form new characteristic adaptations.

So like whether, so let's say you do encounter trauma, plasticity might be what makes the difference.

So stability would be how much it might make sense to the degree to which you're actually traumatized.

Like you're very stable, something might bounce right off you, you're not traumatized.

But

let's say you don't have a lot of plasticity and that instability is compromised plasticity is the thing that would let you update and uh create new strategies uh for being in the world and so they're kind of the state of dynamic tension and that they can like pull at each other um but they're both ultimately synergistic and they're like you're not going to be particularly plastic unless you have this foundation of stability and you're not going to be able to maintain your stability long unless you're metastable

And so part of with meditation and mindfulness, I'm wondering if one way of thinking of it is it's part of what's actually really letting you kind of like ride this optimum of balance, stability, and plasticity.

And that could be one way of thinking about part of what people get from it.

Cool.

Marco, then Colin.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's amazing.

That's a perfect setup.

Yeah, I also fully agree with this theme of complementarity, right?

So stability and plasticity sounds, really resonates with openness and focus, which is a big polarity in meditation practices, right?

So if open meditation, just feel everything, let it all come in, et cetera.

Focus meditation, focus on one point, one mantra,

And that has a big connection to the more well-known complementarity or polarity of exploration, exploitation, right?

But it's not about the polarities per se.

It's always about the balancing them off.

And for example, Sussex had also a nice paper on that.

It's not about perfect theoretical representations.

You can have some errors.

It's about how you balance everything off.

And so again, we go back to the idea, notion that meditation can be games, where you effectively practice balancing that off.

Because that balance is not something you can explicitly verbalize.

It's intrinsically pre-verbal.

Because you can verbalize maybe the particular strategies or beliefs for stability or for persistency.

But to balance them off is more effective.

It's more...

flexible or fluid.

And so another interesting maybe duality that you can think of is also equilibriums and games or contexts, right?

So in game theory, you have an equilibrium for a particular game or setting.

And so what you said earlier about equilibrium and staying in the moment regarding meditation, I think it's a very nice idea what Adam already said, is that by being in a particular game, which is that meditative practice,

you will naturally, by free energy minimization, go to a particular kind of equilibrium.

But that necessitates change, some updates.

And those updates might actually mean that your equilibrium-seeking behavior or your attractors will be different in the other context.

So the underlying assumption is that these particular changes in equilibriums or priors or attractors are transferable.

So, yeah, does that make sense as for your question on meditation in the present?


SPEAKER_10:
yeah cool thoughts colin i was just going to say a little bit more about stability and plasticity i think that those can be seen as the two fundamental needs of any cybernetic or active inference system that exists in a complex or changing or unpredictable environment

And so stability is in some sense just the most fundamental requirement because the system must be able to pursue its goals effectively in order to be a cybernetic system.

It's an organism.

That's what it must have in order to persist.

And even an artificial system in order to persist as the system that it is, it must be moving effectively toward its goals.

But then

If you have any degree of unpredictability in the environment, you can't just be satisfied with the same set of policies that you have at any given time.

You're going to have to be able to update your policies, generate new policies.

And so that immediately in order to remain stable over time in a changing environment, you also have to be somewhat adaptive or plastic.

And so you have these inherent necessities for the capacity to maintain a stable order of goal directed functioning and then the capacity to generate new

components of the model, right?

New policies or even new goals or new interpretations of the situation that you're in.

And then those, so those are complimentary, but they can also, they are also in dynamic tension as Adam mentioned, because if you're massively exploratory, it can be difficult to remain stable because you have so much new information coming in.

Similarly, if you are, well, I mean, we've essentially already covered what the danger of being too inflexible and too unexploratory because you may work fine now, but as the environment changes, as things change over time, then you become unadapted to your situation.

So stability and plasticity aren't opposite to each other, right?

The opposite of stability is instability.

The opposite of plasticity is rigidity.

You can be stable and plastic or stable and rigid.

You can be unstable and plastic and unstable and rigid.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

Adam, go ahead.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi.

It seems like at some point it could be good to discuss connections of narrative perspectives on personality because this idea of narrative as active inference and the work trying to be done there, I think there could be a rich interchange because in some ways you can think of

you know, selves as centers of narrative gravity.

And you can think of personality as styles and modes of narration and themes and motifs as you are this semi-reliable narrator telling your story and enacting it and making it so to degrees.

And this being a source of, to the degree you have stability and plasticity, this would be one source of it.

The ability of narratives to provide cross-situational, intertemporal,

common context and but also because of their richness to create this um rich this kind of their combinatorics and rich representative capacity also being a source of plasticity and so um narrative being a source of balance dynamic balancing this dynamic tension although the narrative itself can also not be a source of balance but imbalance if the style of narrowization becomes problematic so that kind of mindfulness

enters in there again, where it might suck your usual styles of narrative, narrator ization, you might let that go a bit you go, this is this is the way in which you go naive based on your expectations.


SPEAKER_05:
Yep, the stories provide the poles and the archetypes.

And then you can say, okay, it's like Goldilocks, but for the Internet of Things or something like that.

And that gives you a vocabulary to communicate and design.


SPEAKER_06:
You might need a very different story in a very different context.

and kind of bring it back to trauma, that might be all the difference between whether you get stuck or you experience post-traumatic growth.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

Cool.

Interesting.

And just one closing slide that I want to put up while people prepare their thoughts.

This is a question just from an audience member.

They wrote, I have a question about what happens when blankets intersect, blankets of blankets.

And so let's think about this in this kind of blankets of physiologically relevant states, informationally relevant.

Think about what we're talking about here and at which nodes that would happen.

And then there's a link to a talk by Carl Fristen and a question about how nodes intersect.

And just while people are thinking about this or their last thoughts on the paper, one note is about the scientist and the personality scientist as an informational forger, as an active inference agent themselves.

And so our quest to reduce uncertainty about personality, it shouldn't be about the optimal descriptor.

It should lead to a question of ourselves, which is what is the optimal perturbation that we can design that will reduce our uncertainty the most about this individual's personality?

And so that takes into account population level dynamics as a prior, but personalized and kind of dynamic testing.

So imagine having a baseline prior across knowledge architectures that people had, and then having a dynamically updating online course that was optimally informative from both sides of the interface.

It was optimally informative for what kind of learner the person was, and they were reducing their uncertainty optimally about the topic at hand.

And so that was like a co-evolutionary process

amidst a prior that was population level but personalized in the individual trajectory so it's a really interesting framework and colin adam thanks a lot for coming on the stream it was like really helpful and we're excited that you'll come back for next week so in these last couple minutes anyone can raise your hand give a last thought what would be something that we would want to say to this slide about how

nodes intersecting, stories intersecting, individuals intersecting, how does that come into play?

And or what should we be thinking about for 13.2 that would be good to cover?

Shannon, and then anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_01:
I guess I have a thought about the question on this slide.

So is one node that's a sense state and one blanket, the internal state,

another blanket like that's totally the case because you basically choose the perspective and whichever you know blanket sort of internal state you want to describe or whichever thing that you're calling the agent separate from its environment then that's the internal state that you're going to describe and if you're looking at like if this blue node is a neuron and you want to actually know about this pink node this other neuron's internal state then that's going to be your

internal state and these other guys are going to be the sense state, the blanket around it.

And that's going to be the statistical boundary that you're using to explain the behavior of that neuron.

And then you can aggregate and this collection of neurons will all be an internal state for the next collection of neurons.

So the answer is in the question.

That's exactly right.


SPEAKER_05:
Perfect answer.

Showing that the answer is in the question is the answer.

Adam?


SPEAKER_06:
In terms of, loop around to a previous thought in terms of nested blankets and where these different blankets might have different characteristics in their interaction.

For personality, there's some interesting work, Colin might disagree, on tight and loose cultures, where you can think of like the personality of the culture within.

And this tightness and looseness seems to correspond to this stability, plasticity, dynamic tension, this fundamental cybernet parameters showing up on the group level.

And even theory can get this kind of complementarity there where a tight culture might create more tight individuals with respect to the degree to which they let their policy, whether they have a meta policy of letting their policy slide more in different contexts, but, or instead of it being this sort of entrainment relation,

It could be a complementary relation where the stability on the level of the group and this broader attractor affords the fine-grained subsystems to actually have more latitude and vice versa.

And I imagine you might probably see similar things play out like with ant colonies.


SPEAKER_05:
Interesting point about multilevel systems and how they're associated with relative constraints.

In the last two, three minutes,

Let's think of a last, you know, if anyone who wants to raise their hand, give a word or a sentence or a few.

What is something that you took away or was exciting today?

And what was something that we could continue talking about in 13.2 and pick up where we left off?

Marco, and then just anyone else who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I just wanted to thank everyone.

This was really amazing.

It's my first, this kind of stream seminar in ages.

So thank you, it's innovating.

And I think in general, what's been taken away, I think, is excitement.

Because it's kind of amazing how many different domains and topics and questions have been successfully synthesized in this big discussion.

And I think that's a testament

to the power of these kinds of frameworks of Bayesian or active inference, free energy, cybernetics, when it comes to understanding us people, us persons, personalities, as individuals, as collectives.

So thank you again for exciting me.


SPEAKER_05:
thank you well said and the group performance is uh only realized it's only enacted even digitally when the people show up and it's only relevant when there's the regime of attention and so there's so much you know fun and it's great to have you um multiple of you on your first time here that's always appreciated so any other thoughts in the last

minute otherwise in the calendar invite is a feedback form so if you're just wanting to think a little bit more if you're live participant you want to think a little more about what we could cover next week just put it in that feedback form and then anyone who's watching it just leave a comment for something that we could address even if it's after 13.2 maybe we can swoop back and return to some previous comments but this was a super fun discussion and a big thanks to all the participants so really good times everyone

And thanks a lot.

So see you next week.

## PyyHd4P8dbs

SPEAKER_07:
all right hello everyone welcome to the active inference live stream it is active inference live stream 13.2 on january 12 2021 today is going to be a really awesome discussion so thanks everyone who has come out to participate welcome to the active inference lab

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to active inference.

You can find us at our website, Twitter, Gmail, YouTube, or our Keybase public team and public username.

And this is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and as far as video etiquette for livestream goes, mute if there's noise in the background, raise your hand so we can hear from everybody who wants to speak, and we'll use respectful speech behavior.

All the ACT-IMP streams in 2021, at least the regularly scheduled ones, are on Tuesdays from 7 to 9 Pacific Time, so check out this rb.gy link to see the schedule.

Today we are in 13.2 on January 12th with Adam Safran and Colin DeYoung talking about this cool paper about cybernetics and personality.

And next week and beyond, we're going to be heading into different sets of papers.

So check out this spreadsheet and see if you're interested in participating.


SPEAKER_08:
Douglas, I'm retired from information technology.


SPEAKER_07:
all right i just had to mute douglas so yeah please don't play a stream while you're on a live stream this is a uh cognitio 2021 and this is a conference in 2021 that is being organized by several of our colleagues uh by mao and by ns uh who has uh appeared on the discussion before welcome blue

And so this looks like a really cool conference that they are all organizing.

So check out this conference if you're curious, and hopefully, we'll be able to have updates on this conference later on.

So in the intro in warm-up session, we introduce ourselves.

We can just give a short introduction or warm-up, and then pass it to somebody who hasn't spoken yet.

So hi, everyone.

I'm Daniel.

I'm in California, and I'll pass it first to Blue.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi, everyone.

I am Blue Knight.

I'm an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico.

Oh, and I'll pass to Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

I'm doing a practice-based PhD at the Sullivan School Institute of Applied Psychology, and I will pass it over to Sasha.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, I'm Sasha.

I'm based out of Davis, California, and I'm a neuroscience graduate student.

Um, and I will pass it to, uh, Colin.


SPEAKER_10:
Hi there.

I'm Colin DeYoung.

Uh, I'm a professor in the psychology department at the University of Minnesota.

And, uh, I will pass it on to Adam.


SPEAKER_05:
Uh, hi, I'm Adam Saffron.

I'm a postdoctoral researcher out of Bloomington, Indiana.

Good to be with you.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

Go to Alex.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi, everyone.

I'm Alex.

I'm in Moscow, Russia, and I'm a researcher in Systems Management School, and I pass it to Scott.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

Hello, everyone.

My name is Scott David.

I'm at the University of Washington Applied Physics Lab, where I'm the director of the Information Risk Research Initiative, and I'll pass it to Marco.


SPEAKER_09:
Hi, thank you.

My name is Marco, Marco Lin.

I'm from Holland.

I graduated in Cognitive Neuroscience and I'm just very interested in that entrance.

I'm not affiliated at the moment, but happy to be here.

Is there anyone left?


SPEAKER_07:
I had to kick out somebody who's doing feedback, so please have it figured out.

And yes, cool.

All right, maybe not.

All right, hello.

Dave, are you there?

Okay.

He just got disconnected.

Dave?


SPEAKER_08:
I am here.


SPEAKER_07:
Hello.


SPEAKER_08:
Help.

Okay, well, just proceed.

I'll figure it out.


SPEAKER_07:
Fun.

Great times.

Thanks for being on.

So for the warm-up questions, people can just raise their hand if they want to say something that's related or unrelated.

The same questions from last week, we'll put up and take a little bit of a different go at them.

So what is something you are excited about today?

And what is something that you liked or remembered about the paper?

anyone can go for it.

I'd be curious to either of the authors just looking back on it.

It's not so long ago, but we are in a new year.

So with the fresh lens of the numerology of the year and just maybe these discussions, how are you looking back at what you had done and seeing it in a new or a different way?

or any other participants who want to add something that they thought of.


SPEAKER_10:
Go ahead.

I might as well go ahead then.

I was just going to say that I don't know that...

For me, maybe even more so than for Adam, this particular chapter was sort of right at the boundary of the things that I've been thinking about.

And working with Adam has really pushed me into making contact with this whole topic of active inference and the kind of Fristonian world.

And then it's also made me think more about

modeling, because I've generally been fairly skeptical about the value of trying to model whole agents that are analogous to actual human beings for learning things about psychology, just because because the brain and people are so complex.

You know, if you if you have a model, it has to have a sufficient degree of verisimilitude

in resembling the thing that you're modeling before you're likely to actually learn new things just from studying the model rather than learning about the limitations of the model in one way or another and your skill at modeling.

But I guess one of the things that writing this chapter with Adam made me think about was Mars' different levels of analysis and the way that if you get a good enough resemblance at the level of function or computation, you might be able to learn things even if

you don't have verisimilitude at the level of implementation or algorithm.

We don't necessarily have to say that the brain is doing the exact mathematical computations that FEP demands in the same way that we would do them to model it.

But as long as we're capturing something that truly resembles the functional computation that a cybernetic system like a human being needs to carry out,

we might actually be able to learn new things about the way that people work.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

Stephen, and then anyone else who wants to raise their hand, but just maybe we could hear from everybody in the warm up.

So Stephen, and then Adam, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm really excited by the fact that this taps into a very widely used tool in psychology, and then links this back to these new potentials of active inference, which we've talked a lot about maybe in more theoretical philosophical ways, but this really is showing how the tools can start to

move into each other so i'm curious today to see more ways in which you know there's questions about um you know the potential for that going forward you know what what possibilities in the field of even organizational psychology which uses these traits as well this these these traits are kind of used beyond kind of um

work with um sort of therapeutic environment so um and you know even with the nias briggs and other types of things how can a more dynamical kind of embodied you know what's the future basically for applied psychology cool adam then scott um so this


SPEAKER_05:
Actually, working with Colin on this, it really stretched me also.

It was at the limits of what I was used to thinking about.

And I think I never really seriously engaged with personality science before this.

I was always interested.

But then I think I was also skeptical that they had any chance of carving nature at its joints.

And I was just like, eh, maybe.

as we started exploring the correspondences between like the cybernetic view of personality and the other cybernetic perspective of active inference, I started to become more compelled.

And then I'd say like things are always kind of moving around for me in terms of like perspectives.

But I think recently some of the things I've been thinking about is like how far can we

stretch or apply these ideas of personality over what scales and what ranges of systems.

Can we think of the personalities of societies, the personalities of any system?

And so that's, I think, most recently been on my mind.

But I'm excited to be here because I love these live streams and last week was awesome.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

Agreed.

Scott, and then Sasha, then anyone else.


SPEAKER_02:
So a couple of things.

The active inference is totally new to me and has really been revelatory, as other people have said.

A couple of things.

I used to work in identity a lot, still do.

Identity kind of system federated identity kind of technical stuff, not on the technical side.

What I realized is the attributes are carried in these Markov blankets, right?

So the access to attributes is through this

see statistical views of the surface of other systems.

And so that's been really useful to me.

And then the other part I realized is I realized that a lot of folks, Friston and others are coming at this from the biology perspective of seeing, gee, how do these things emerge by themselves?

What I realized is as a lawyer, all I've ever done is construct synthetic Markov blankets.

Because contracts are revealing a surface of a system.

In fact, the system doesn't exist until the contract exists.

Forget corporations.

If I want to put a supply chain in place, I write a contract and then the organism of the supply chain exists.

As a result.

And so it's funny because in that idea of if it's too rarefied for viewing human mind, I get it.

And it's interesting because in the de-risking context where a lot of folks are getting together, they try to make it simpler.

You know, worry about bankruptcy, worry about notice, worry about these specific things.

Boom, boom, boom.

That's all they care about.

So it's kind of like a synthetic organism constructed by the contract.

The Markov blanket defines the organism.

It's like the opposite of the blind men and the elephant where they're trying to find the elephant.

Here, there is no elephant until there are their parameters.

So the attributes define the system and it's a very bounded system, very few attributes to it, but it simplifies it.

And that's what a lot of regulatory market issues are about.

So that's been huge for me, really realizing that we can synthetically construct these systems

and base them on shared story shared narrative shared meaning contracts is a formal way of doing that but folkways is an informal way of doing that and i think that's absolutely a very rich avenue for for my work and i'm looking forward to working with others on it thanks cool thank you sasha and then anyone else on the warm-up yeah sasha then adam


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

Yeah.

Just really kind of following up on what Adam mentioned, thinking about other applications for the Big Five theory and what other groups and organisms they might apply to.

And I think very relevantly for this group and

of the kind of projects that we're working on is personalities of a team and thinking about different behaviors.

I'm sure this isn't a novel concept, but I would love to hear more about it from the authors of other possible applications of these metrics for teams of varying sizes.

And the other thing I've been thinking about since last week is this

if this paper aims to integrate these two concepts of active inference and the big five theory, are there parts that are incongruent?

Is there something that doesn't, that can't work together from both of these systems?

And is there something that active inference can glean or kind of take away from personality research in a way that hasn't really been tried before?


SPEAKER_07:
All questions.

Thanks, Adam, then blue.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, somewhat flipping what I said before, and related to what Sasha and Scott just said.

So like in also not just applying personality to other systems, or you might not normally think of them in terms of personality.

I'm also interested in like reversing that flow.

So it's like, how might we think of the personality of teams, but

the things we know about teams, how might that influence how we think about persons and their personalities?

Or contracts, like what are analogies or models that could be derived by thinking of what you described as this like inactive contract, like creating the Markov like you have the contract in the doing.

To what extent can we,

how this is part of person formation and person evolution, personality evolution.

I don't know if that makes sense, but that's another place I've been thinking is like this bi-directional flow of like taking things from persons, putting them in terms of things you might not normally think of as persons, taking things we might not normally think of as persons, and then putting it back to persons and their personalities.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah, it's kind of like finding the human in the non-human, Adam.

Really interesting point.

So personifying and enlivening things that are perceived as inanimate and then finding the mechanism inside of living systems too.

So blue, then call it.


SPEAKER_04:
So going back to what Adam was saying, not just now, but earlier, and also just something that I liked about the paper.

So for me, psychology has kind of always been like this soft science.

Like you can't really do science on psychology, but really like what that means is that it's a wicked problem, right?

It just falls into the complexity realm.

Like people are super, super intricate, complicated.

It's a convoluted like thing.

So this paper for me really was awesome in the way that it kind of concretized

or hardened up for me, like a quantitative way to really look at personality.


SPEAKER_07:
Interesting.

Colin, then anyone else?

And I'll put up the third question as well.


SPEAKER_10:
Well, first, I'm really glad to hear that this might have convinced somebody that psychology wasn't just soft science.

It's definitely hard science in the sense that it's difficult.

And that's largely about issues.

Well, it's two things.

I think it's issues with measurement, the kinds of measurements that we want to do and can do.

They don't necessarily line up very well in terms of precision.

And so everyone has physics envy because you've got precision down to 10 decimal places on measurements.

We're lucky if we have precision down to one decimal place, or if it's even clearer that our measurements are anything other than essentially heuristic.

If you have a scale and you're measuring a personality trait, essentially what you've got is just a measure of people's

degree of a particular kind of behavior or experience relative to other people.

So the measurement is relative and it's not clear that the one point on the scale actually corresponds to some true interval rather than just a kind of heuristic approximation.

So yeah, there are a lot of really difficult challenges in psychology.

um but nonetheless i mean in order to do science you just have to have some kind of standardized measurement and then be able to uh to replicate right to see if other people can get it i used to think that you had to have uh you know hypothesis testing too but then i realized you can really just do science if you do exploratory work and then replicate it because once you've found something that then de facto becomes the hypothesis for the replication attempt

So all you're really looking for are reliable patterns in reality fundamentally.

And I think we can do that to some extent in psychology.

I wanted to say something also about Sasha's question about whether there are incompatibilities between FEP and active inference and general approaches to personality and my theoretical approach specifically.

And I think one of the things that's really nice about active inference is that it's

it's very low level in some sense.

It's this formalism that is extremely widely applicable.

And the way that I see it is that it's essentially a formalism that captures the essence of all cybernetic systems.

And so, I haven't found anything that makes me say, oh, this isn't gonna work.

It's like,

there's a lot of detail about what people are that isn't captured in active inference, but only because it's so low level.

But there's nothing about active inference that isn't crucial to what people are, right?

Because the process of pursuing goals via feedback, that is just necessarily the core of what an agent is.

And so I guess my concern isn't that there are incompatibilities.

It is how to draw out the AI framework in such a way that it makes contact with a lot of the specifics that we know about humans function rather than the generalities about how all cybernetic systems function.


SPEAKER_07:
Really interesting answer.

We'll go to Dave and then Markup.


SPEAKER_08:
Hi, my professor of cybernetics, Gordon Pask, in the 1950s and 60s, developed some very fine-grained measures of learning strategies, which is how individuals approach a specific concrete task as they're learning it, and learning styles, which is a more systematic way that folks approach

develop a fixed repertoire of approaches to a task.

The extremes on that scale are serial learning and holistic learning.

I believe the areas of his data where he uses entropy as an important measure for certainty and for tolerance for ambiguity should tie in with

not the active insurance, the other major area that we're talking about, free energy.

And I suspect that the learning styles should correlate with personality, and that is an area that I believe he, Pask, did work on.

So that's something I need to dig into the literature on and compare it.

Cool.

Marco?


SPEAKER_09:
All right, thanks.

Also, thank you, Scott.

That was very well put.

So in general, I just really like a lot of things that have been said.

About active inference as a framework, I also echo the notion that the beauty side is so generally applicable that you can kind of elaborate it, and that becomes a kind of game of,

If you take a bit further with a few assumptions, when does it touch or overlap or align with other existing years or empirical data?

But what has been mentioned and something I find personally an intriguing possibility is not necessarily active inference, but if something like active inference would be true,

and it would indeed be the most approximate description of our neural dynamics, then naturally follow that it also can become quite intuitive.

So just like Colin said that you can elaborate until it kind of touches something else in terms of theory, you could also maybe consider the idea that you can elaborate your understanding of active interference

relative to personality or other psychological notions, until you start to touch your kind of folk psychological notions of people, of yourself, of others, of society.

And I think that's what I think someone in the beginning said, I think it was Stephen, about the future of applied psychology.

And I think this is really, really crucial, not just from a scientific perspective, but also a social and a humanistic perspective, because

I mean, I think most people agree that folk psychology isn't enough.

And I think also most people agree that most scientific psychology, whether it's a neuro or clinical side, isn't very easily implementable in terms of actually understanding yourself in the first person.

So I think that's definitely the most exciting aspect.

I think this particular work is a very nice milestone in regards to that.

I mean, I don't think anyone really understands themselves that much better with some ratings on the big five.

But knowing the mechanisms, I think, is a very, very beautiful lens to understand oneself.

So cheers.


SPEAKER_07:
Thank you for sharing, Stephen.

And then anyone else?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so following on from what Marco was saying there is the fact that this paper also takes in the affordances and active influence, like you say, does this dynamics.

It gives this generative potential to the big five, which I know is kind of

sort of seen to be there but you know the the challenge is that they can end up being whether you like it or not prescriptive and kind of diagnostic to some extent and having a way to relate them opens up that phenomenological sense because there's a i think what i'm really interested in is if people structure their metaphorical models of how they cognize

in the world, like how they, whether they relate to time as time coming towards them or they're going towards time or whether they're trying to build a more firm career or they're trying to get on in the world and travel and go somewhere.

So those kind of phenomenological ways of structuring thought

they seem to be more ways that you could then connect them as opposed to it being like completely disconnected or just too big a gap to bridge.

So this mixture of the affordances, the dynamics, the blanket and the attention and the way that phenomenological sort of structuring could happen even at the individual level starts to become more plausible, which is kind of cool.


SPEAKER_07:
Awesome, yeah, a lot of cool ideas coming up.

One theme to return to is that by looking at the patterns and thinking about the frameworks that span different systems of different levels of analysis, we can think about like the traits of organizations, teams,

individuals organs cells so that's the multi-scale kind of complex systems approach because we set out to look for patterns across systems and then that led to all these interesting questions like would there be a big five for teams or how are the generative models of individual personality related to the generative models or the generative processes underlying group

personalities, and so pretty interesting things that we're coming to.

Any other points in this intro before we just return to some of the later pages?

Colin, go ahead, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_10:
I'll just make one point in relation to this issue of team dynamics and personalities at other scales.

That's something that

there are different ways to approach it, right?

So people have certainly, psychologists have certainly studied what happens to teams that have different characteristics of the individual members.

And so you can think of how do the personalities of individual members of a team influence the success of the team.

For example, having people high in openness on the team tends to make it more effective in various ways.

That's especially true for leaderless teams.

It's not necessarily true if there's a clearly established leadership structure in the team, but if you have leaderless teams, then having people who are more cognitively flexible enables them to organize themselves better.

But I think that what we're thinking about here is something a little bit different.

Like, is there a personality of a team as a whole that might be more than the sum of its parts?

And they're probably going to be, well, you'd need to do a sort of parallel kind of research in terms of trying to come up with a comprehensive set of descriptors of the properties of teams and then seeing if they varied systematically in the same way that people did with individuals and leading to the big five.

But I guess one of my intuitions is that the highest level of the personality hierarchy, stability and plasticity, which are also the most replicable across different languages when people have done the kind of big five research.

So there's this very clear way in which what I think of as the two fundamental properties of all cybernetic systems, at least ones that have to be able to function in an unpredictable and complex environment.

That is probably applicable at virtually any scale, even for something that might not be.

Well, I think it's an interesting question whether something like a team or a society is actually a cybernetic system itself or whether it is an emergent dynamic out of a set of cybernetic systems interacting with each other.

But regardless, I think you can certainly describe the stability and plasticity of teams or even societies, right?

You can describe them in terms of how much they focus on and value the lack of disruption of their functioning versus how much they value expansion and exploration and sort of dynamic growth.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

That reminds me so much of the ant research.

And do colonies have phenotypes or is it just the phenotypes of nest mates?

Does selection shape colony traits or is it just shaping the nest mates and they're duking it out?

So all these multilevel systems, we kind of can see these similarities.

So Adam and then Scott and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_05:
So in relation to what Colin just said, correct me if I'm wrong, but I believe in terms of like cross-cultural

like the robustness, is it the stability and plasticity, like that level of granularity actually is what is the most broadly applicable in terms of like showing the least variation, like if you look at it in those two?


SPEAKER_10:
Yes.

So in terms of the lexical research, like starting from a specific language and extracting descriptors and then doing the same kind of, you know, ratings and factor analytic work, the only truly universal solution that's been found is a two factor solution.

And those factors very closely resemble stability and plasticity.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

So, yeah, so that, that would support the idea that like, if we're trying to do like a multi-scale personality story or a quasi anthropomorphizing of, of,

of quasi-agents, or maybe we should just call them agents, depending on our view, that yes, we will be most likely to find stability in plasticity.

But because you basically grounded the big five as part of cybernetic functioning, and if any, from an active inference perspective, if any sustaining system is doing some kind of either explicit or implicit goal pursuit,

we actually might find even the big five itself being surprisingly applicable.

Although, I guess you're saying it's an empirical question.

And so I guess the idea is we actually do the research program of this sort of derivation of factors, and then we should expect to find things that might be shockingly like the big five in places where you might not expect them.

Nice.


SPEAKER_10:
Sorry, I didn't raise my hand, but I just wanted to jump in and say I think the best analogy for that that's going on in science right now is over the last, let's say, 20 years, people have really started to take seriously the idea of personality and other species.

Now, I mean, whether personality is the right word there or you want some other one, it doesn't really matter, right?

You have individual differences in psychological functioning of other species.

And so people have been doing this, attempting to come up with extensive sets of descriptors of other species and ratings of them or coding based on video or observation or whatever, and then looking to see whether there are these similar patterns.

And most of the big five are identifiable or fairly close analogs in other species.

And the one that is the least commonly found is actually maybe

proof of concept in a way, because conscientiousness is the dimension that least appears in other species, something like conscientiousness.

And in fact, the only two species where something close to that has appeared as its own separate dimension is in bonobos and chimpanzees, right?

you think like what really makes humans special while it's our ability to plan for the distant future and to prioritize goals that aren't uh immediate or near immediate and to really have these elaborate goal hierarchies and so it might not be surprising that it's only our nearest evolutionary neighbors that have uh these kind of identifiable patterns that are uh that are related to those abilities and that are separate from things just like you know how emotionally reactive you are


SPEAKER_02:
very interesting scott and then i think adam and then marco so that this is great this um one of the things i thought was interesting is like you know what gets measured gets done and what gets measured gets seen and so it's kind of interesting because we're coming it's like a bio theory of everything kind of idea here and we're like wow this is really explanatory my recollection is that quantum mechanics

was just a calculation convention originally, but it kind of works, and we kind of use it, and even though we don't understand all of it, it's kind of helpful that way.

So it's not so much is it true, but is it useful?

And this is broadly useful.

And so it's interesting in living systems or cybernetic systems,

we start to get at these questions we ask.

And when we ask questions from the... I don't know.

I'd like someone to tell me what the big five is after I make this comment.

But if they're the big five of consciousness, then the...

I always think of them as the accounting firms, but that's just because I was a lawyer for so many years.

But it's like we're using the Turing test in a way.

It's too much hubris about our form of intelligence, right?

And so if we point our measurement instrument at a certain thing, that's what we're going to see.

If we point our measurement instrument at human cognition, human consciousness, our sense of human consciousness, that's what we're going to see.

and so this is a great discussion there's no it's not a to me it's not a truth-finding thing but a a usefulness of the paradigm kind of issue and if someone could tell me what the big five are just list them that would be good because i'm not familiar with the term as in parlance sure it's the big five dimensions that are empirically observed when you ask people personality trait surveys and their openness conscientiousness extroversion agreeableness neuroticism ocean


SPEAKER_07:
And then one metaphor on the big five, and it's kind of like the big five continents.

That's what we have in the world as we have it.

And so that is specifics that's related to history and that changes.

But the principle is water and land.

And so maybe in a different system, a different sphere with a different type of water level, you still would have water and land, but the actual number of big dimensions might be empirically seen to be different.

So that's kind of an interesting thing.

I think Adam, then Marco, then Colin.


SPEAKER_05:
I don't know if this would be useful, but perhaps in a bit actually might be good to have Colin talk about like the specific mappings of the big five onto cybernetic function that he describes in his original paper.

That could be useful for people, but it's,

Interesting about conscientiously being less likely to generalize potentially across species or systems, because it seems like that makes some sense to me in terms of preserving goal hierarchy integrity as you're confronted with all these different circumstances, but you want to maintain this overall broadly applicable goal hierarchy that's benefiting you overall.

In order for that to be the case, you have to have

a system capable of generative modeling with, or modeling with a certain degree of temporal depth and the policies is pursuing and counterfactual richness such that it could actually get itself into trouble and get confused and go down like wrong paths.

And so you wouldn't expect this for all systems.

You would expect this, you need a certain degree of sophistication, even maybe sophisticated effective inference,

in order for you to really actually need something like conscientiousness.

So that one actually might not generalize as much.

Related to what Scott just said, there seems to be this interesting combination.

It's like realist versus instrumentalist, or it's like you can think of like this personality is almost like, like the big five is like an effective field theory over persons.

Um, where it's, um, a good approximate description, um, a useful core screening, but now the question I would have those, but is it like just completely.

So there's a sense in which it's, it's modeler relative it's based on our interests, but there's like another sense in which it's like, well, um, like what worked in evolution and like, and it's like, you don't have to take the perspective of evolution.

but it's a, we can all kind of converge on it.

It's like quasi objective.

Like it's one of many perspectives, but it's a pretty darn good perspective or an important one to keep in mind.

And so that's since the big five actually might be carving nature at its joints in a really powerful way.

And so I guess one more thing along those lines is, um, uh, I think we good for probably Colin to talk about this since you discovered them, uh, which is the aspects.

Um, and so one thing I'm wondering is, uh, so

it seems like in a lot of studies when you do things at the level that so as a correct me if i'm wrong but it's kind of um so under so the big five has this hierarchical structure over them you'll have these two metatrates which we've been discussing of stability as shared variants of um uh conscientiousness agreeableness and inverse neuroticism and plasticity a shared variance of extroversion and openness

then underneath the big five um confidently that you'll get if you like force if you'd like to have the water level uh go there's a downer up uh i'm i'm messing up Daniel's like analogy but you'll get um two and only two aspects underneath each of them and what's interesting is they oftentimes kind of read as being at cross purposes with each other it's like these are very different things that cross they're very different it's very different to be like

industrious versus orderly.

These are very different ways of being in the world.

If you're neurotic, it's very different of being withdrawing or being more volatile and reactive.

And so I guess one thing I'm wondering is both in doing active inferential modeling of persons and trying to suss out a personality, would it be better to actually in some ways focus on the aspects in terms of finding joints there, but also maybe across

other cybernetic systems?

Like, could there be more purpose purchase from the aspects?


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

And I just flipped to the slide.

So just for anyone can just say go to this figure or go to this other thing.

So Colin, and then Marco.

Sorry, you're muted.


SPEAKER_10:
Thank you for the reminder.

Yeah, so while there's a lot to think about in what's been said in the last couple of comments now, so in terms of this idea of continents and water and land, I do think that there is a way in which stability and plasticity are like the equivalent of water and land, so that pretty much any organism

you're going to be able to identify, you know, if there's any kind of individual variability, which of course there must be in order for evolution to proceed.

Like, so probably, you know, if you take amoebas, for example, they're not going to have a lot of different personality dimensions, but nonetheless, you might find some that are a bit more of the same species that are a bit more exploratory and others that are a bit more, more cautious, let's say.

So, you know, even at this very simple level, you may get this trade-off between,

uh do you do things that keep your functioning running uh without disruption or do you do things that lead to greater uh expanse and uh discovery of new resources so those probably do trade off i would hope that when we're within a species though the the big five are not um like just the continents in other words they're not just a historical accident i think that they actually reflect

variation in parameters that have evolved and that are present in every intact organism of that species.

The issue, though, in terms of carving nature at its joints is just that nature in this case is so complicated, right?

So if you look at, this is a good figure actually that Daniel put up to make this point, which is that

When we draw these kinds of hierarchical taxonomies of personality traits, they are necessarily oversimplifications, especially at the levels below the big five, because we know that personality does not have simple structure.

And what that means from a factor analytic perspective is that

If you took the taxonomy exactly literally that's depicted there, you would say, well, for example, no trait that is underneath extroversion that's a subcomponent of extroversion can be related to any trait that is a subcomponent of agreeableness, right?

Because there are no lines connecting them in that figure.

But in fact, the pattern of association and co-variation among more specific personality traits below the big five is considerably more complicated than that would suggest.

And so, for example, assertiveness is negatively correlated with politeness, right?

So assertiveness is part of extroversion.

Politeness is part of agreeableness.

Those are correlated with each other.

However, it happens that the enthusiastic sort of sociable component of extroversion is positively correlated with the other aspect of agreeableness, which is compassion and caring about other people.

And so you have two different components of extroversion correlating in opposite directions with two different components of agreeableness.

And those end up canceling each other out.

And so the first at the other level, you see no correlation between agreeableness and extroversion.

essentially.

So this whole thing, the structure, it looks simple in the picture, but it's a lot more complicated the lower down you go.

And so I would have,

It seems to me that this aspect level distinctions are important.

They are supported by some behavioral genetic research as well as some of my own research just at the phenotypic level.

I think that they're probably the most important distinction within each of the big five in terms of discriminant validity.

In other words, you often get things that are predicted differently at that level.

So for example, politeness and compassion are the two aspects of agreeableness.

And, well, it turns out that if you look at people's political orientation, people who identify as more left-wing or liberal score higher in compassion.

People who identify as higher in conservatism, more right-wing, score higher in politeness, right?

conservatives are more polite, liberals are more compassionate.

Well, what happens when you go up to agreeableness, you see no correlation with political attitudes, which people found surprising for a long time, because it's, you know, issues around altruism and cooperation seem very relevant to political issues and policy.

Well, so it turns out that that's because something lower than the big five actually is associated with, with political attitudes in opposite directions.

So I definitely think that these lower levels of the hierarchy can be useful.

You know, there's less

the the evidence for the big five is remarkably extensive right whereas the evidence for that next level down that i've worked on is much less extensive nonetheless you know again i think there isn't just one way to carve this system up because the patterns of interrelatedness are so complicated and i do think that these are useful uh useful sub dimensions at any rate even if you could focus on others

So I'll leave that there.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

Thanks.

Marco, then Scott.


SPEAKER_09:
Thanks.

So the last few comments were very, very thought-provoking.

So let me know if I ramble on for too long.

So I love metaphors.

So if you don't mind, I'll try to provide a complimentary one.

So instead of maybe landscapes, I have this thing with imagining the brain as one big

dynamical system.

And so all those dynamical flows or patterns, they need to, of course, be patterned or structured in an adaptive sense.

So this kind of tree-like structure could maybe be seen as a kind of grip, a kind of handle, a kind of heuristic well of gravity to kind of heuristically bias particular dynamics.

And at least for me, that would make sense because of these big five factors being quite segregated in terms of where I think they would be relevant.

And that leads me back to the matter of personality and kind of anthropomorphization.

Because I agree that there's a big problem of our theory-ladenness in the manner in which we approach psychology.

um and that also uh should exhibit itself in as mentioned the observations when it comes to animals um but for example when it comes to conscientiousness as adam already very nicely pointed out there's a matter of temporal depth and i think i think he did allude to it but another thing to emphasize is also um the kind of

field or a range of possible alternatives to care about.

To someone who would be low on conscientiousness or carefree would perhaps not simply be lacking goal-orientedness, but be more aware or in touch or have a bigger affinity with the notion of play, of simply engaging in behavior that is reducing expected free energy.

yet not necessarily defined in terms of a particular goal, right?

So not all animals would have to deal with that, right?

Because the evolutionary simply aren't trained or evolved to have awareness or sensitivity to a multitude of possibilities in what to do in an environment.

And so the very emergence of a particular big five factor might be also related to the complexity of the imperatives that they may encounter in their life, in their niches.

So one maybe interesting example is like dogs or other social animals, although in general, I don't think it would be appropriate to

project or impose our anthropomorphic notion of personality, I do think at least dog owners can agree that dogs tend to have a personality that seems to develop or evolve and even seemingly be similar to their owners, possibly because the imperatives of their environment is expanded by being in relation with human agents.

And so by the expansion of possible niches, possible situations, the relevance or the variation specific to where conscientiousness is a relevant factor becomes more apparent, whereas previously that might not be the case, if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_07:
um yeah i'll leave it at that because i forgot everything else i wanted to say no it's it's really interesting that it's uh big five is not the essence of an individual it's actually in a cybernetic framework making the individual's phenotype in relationship to the goals and the context of their niche so it actually moves away from some of the essentialist types of critiques that people might naively bring up against big five we're looking at this as an empirical pattern with a generative underlying cybernetic reality so scott then adam then anyone else


SPEAKER_02:
So fantastic conversation.

A couple of observations.

One, personality is for a person.

And so it's kind of interesting when we take personality and pose it on other systems.

I'm just playing linguistics there a little bit.

But in a way, what is the delta between personality and living formality?

wonder so that might be in because are we assuming the human elements again it's that subjectivity question one of the things also it occurred to me that Friston it kind of allows for a notion of situated personality beyond situated cognition and so maybe those are overlapping maybe they're not I'm not sure if all personality elements are seen as cognitive

or if there's some things that are effective and hormonal and whatever other causation chains there are.

So it's interesting that the behavioral elements we ascribe to personality may or may not drive through all living systems.

I tend to define living systems, and it's not anything reasoned.

It's just what I've done for the last 10 years, and it's been effective for me, is I define living systems as autocatalytic and entropy secreting.

so they can be in a variety of different forms and so i think of markets and corporations as living systems and so to me one of the questions that with with the definitions in the friston notion we have kind of a fractal notion of uh things that are show scale independence i guess is one of the elements of fractal systems and so to what extent

Can the definition of using these personality traits at different levels help us understand the scale-independent possibilities there?

That's one issue.

Then the last point, and these are kind of random, but I think they're clustered around the idea of the model ascribing.

The last one is, if I'm talking to Daniel, there's at least four identities involved there, my sense of me, his sense of me, his sense of him, and my sense of him.

So one of the challenges when you're talking to corporations, markets, maybe not dogs, because they may have qualia, is that the other entity doesn't have qualia.

If you're talking to a corporation, it does not have qualia.

The people in the corporation have qualia, but the corporation itself does not.

And so obviously we can talk about that.

But my point is, if they don't have qualia, can they have empathy?

And if they don't have empathy, maybe there are differences in kind up the Friston stack

of fractal stack of living things.

And so maybe that is one way to start to distinguish between markets and corporations.

And again, it gets back to the animals issue.

Do animals have qualia?

Is the quality of their qualia slightly different than ours, such that maybe there's a subset of personality that they

show, things like that.

Anyway, just a couple of random thoughts, I think.

But again, that definition of living beings, I think, is bound up in here.

And again, us not being too stubborn in our perspective that the personality is something that would describe all the attributes that work up and down the biological stack.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

We got Adam, then Stephen, Marco, Colin.

So go ahead, Adam.


SPEAKER_05:
Hi.

Hmm.

Okay, there's a lot to try to rein it in for me.

I like, so what Marco was saying with this, basically this attractor network formation perspective, the supposed metaphor for a really good model, he mentioned like niche construction and he mentioned, I think this,

perspective is really important in terms of thinking of the dynamic character of the processes that might give rise to these attractors over the course of development and situations and with development potentially being understandable in an open-ended sense that never stops.

And so I guess along those lines, I'm thinking of that causal process model that Colin has in the original paper, where it's going from genes and environment to

Um, you're having these, uh, cybernetic function and then traits and characteristic adaptations, but then there's this feedback, um, as, and one way of understanding this feedback is, um, as a kind of niche construction relationship where you're, uh, modifying your environment, you're specializing yourself for these environments, um, as you're trying to like get along in the world as a goal seeking system.

Um, one more thing.

with relation to what scott was saying i think that's actually uh yeah so i don't want to also like while i'm interested in seeing like how far we can stretch personality i wouldn't want to overstate it either because there were uh major transitions in evolution and you know one of them would be um basically the ability to have certain types of generative modeling where there might be a qualia and quality of different varieties and then we might go beyond that not just qualia but things like

access consciousness, and if you like that distinction, I do, like being able to know your experience and report on it and things like being auto-noetic and being able to reflect on even your knowing.

And so this would be very different cybernetic systems once you introduce this.

So like you can have like, and if you have something like the big five showing up or the big 10,

or the medium 10, I don't know what you want to say, but they might show up differently.

So you can think of generalized agreeableness as tendencies towards non-zero interaction and not defecting in generalized game theory, something like that.

In a multi-agent context, you're more of a cooperator and you coordinate better.

But very different thing if you're actually having something like the feeling of compassion or empathy.

these are different processes getting into the mix and you want a different handling and some things might not actually, you want a very different handling.


SPEAKER_07:
Yep.

Interesting.

Like would rather somebody act compassionately and be perceived as high percentile compassion or perceived overwhelming experience of compassion.

Stephen, Marco, Colin.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this brings in the idea of how

people relate in a task-based environment or a more task-orientated environment, I suppose, where it might structure things a bit more clearly between the things in the world where the person is and whatever mechanism or structure is interacting between the two.

Am I picking up a tool?

There's some sort of delineation.

And one thing that sort of comes to mind when we talk about, so you've got the generative model,

you've got these hidden states of the world, and you've got this Markov blanket.

And the thing with the Markov blanket is, unlike, it's not a system boundary.

You never can really define it.

So you've got this.

And what I thought was quite interesting, really, by having the stability and plasticity, I'm seeing sort of the plasticity with this extraversion, which you could say is like influencing the hidden states in a way.

You're perturbing out there.

And the intellect is...

making models is is the sort of the other side but the the the the um stability in some ways is really stabilizing with the marco blanket like the the nature of the regime because you've got to go you know neuroticism is it like a

is it a very hilly landscape of actually like inferring so that maybe we because i'm really interested in how we might have mental space psychology approaches which there might be some sort of intervening um spatial mediator to how we process and that spatial mediator of how big and scary things are around us and in our metaphors it could be sort of

mediating.

So the neuroticism, the agreeableness, the conscientiousness seem to have more structuring about how I might take data in through a Markov blanket to the other side.

And the other two seem to have a bit more about what's out there and what's in here in a very crude way.

But that's just something that came up for me.

I thought it was really interesting.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

Thank you.

Marko, Colin, Blip.


SPEAKER_09:
Thanks.

Yeah, I also want to build up on that.

So I fully agree.

So I think the prospects that are most attractive with this kind of approach to personality is, as Stephen alluded to, that you can associate these aspect factors into particular apparatus, to particular challenges, as it were.

And I think it's nice also to connect that with what was mentioned in the beginning about Mars levels of analysis.

So Mars levels of analysis is a bit of a hot topic always.

um so so forgive me i'm a bit biased but personally i don't believe that active inference should be seen as as quintessentially computational because i think it would discredit the fact that it implies a lot about um the algorithmic level so um just like uh stephen kind of already said you could have these intermediate spaces right and that's basically asking you how these computational imperatives or functions are going to be realized

And I really want to emphasize the notion of mediation because I want to connect that to what Scott was talking about.

So it should be emphasized that, from what I can tell, this model of personality is kind of neutral about consciousness.

We should be very, very mindful about not conflating the first-person signs or perceptual models of how empathy arises within us with the process of empathy as such.

Because if you see the process of empathy within the brain, then there's two ways to perceive it at the very least.

Third person view from the measures, whether physiological or questionnaires, and first person, of course.

And it stands to reason that it's not necessary to have that first person encounter with these processes for these processes to happen.

But having said that, it would be very interesting to imagine that consciousness would be like an intermediating space as well, such that the component factors and the respective challenges of the big five

um can actually equilibrate in the sense of that it's not a trivial challenge to balance the respective aspects of these factors and the factors between each other for the uh autonomous being of concern and so it would stand to reason that indeed um there might be another intermediate space intermediating between these five factors which would emphasize the cybernetic function of something like consciousness as a space

Which I think might be interesting for you, Scott, because I think then you can generalize it for non-living beings or composite organizations.

Because if you then associate personality as heuristics for certain domains of challenges or domains of imperatives, and then having to bind them together through a certain integrative space, then you could have, I think, a very interesting approach to organizational science, if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks.

That reminds me a lot of the projective consciousness model paper that we read in a previous Actim stream, but it's almost like wondering if the cybernetic organisms or cybernetic systems other than organisms, if they have a projective geometry, do they also have that awareness?

So Colin, Blue, Scott.


SPEAKER_10:
What I wanted to say actually ties in nicely to the point that Marco was just making.

I was going to start by saying that I think it's important that the existence of personality is not dependent on the existence of qualia.

So this is, I think, a mistake that people often make when they're considering the big five and similar personality systems.

They think, oh, well, these are just about how people perceive themselves or about how people perceive other people.

And maybe they're useful categories in terms of what you need to know about a person.

But actually, the claim is that assuming that these descriptions of people's behavior have validity, they describe patterns of behavior that exist regardless of whether people are accurately aware of them or not.

And so you could have differences in persistent differences in behavior from organism to organism in any species that would be directly analogous to what we think of as personality in human beings.

now of course it is true that we have this additional layer in which one uh kind of characteristic adaptation that we have is that we tell a story about ourselves consciously and we can describe ourselves and we actually make use of that when we try to measure measure people's personalities because we you know often just ask them to describe themselves

But we're not interested just in their description of themselves as such.

We're interested in, or we hope, and we know from a fair amount of evidence, that those descriptions are reasonably accurate.

So it's not just that I think that I talk a lot.

I actually do talk a lot if you take some kind of objective measurement of that, right?

That's part of what being extroverted is about.

And so, you know, consciousness is obviously something that, well, is mysterious in various ways.

But I think that, you know, if we focus on that division between the easy and hard problems of consciousness, I think we actually have some pretty important things to say about the so-called easy problems of consciousness, like how does it function?

What does it do?

And I think Marco is right that one of the things that consciousness does is allow people to deal with conflicting information, conflicting goals, and to create a sufficiently broad model of the world and our attention of it that we can then control our attention effectively.

I really like Jeffrey Gray's perspective on consciousness.

His last book was just called Consciousness Creeping Up on the Hard Problem.

That's really excellent.

And then I also like, what is his name?

Michael Graziano's Theory of Consciousness.

It ties in very nicely to this idea that a cybernetic system, to be a good cybernetic system, you have to have some kind of physical representation of the variables that are being controlled.

That's the good regulator theorem.

And so I think that one useful way to think about consciousness is as a model of our attentional field that allows us to direct our attention effectively to things that are important for our goals or things that are potentially conflicting between goals.

And so in that sense, yes, it would certainly be relevant to conflicts that arise because of different needs or goals that are related to different personality traits.

But it's not something external to the traits mechanistically because the traits are descriptions of patterns of variation in a population.

And so when we ascribe them to the person, the person has a level of a trait.

And so those traits actually should be reasonably comprehensive descriptors of functioning in all of the important

categories of human function and that includes consciousness.

In fact, if you look at the contents of the Big Five, openness and intellect is the trait that is really related to the qualities of consciousness.

People who are high in openness are conscious of more things.

Their consciousness is broader, it's deeper, it's more complex.

And, you know, so there's the openness side of that trait and the intellect side.

And so you've got this sort of pattern detection and then pattern analysis.

And all of that is basically about, in large part, the qualities of our consciousness.


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

Very interesting.

Blue, then Scott, then Adam.


SPEAKER_04:
So I am going to totally bypass consciousness because it's just, it's a hard problem, right?

But I do want to just consider for a minute, what would happen if we maybe mapped, like not asking what is a person, but what is an individual?

Could we then scale over non-human systems like organizations or even to other animals?

Adam brought up major transitions in evolution and how do these personality traits maybe influence evolution?

That would be interesting to think about.

Can we think of maybe clams as like ultra neurotic features and ants as like high in conscientiousness?

Could we take like these personality traits and map them onto organisms, you know, that have evolved over time?

And what would that look like in terms of evolution and what is essential?

You know, openness to exploration is obviously key for, you know, some of the major transitions to happen.


SPEAKER_07:
That reminds me of the principal components, the big fives.

They're based upon the patterns of empirical variation in the actual population, as Colin brought up.

And then the animal spirits are, without making a metaphysical claim, they're like archetypes, like of bravery or of extraversion or a social butterfly or a couch potato.

It's still a living creature.

It's a potato.

It's in the ground.

And so how we model different types of metaphors, it's like that's on our Procrustean bed.

but then what does it look like to have it on their Procrustean bed for their personalities or individualities?

So Scott, then Marco, then Colin.


SPEAKER_02:
Blue, I love the notion of neurotic clams.

That's my favorite.

Yeah, this is great.

And just along the same lines, a couple of things that leaped into my head.

I was thinking of Irving Goffman stuff where you project yourself out as you want to be perceived.

So that's kind of modifying your environment in terms of the persona perception.

That was one thing.

And also there's a lot of self other things in here, the identity kind of notion and that idea of presentation of self.

One of the things I was wondering about is the DSM, Diagnostic Statistical Manual.

DSM-5 just came out and really how it plays into the what I guess they would define as anomalous behavior.

persona traits.

And usually DSM seems to be the ones that aren't the ones that make you not productive in the capitalist society kind of things, because there's a lot of things in there called cultural in there.

But it's interesting that those are the outer bounds of what's expected expectations of persona.

And I think a lot of the survival in this questions have to do with expectations, and the rising of these variables in

The corollaries in animals and in people have to do with survival and increasingly in social survival, but also just that survival of the organism.

And so that idea of presentation of self might be even related to camouflage.

And issues of that, you know, how do you present yourself or not present yourself in society?

So anyway, that just that host of thoughts that how that naturally evolved is kind of interesting.

Also, this is and this is not a studied thing.

I'm not an expert in this, but just functionally, again, I think of the

mind and consciousness, well, I think, put consciousness aside, just like Blue said, but I think of the mind as not in the brain, I think of the mind as in language and material culture, and the brain as an antenna tuned into the local mind.

So if you're, my sister adopted a child at the age of five months, and now she's a, was raised in central Pennsylvania, and she was adopted from China, she doesn't speak Chinese, she speaks Spanish and English, she's a U.S.,

person, but she looks like a Chinese person.

So that their mind was developed in Pennsylvania.

And so if there's no feral consciousness, which take that as an assumption for a second, or no feral mind, and if it's a learned phenomenon, it's interesting that we have this framing and then we keep re-upping the framing, reaffirming and valorizing the framing.

It's interesting to

wonder if there's a lag in terms of survivability what were the persona characteristics that were selected for and i don't just mean in biological evolution but socially are they identical to the ones that will be selected for in a much more dense interaction environment for instance so there may be some interesting questions if and to the extent that persona is not

on board in the brain inherently, but is a learned social phenomenon.

What is the, how malleable is it?

And I mean, I guess that's what education is about and why colonialists try to get indigenous people in their schools, their children in schools early to render the externality innocuous.

But it'd be interesting from a perspective of,

current situations that we have in current policy challenges and public health challenges, et cetera, information challenges, how might we handle those recognizing a more plastic persona?

So just a few thoughts.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.


SPEAKER_07:
Interesting.

Marco, Colin, Adam.


SPEAKER_09:
Thanks.


SPEAKER_07:
Wait, I forgot what I was going to.

We'll come back.

We'll come back.

Okay.

Colin, Adam, Marco.


SPEAKER_10:
OK, well, I think that there are certainly certainly true that there are aspects of the mind and personality that are learned, but then there are others that are evolved essentially and sufficiently genetically programmed that they would be present even in

feral children.

And that connection back to the idea of the evolution of personality, when Blue was talking about neurotic clams, I was thinking about some of the work that's actually been done on the evolution of personality in animals.

some of it is very interesting there's a really nice paper from oh i know almost 15 years ago now by daniel nettle that talks about the evolution of personality in humans and other animals and so one of the things that he talks about are these experiments uh where you take a bunch of fish and you if you just naturalistically observe them you will see that there are differences in personality some of the fish are relatively bold some of them are relatively timid and cautious

And what you can see is that if you systematically manipulate their environment, you can actually change evolution of that population over time in interaction with the personalities of the individual.

And so the way that I think about this is that personalities drive evolution, but evolution also drives changes in personalities at the population level.

So what happens is that if you have those fish in an environment that has a lot of predators, then the bold ones get eaten and the frequency of the more cautious, timid ones increases in the population.

But if you put them in an environment that has very few predators, then what happens is that the bold ones tend to monopolize a lot more resources and the frequency of the bold personalities increases in the population.


SPEAKER_07:
Yes.

So always the ecological selection on the development of personality, not even just personality, something that can be reached out and grasped, but actually how personality becomes developed in relation.

So Adam, then Marco, then Steven.


SPEAKER_05:
Trying to tie together a few threads before I lose them.

So like earlier I was saying, you know,

evolution is one of multiple perspectives, but a really special perspective.

And it is a really special perspective.

Like I, it almost makes me move towards like, well, on some level I'm an instrumentalist, but with respect to like the things like what is the ontological status of a Markov blanket?

I think there is also like a realism, a quasi realism, and maybe,

A realism so strong we couldn't sometimes throw away with the word quasi although we should always kind of keep it in our back pockets.

And that we should keep in mind that there are multiple ways of carving up the world, actually infinite ways.

It's just some are going to be more or less good for beings such as us.

And one really good carving would be the one that basically relates to functional cycles that achieve closure on time scales where they can be subject to cumulative evolution.

Broadly construed whether being the development of the organism

or phylogeny.

And so that might pick out some particularly universally agreed upon, while still subjective, joints.

But to kind of bring it together more, among those, and with relation to your personality characteristics, there's an interesting thing that can happen for species

capable of modeling each other themselves with a certain kind of richness, having certain types of consciousness in the sense of knowledge, where, and even without it potentially, that they can come aware of these reliable core screenings of themselves and others.

And then this forms a basis for your planning.

And then this forms a basis for basically not just the niches that you're trying to construct, but the way your niche is constructing you.

And

So for all of this like active inference with it's like an embracing of circular causality and this mutuality between like system and environment in terms of each being its own kind of active inferential system and exploring this interplay, I think that's really essential for understanding personality in both the specific and the general case.

Before I let you all move on, one final set of threads would be like when talking about something like consciousness, so like I recently kind of took on the hard problem

It was debated how much success I had.

But in trying to make way on this, it seems useful to not, and probably with respect to discussions of personality, all of our words are just words.

They're core screenings that we agree upon.

And they don't exist in the world.

And so consciousness, part of the issue is like, we mean very different things when we use the word sometimes.

And so similarly, so you might say,

Scott was suggesting like, you know, is we might want to distinguish between mind and consciousness or intelligence and consciousness.

And so you could say like your mind is distributed through the world and that your brain is an antenna.

I think that's a good perspective.

But if you're thinking of like consciousness as like a type of model where there is something that it's like from the inside to be that kind of modeling process, that might not be extended.

That might be like a subsystem and a sub model.

Um, and so similar that we're kind of building up this onion of complexity with respect to consciousness and people are kind of, kind of engaging at different levels, but not always being clear on the level that they're engaging in.

And so you could, so recently, um, I was engaging at the level of like basic phenomenality itself.

Um, and, uh, Rudroff and like the projected consciousness models, very similar spirit.

Um, it's, uh, you know, specifically.

what are the ways we can describe your subjectivity as a particular reference frame and point of view in the world as you as a cybernetic system, how can we characterize that?

And so then we go like another level still and we're getting to what Colin's talking about with things like attention schemas and like models of your awareness for modeling yourself and others and shared attention schemas.

And so I guess the...

And we can go further still and get to things like self-consciousness, reflexive self-consciousness.

And each of these will be kinds of major transitions in evolution and development, which I understand is a kind of evolution.

And each of these will now dock with personality in different ways.

Now, I guess the one final thing that's interesting is the way in which personality traits

if you're thinking of them as kind of coarse grainings, like coarse grain descriptions.

And so when can you coarse grain?

You can coarse grain when you have something like a renormalization process, when you have some sort of like emergent attractor structure, such that the lower level or the smaller fluctuations, smaller dynamics can be kind of like averaged out because now you're pointing at this bigger thing and the bigger, slower attracting manifold didn't care about the particulars.

or rather that's not relevant for this course or phenomena that you're trying to observe.

And so there's a sense in which personality is a kind of course when it's like, what are the nature of these like normalization processes?

And so one of them, it would seem like, so what is inducing this attracting structure?

It seems like a good part of it would be so you can model yourself

across situations.

So, you know, what kind of agent am I that I am likely to be doing what and what circumstances?

And this will be pretty essential for pursuing any kind of complex plan.

But similarly for coordination, other or working around other agents or cooperation or competition, what kind of agents is this I'm dealing with?

But for the sake of cooperation, you might ask someone to be responsible.

They should be able to respond

and report in a reliable and consistent way.

We actually demand of each other, in a way, a certain non-erratic character.

We demand dimensionality reduction of each other just because otherwise we get surprised.

And as the framework principle in active infrastructure, we don't like being surprised.

Because then we can't plan.

And then we can't outsource our cybernetic entropy.

And it's bad.

So there's a sense in which to what degree there's

The same way that like personality traits are influencing, they're emerging from evolution, then influencing the course of evolution with development.

Uh, your personality traits are emerging from your interaction with your environment as you're carving out this niche.

Um, but also they can also become like attracting targets in of themselves on different levels.

Like if you were, uh, if you have this expectation of yourself as being this type of agent, it could be a self fulfilling prophecy.

I think I'm a neurotic agent.

I think I'm an extroverted agent.

Now other people think I'm a neurotic agent.

Other people think I'm an extroverted agent.

And now they're treating me a certain way and I'm acting a certain way.

And then this keeps going.


SPEAKER_07:
Yes.

Thank you.

No, a lot of awesome stuff.

That reminds me of the scripts.

It reminds me of the phrase, the common saying, the absolute power to act absolutely brings responsibility or something like that, like power and responsibility.

But


SPEAKER_09:
we're talking about the power to act and the responsibility to stimuli and that means that we respond so um marco then steven thanks um adam for that fantastic uh monologue um so first um a bit of a meta uh comment or question so since you said we can't use the chat in stream um i've been

putting some links in the youtube chat but i'm wondering if you had a recommended way to do that because a lot of people are mentioning a lot of interesting research and i think people are modest to the point that they won't advertise their own research or link it yeah um so what would you prefer daniel uh sure i put some links youtube to respond to the discord or


SPEAKER_07:
yeah to respond to the meta and just to clarify so in the jitsi for the live stream it will make a if you use the chat so it's very disruptive to use the chat during the jitsi so the single source of truth for the video is the youtube page or on keybase so definitely everybody should make a keybase username and join us at actinflab.public and check out active active inference.org to find out more but the key base at this point is our

actual organizational hub.

So that's where we're doing the open participatory Active Inference Lab.

Like this is a project of the communications branch of Active Inference Lab.

Continue.


SPEAKER_09:
Okay, thank you.

Yeah, I didn't know what key basis but thank you.

Glad I asked.

Um, yeah, so building on on Saffron's great comments.

So I fully agree that personality is definitely something scaffold, right?

So personally, I, I

I do see the relevance of course grading, but I think it's also interesting to use another example or metaphor of bootstrapping.

So one interesting thing is, so in AI, we keep dealing with interactability, but clearly we are still living and not defying laws of computation.

So there needs to be this kind of leap of faith of how to start off acting around in the world.

And so one way to see it, instead of course grading in terms of temporal scale, maybe it's simply, let me put it this way.

If you're going to behave over time, over time, over time across different contexts, there should be overlap in the kind of parameters or hyperparameters that govern your behavior or approach to the world.

And those that are more consistent or more covariance or synergetic, they will consolidate into this kind of heuristic core to further elaborate and specify.

And on top of that, building onto that, I was wondering, because Adam earlier asked Colin if he could maybe explicitly map the big five to mechanisms in cybernetic or inferential terms.

But I was wondering if it's appreciated or useful to also put the question for everyone, since everyone's relatively familiar with active inference or Fristonia terminology, how they would characterize the big five factors, because mostly it's in very simplistic

uh adjectives or purely behavioral but i think would be interesting to maybe at least attempt faithfully to understand them from the inside out right what kind of functions or processes or inferential problems would be associated with a few people already did that but i was wondering if people would like to do that more explicitly together


SPEAKER_07:
Cool, great question.

And also a lot of it is enclosed in the paper, which is why this is so fun to have as a journal club, because we can always superfluously add on top, but then the paper also references a lot of these things.

So we'll go to Stephen, Colin, Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, a lot of really cool stuff.

I think as well as the modeling idea, I think going back to this, the idea of a timid fish and a bold fish and...

the affordances of the environment.

One thing that's really been striking me is there's been trying to integrate

drama-based projects and sort of experiential workshops with psychology is that you've got this kind of reflective perspectival aspect to psychology, like you can take a perspective and reflect and you get a sense of it.

The Big Five will use that in the reporting, yet it's tapping into some sub-personal dynamics and other dynamics which may not be available at the conscious reflective level.

And I think that then starts to get really interesting with the affordances, again, with the timid and bold and what's been talked of of how this all sort of scales because it's not necessarily a timid generative model that creates the timid.

If I take too many cups of coffee, okay, now my, I don't know if it's my brain that's changed or whether it's the sensitivity to my,

of my of my perceptual and active action reflexes, which are kind of now or maybe my stomach or so you've got this, there's an interesting way with this that it can bring in the kind of

the dynamics and the affordances.

And so one thing that's quite interesting, in theatre, you've got an acting method, which is basically very text-orientated, and what did my character want to do?

But another way is you get into the body of an animal.

So you be a spider.

And they actually have in the Lecoq School, they do a whole series of weeks in the zoo, and everyone has to be animals.

and inhabit animals' bodies.

But there's something different about if you're on four legs and you're moving around smelling things, you're going to be balancing your inputs and your options and affordances for action.

quite different right so it might well change the way um but it will change well i'm not going to speculate on that but just just basically coming back to the point of the timid and the bold and this idea that the the way the active influence or the inactive sort of dynamics of the body with the environment can

be a lot of that could be sitting at a sub personal level like you're not really sure how you know that bright light has affected my retinal or my tiredness is affected or my alcohol consumption you know some of these types of things so i thought i'd sort of say that that kind of could connect in with this um the more consciousness um reflective piece and the sort of phenomenological cybernetic subconscious piece cool colin scott adam


SPEAKER_10:
I just wanted to say that the reason that I didn't take up Adam's suggestion to go through each of the big five and talk about the cybernetic processes that we think are probably related to them is precisely that that is all discussed in the paper.

I didn't want to take up a bunch of extra time with things that many people have already read.

In terms of this kind of idea of the richness of the psychological processes that are underlying each of the big five,

That is something that, you know, it's true that a lot of people have this very shallow perspective on them, partly due to the way that they were derived in the first place and those stereotypes that people have about them as scientific entities.

But

I could spend the rest of the livestream talking about these processes in great detail, but I think it would probably be better just to refer people to the original paper that I wrote in 2015 on cybernetic Big Five theory, and then also maybe to a theory that we wrote on the cybernetic perspective on psychopathology.

um because the big five turn out to be equivalent also to the major dimensions of risk for different forms of psychopathology and we talk a lot about the specifics that might be important there as well and that all my papers or most of my papers are available on my website


SPEAKER_07:
Cool.

Great.

And that's also why, again, the Journal Club format, it's not the only format we're going to experiment with in Active Inference Lab, but this will actually allow us to have conversations that are rooted in a lot of specifics and various papers will be amenable to that in different ways.

So Scott and then Adam.


SPEAKER_02:
So, and I wanted to apologize for not having an opportunity to read the paper before this one, so I would have been better informed had I done that.

I wanted to, this just occurred to me, something that might be going on here, and it's a little bit stretched, so give me a second here.

So this is going to be, where I'm going with this is whether living forms are entropy engines.

Okay, that's where I'm going to go with this.

So there was entropy.

I'm talking about now using Shannon and von Neumann and entropy notions generally, not by analogy, but rather saying you talk about general disorder.

And so I'll be a little fast and loose with entropy for a second here.

So Penrose wrote a paper book recently where he talked about.

What we get from the sun is not energy, but rather negentropy because the yellow light of the sun comes in, infrared light goes out.

The difference is the frequency, the information carrying capacity of yellow light is higher because it's higher frequency.

And so it's a net energy neutral except for global warming or climate change.

But what we get is the structure of plants reflects that higher negentropy opportunity, I guess is one way to put it.

So starting with that, what if entropy was driving a lot more?

And so what if the, recall my definition of living forms as autocatalytic entropy secreting.

So if entropy universally is increasing, living forms are localized negentropy areas, right?

They lower entropy locally and try to preserve it.

What if the drive, both the physical symbiogenesis where...

Free existing bacteria migrate on board to eukaryotes and then become mitochondria in animals and chloroplasts in plants.

So they come together because it's a better deal, basically a better way to be autocatalytic and entropy secreting at larger scales.

What if that extends to where we are now with the, what if those stages of personality have those functions?

We're saying they do.

And then it has to do with both entropy accounting.

So when you're meeting someone who shares personality states or has predictable personality states you can predict, there's a lower differential.

So from a second law of thermodynamics perspective,

You have like for Carnot's equation, you need a hot and cold differential to perform work.

What if the information differentials that you have between entities that are meeting each other help to cultivate various responses?

And those responses are, we are cataloging in those five big persona traits.

And so that's ways of being or ways of encountering.

So it helps you navigate the social landscape.

And that what if what we have really is what I call an entropy engine, which is that the personality goes out and harvests disorder through these mechanisms, dissipating it, obviously, but also growing from it.

And what I mean by that is all institutions, all of them,

are uh dis de-risk some subset of interactions whether it's grocery stores or hospitals or banks or whatever that's what institutions do at larger scales so they're neg entropy expressions at larger scales but we have those um those those feelers that go out and maybe the personality types and our physical attributes are the feelers that go out to figure out where there's opportunities for proliferation


SPEAKER_07:
into a community of interest around a shared risk thanks wow very interesting with the jordan peterson the darkness into light ordering the universe and you know or disordered order as a thermodynamic inference process so hopefully that will be something we can like continue thinking about in our last 20 minutes so we'll do adam then uh marco and anybody who's watching live can leave a comment anyone else who's on here can prepare any like last thoughts but this has been a super

Awesome discussion.

So Adam, then Marco.


SPEAKER_05:
With relation to entropy, you might want to check out the work of, in terms of life, Jeremy England.

He has a really interesting handling of that's free energy principle compatible of entropy maximization.

And you might also enjoy Terence Deacon's work.

Colin hooked me up with him.

It's incomplete nature.

He gets into discussions, discussions of auto catalysis, like Kauffman talks about, and work cycles as ways of describing systems and their reality.

Because if you're talking about realities, differences that make a difference, being able to contribute to a work cycle is a pretty good criteria.

And if we're able to identify system on some sense, it's engaging probably

in some kind of work cycle and you can do an entropy, like a handling of it that's going to involve entropy.

Also in terms of entropy, there is maybe two papers you might like.

One is, I posted them in the YouTube feed, which is Psychological Entropy from Hirsch, Marr, and Peterson, 2012.

And then a more recent Attitudinal Entropy Framework by Dallag, Borsboom, Harvill, and Vandermasse.

Forgive my pronunciation.

But to loop back around to some of the things that Stefan was saying, that still, on some level, abstraction will involve entropy.

One of the places I'm actually really thinking now into and trying to understand is the conditions under which personality might be more or less plastic, the conditions under which you can get trait change, altered traits, and not just altered states.

along these lines of notions of like acting, like technical acting versus method acting, like to what extent is this sort of self-fulfilling, like this self-perpetuating attractor dynamic that makes up persons and their personalities, to what extent is it changeable, even if there are these enduring cybernetic parameters?

To what extent can you take those arrows in Colin's causal diagram and really work them?

So Collins, um, basically talked about like, if you want to have his wellbeing work and his, um, uh, psychopathology work, um, about characteristic adaptations being where you have the most leverage, like the things you tend to do, the, this like design of your life and the situations you show up in and how you show up.

And this is where you like, or clinicians and yourself, you might have the greatest purchase in enacting change.

Um, but.

And so this would work on multiple levels.

One would be like, it would change the nature of what you experience.

We're learners, we update.

It would also change your niche construction.

It would change the context in which you're in.

That would be leveraged there.

But I guess one more thought would be, to bring it back to consciousness, to what extent

it's, it's not just chance.

So to change your characteristic adaptations would be to change the things you tend to do.

Um, but what you're describing with this sort of like method acting view, or are you bringing that up?

But like acting, um, to what extent can personality be changed by really paying close attention to this?

What is it like to be me and actually, and what could it be like to be a different kind of me and then

imagining yourself in that way um i'm gonna quite call it faking it till you make it but like um and to what degree is this a substantial part of how personality forms to begin with like children at play copying their parents pretending to be this way or that way but now the question i would have is in the bootstrapping can we still leverage this um as adults and one thing along those lines would be um that makes me think you might be able to

Um, I believe in the, uh, Tibetan tradition though, um, I think it's part of joke.

I don't know how to pronounce it, but basically, um, they'll do these kinds of like, uh, deity practices where like, let's say you have some kind of like affliction, something that's like not working for you.

Um, you might pretend to be a kind of complimentary, uh, deity or spirit, but you don't pull this off on your own.

like the social context.

And so you create this kind of sub-persona that you live into.

I believe they call it tulpa.

Marco, I think, actually pointed me to this.

But you don't do it on your own.

You have a holding environment, a social context that supports your act.

And you're able to kind of collaboratively enact it.

And that seems to me to be, we can empirically establish this as a mechanism of personality change.

This seems to be part of what makes the magic happen.

Yeah, that's the things I'm sort of thinking into, like, what are all of the levers we have to actually design our personalities going forward?

So, you know, what mental techniques, psychedelics, like meditation, what's at our disposal so that we can have like, you know, we can be good meta regulators over ourselves and like realizing like our deepest values.


SPEAKER_07:
Thank you, Adam.

I'm just gonna throw up that closing slide, and then we'll hear from everybody who wants to raise their hand with the final note.

This has really been an awesome ACT-M stream 13.1 and two.

So in the calendar event for those who are participating live, there's a feedback form, a survey, which would be really appreciated.

and all of you are always welcome whether you're the author or not to participate in a future active stream you can go to the spreadsheet and find out the calendar but all of you would be extremely welcome to be in a group active stream like this again and then if anybody has an idea for an event that they want to arrange like an interview or a follow-up discussion or a few minutes isn't enough during this conversation to talk about drama or consciousness or

whatever it happens to be let's just plan that as an event so that we can always make sure to hold the space for hearing about everyone's perspective because it's just such a great stew when we can have it all going so uh Marco and then Steven and then anyone else who wants to raise their hand on a last uh note thank you I agree this has been very very enjoyable so thank you Danny


SPEAKER_09:
um yeah scott thank you for the nice um metaphorical pictures so i fully agree that there's this beautiful notion of the feelers right but but i think it's also interesting to um first distinguish reflexive feelers and intentional or expressive features right so how do you navigate uh to the world and in that challenge how do you navigate yourself and so i think personality or your self model regarding you as a person

are more of those reflexive feelers.

And then subsequently, you're more able to grip or control or regulate the way you navigate the worlds with your perceptual feelers, more specifically the recognition models by which we are able to take in the worlds, because they are what are being compared with the sense data.

And you also said something very nice about, I really like Carnot engines as a picture.

I fully love that you mentioned that.

And you mentioned information differentials.

Now, information differentials is exactly what active inference is about, right?

So the beauty is also there's a notion, you mentioned entropy a lot.

But there's also a notion of relative entropy, which is also known as the Kublick-Library divergence, which is exactly what underpins the entire formalism.

Because exactly like the Carnot engine, you want to minimize the temperature differential.

But in the brain, temperature is constant, right?

Similarly, the energy consumption doesn't vary more than the order of magnitude.

And so the interesting question here is, OK, to what extent is it like a Carnot engine?

To what extent does just the minimization of information differentials play a part in its functional behavior?

So one very nice notion that I like, which I got from a friend, Seth Burnett, shout out,

um is coordinated equilibration so both in the case of normal conventional thermodynamic equilibration such as incarnate engines as well as in my opinion for active inference you're basically equilibrating the whole collection the complex covariance and co-conditional collection of information differentials and so no matter what by virtue of it being physically instantiated it needs to equilibrate physically which has some relation with informational equilibration

So in other words, one thing I like to say is basically we're letting nature do the work, right?

We're already nature.

It has to equilibrate.

And it happens that that finding of equilibria is in itself homologous or analogous to particular algorithmic instantiations, which is also interesting in computer science because apparently there's some nice works that connect Ising spin models, toy models with magnets,

with self-organized criticality, how the brain operates via avalanches or cascades of activity.

Apparently these are formally implementable to solve basically most famous algorithmic challenges.

So I think hopefully you might find that interesting.

I'm not sure what your exact phrasing was, but I want you to note that I think it's also a nice picture to imagine that what we're doing effectively

Oh, yeah, you talked about negentropy.

So effectively, what you're doing is basically you're partially deciding how you're going to be imprinted by the world.

And that's the whole power of the whole predictive picture, because the patterns that are out there in the world are effectively the challenges themselves.

So when we internalize the patterns, then we're more gripped or attuned to or have a bigger affinity with the world.

So you're exactly right in that regard.

yeah sorry i forgot the rest of what you said um and regards for adam's beautiful point about plasticity of a personality um i also very much echoed this kind of criticism slash um question of the whole assumption that personality traits is static it's rigid but i think

what he said earlier about coarse-graining and what I called bootstrapping, kind of maybe is a path to understand better how it shouldn't be seen as so static.

Because if it indeed is a bootstrap in a time where it lacks self-models, then basically the accessibility of changing that initial bootstrapping model is inhibited or it's obstructed effectively, right?

Because if you want to reflexively act upon these models, then you need to have a path.

towards these models so that you have to act upon whatever influence your personality through layer and layer layer from superficial to deeper right

And that's a big challenge.

And I think, indeed, things like tolpas, things like visualization exercises are one example.

But I also really like Stephen's notes on drama and more situated experiments, situated design, where I think the notion of porosity is also very interesting.

To what extent do you allow the environment to influence you?

And finally, I just want to note that's because Adam mentioned it, psychedelics.

Yeah, absolutely.

Because the whole phrase is psychedelics, the revealing of the mind.

But that's only one step.

The second step is reveal such that it becomes accessible to systematic change.

So, yeah, so those are my thoughts and thank you for giving me these thoughts.


SPEAKER_07:
Nice.

It's really great how you tied so many of those elements together.

So in the last couple of minutes, just quickly from anyone who wants to speak, we have Stephen, then Scott, then anyone else who raised, then Adam, then anyone who raises their hand.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, this is what this paper is so...

interesting about is the way that it gives these this dynamic mechanism which is good for active inference but it's also also quite an intuitive way to break down all these generative models and

and different things.

It gets hard when you start to lay out different areas.

I suppose the two things that come up when I was thinking about the comments on the drama or acting is I think sometimes the acting or having a chance to go and do a performative event or action, that's more like you're...

you're going on stage.

And that could be like that mountain car problem.

I don't know if you see the paper of exploring a landscape using your model and seeing different possibilities.

So it could extend out the possibilities.

And that mountain car problem was quite good for looking at how that issue of expanding out can be important.

And then there's also, and there's different ways.

So for instance, method action is actually

can be quite dangerous a lot of people have psychological issues if they go down that route um so there's a basically putting on an act is like you're still a performer and you know that you're in a sort of a field of practice presenting and

being aware of where the audience is, how close they are, what size of view they can see.

However, just by doing that, you will have that experience.

So you will have expanded your range, your entropy of possibilities or states of the world.

But there's also participatory type drama where you could revisit a real life experience and go back into through psychodrama, sociodrama,

actual experience that you had and look at that and then that also could give different ways to maybe understand your actual lived life now whether that would change the big five I don't know it may not be about changing the big five to someone it may be

something else within that you know but it um so i think it's really there's a i just thought i'd add that to the great conversation thank you scott and then adam then colin just in the last couple of minutes


SPEAKER_02:
This is great.

Very rich discussion.

I like the fact that we raised more things and this is really the beginning of a discussion than we resolved.

And that's beautiful.

The tulpa really struck me because it's something where there's an imagination in an internal, which is re valorized, reified by the external in a, in a process way.

And it really reminded me of law in law.

If you say you have a right,

But there is no duty of anyone else to respect that right.

Like if I say I have a right to free speech, a right to sit anywhere I want on the bus and no one else respects it, I don't really just I just have words on paper.

I really need the duties and the rights.

And that dyad, I think, is really interesting, that reification, that valorization.

And it started to wonder whether it feels like something like behavioral catalysts.

or consciousness catalysts, where you have that external and internal element are necessary for that coordinated equilibration that, as Marco was alluding to, so I'm fascinated by the discussion here.

I feel like we're just beginning and looking forward to other ways for us to continue because there's a lot of pieces that we still need to explore, it feels like.


SPEAKER_07:
Totally agreed.

So we'll have Adam, then Colin.

And if anyone has thoughts on where we could explore next or what would be fun to explore, they can mention it too.

Adam, then Colin.

And a special thanks to both of you authors for coming for both of these conversations.

It was just, it really made the whole thing come together.

So Adam, Colin, Blue.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I've been loving this.

Thank you, all of you.

I'm really glad Marco brought up criticality because it gives me an opportunity to hold forth for what Colin knows is my religion.

And I think this somewhat harkens back to last week's discussion of meditation and mindfulness.

So one of the ways I view mindfulness is a kind of like psychological manifestation of self-organized criticality.

So it's like there's this edge of chaos or this inter-regime where you have

enough variation, enough disorder to give birth to a dancing star or rather to have variation for evolution to work with.

But then you have enough stability to get this cumulative evolution to have structure built upon structure and so on.

And so if it's the one regime where evolution is possible, yeah, this is a multi-scale phenomena.

This is a universality class.

You'll find it everywhere at all scales.

And so at the psychological level, whatever you're really doing,

In some sense, I think it's going to be involved with respect to optimality.

And if one of the things you're doing is trying to, for instance, try out something new and regulate the amount of psychological entropy you're experiencing, basically setting up for yourself this return to this metastable place where you can balance stability and plasticity, where you can sort of ride along the edge of chaos and not fall in

or go too straight, too far away from it.

This is, I think if you want to either maintain your personality or change your personality or work within the bounds of it, this seems to be really essential.

And this final thing is like, I've been increasingly thinking like the way we think of mindfulness is like all wrong.

And that rather than thinking of it as like, this is a really nice state to be in and you're watching your breath and everything is like super great.

That's good.

But like more like the phase space description and more as process.

And rather than like a thing you get, it's a return to like a kind of a necessary home.

And it really an essential part of cybernetic functioning of balancing stability and plasticity that you're going to need for anything.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks so much, Adam.

Colin, then Blue.


SPEAKER_10:
I'm glad this whole idea of the edge of chaos came up because, Adam, earlier you said at some point we're talking about active inference, so talking about free energy, and we don't like surprise.

And of course, as soon as I hear that, you know what I think.

Well, no, we do like surprise.

We seek out surprise often.

We like surprises, right?

We like uncertainty.

We like risk.

People enjoy these things.

That's exploration.

And so and the reason that we have both it's one, I think maybe the most important fact in psychology that we have an innate, ambivalent response to uncertainty and an increase in entropy, which is simultaneously positive and negative.

Right.

We obviously don't like surprise.

We fear entropy.

We need things to be predictable or everything disintegrates.

But at the same time, we like surprise, we like uncertainty, we like exploration.

And if we don't do that, then we don't adapt.

And eventually we get too rigid and everything disintegrates, right?

So you have to seek out entropy in order to avoid eventual catastrophic increases in entropy, right?

You have to seek it out and master it.

And so that's why you need to be at that line between order and chaos, right, between order and disorder.

And, you know, as Adam's pointing out, that's what evolved systems evolved toward, is toward the edge of chaos, because that maximizes the possibility for computation, it maximizes the possibility for adaptation.

There is, to make a segue from the abstract to the more concrete, because I feel like that's sort of like what my collaboration with Adam is like.

I'm tying this to more concrete psychology.

He's tying it to more abstract theory.

There's a lot of work in the last 20 years in personality psychology on personality change and especially personality trait change.

One of the things we know from this research is that virtually everyone has at least one personality trait that they would like to change.

We also know that personality traits can and do change over time.

It might not always be easy to change traits.

They might not always change dramatically, but we do see change in personality traits over time.

We know that things like therapeutic interventions change personality traits, especially reducing neuroticism.

And personality psychologists have recently been trying to develop systematic programmatic interventions to help people to change different personality traits.

And of course, a lot of it is through first just changing more specific habits, more specific characteristic adaptations, because that's what, as Adam said, you have more of an immediate grasp on is how to how to change your habits, how to change your particular strategies.

But it is possible for those to generalize to these more


SPEAKER_07:
uh general changes and i would think of that as you know you you learn specific things but eventually those things that you learn may actually tweak some of the underlying general parameters that actually enact those specific things over time thank you colin for those who need to drop off thanks for coming just to respect the end of the official event but blue dave and then we'll chill for a couple more minutes but thanks everyone so much for coming today


SPEAKER_04:
um so i want to thank the authors uh especially for for being here and livening up this conversation but just as far as things that i think we could continue talking about or that would be interesting to pursue in the active inference framework um are things like personality change or things that do change the personality right like trauma therapy psychedelics mindfulness meditation like all of these things can really have drastic effects on who a person is

fundamentally, I expect in like terms of big five as well.

And then also like maybe in a non-active inference kind of way, like the discussion on consciousness is big and heavy and maybe not for this live stream, but something that is definitely always worth talking about.


SPEAKER_07:
Thank you, Blue.

Dave?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah.

Sean Carroll interviewed Carl Friston a few months ago, and he brought up, I think, the same point that Professor DeYoung just mentioned.

Wait a minute.

We don't try to be certain about everything.

We want novelty.

We want to be confused.

And Professor Friston became even more

slower and more methodical and self-critical and self-qualifying than usual and really went, I think, was working through all these levels of mathematization that I'm sorry, in my humble opinion, he's kind of gotten trapped into.

That's something that Professor Edelman was terrified.

That's this incredibly brilliant young kid and he's going to get his brain sucked by the algebra.


SPEAKER_07:
Thank you, Dave.

You know, it reminds me, it's controlled novelty.

We can't just say more.

It's more is different, is what we say in Complexity.

And when it comes to cybernetic, goal-driven, edge of chaos systems, it's not so simple as just take a linear regression and, you know, more ants is better for the colony.

No.

I mean, selection has clearly, in different niches, resulted in colonies that have different shapes of everything.

So...

It's a local vector of selection, but then the broader space is actually not quite so linear.

So I hear you on that.

Marco?


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, thanks.

I'm glad you mentioned that podcast.

It's actually, in my opinion, the best conversation with Carl because

Sean being also, Professor Carl also being a physicist, he really was able to get Carl active and it's more playful and cheerful about talking about it.

But I'm not sure what you mean with the getting more quiet and self-critical.

I think it's more his awareness that that's really the main challenge in dealing with these kind of seeming tensions or paradoxes, because I do think there's a very important

attention to point out, when it comes to formal modeling, especially when it comes to formally modeling brains or humans, as we are all too familiar with, which concerns, as seen, for example, in the personality model, and that there are often these complementarities, these trade-offs.

And often in folk psychology, in normal communication,

We tend to pick a trade or pick a characteristic and just say that's good or bad.

It's always decontextualized.

It's rarely in relation to the trade-offs, in relation to which they obtain an actual normative value or valid normative value.

And something else.

Oh, yeah.

So I linked on the YouTube chat, but I really personally am very fond of the theme of pleasant surprises, pleasant perturbations.

Um, and, and this controlled, uh, uh, uh, on these controlled unknowns, for example, um, well, Steven has gone out, but, but he mentioned the idea of spaces, right?

So we could imagine, um, well, first it should be more formal.

So formally, um, that's already resolved in 2017, um, a paper I was happy to be the coauthor on, um, because.

Uh, active inference doesn't concern itself with free energy per se is it's expected for energy.

And the more sophisticated your models, the more sophisticated your temporal depth and your counterfactual imagination.

Imagination isn't very formal, but I like allowing us to talk about imagination as if it was formal.

Kind of liberating it from the folk psychological connotations and way too many centuries of philosophy kind of dunking on it.

Because it's simply because we didn't have the grounding.

So it is exactly in active inference that these tensions disappear if we allow ourselves to accept what the mathematicians say, that there is this kind of trade-off, that there is this kind of complementarity, that indeed it is kind of that hippie notion of yin and yang.

And so it's no surprise that stability and plasticity is the method trade in my opinion.

And I linked that paper from Heiliger, who is at the University of Brussels, and a pretty prominent researcher of sermonetics.

And he has a very interesting notion, which I quite like, about challenge propagation.

So that's continuing the theme of pleasant surprises, because we design challenges for each other.

Social situations, games, work, all these cultural niches are designed challenges simply by virtue of the fact that they were selected by our social culture dynamics.

We allow these to persist throughout time in culture, knowing that in their persistence, they enact positive effects on us as we try to adapt to them.

right and so in that sense i find it very very beautiful um that these kind of controlled unknowns is controlled chaos is such a prominent theme in how we design each other and allow each other to cultivate and in that sense to find another theme we co-regulate each other and in the co-regulation of each other we develop these kind of super personal personalities which i think

Well, hopefully people can agree that we sometimes really feel that viscerally, the kind of personality or vibe as millennials like to say.

And there's a certain vibe, there's an area.

And these vibes tend to resonate with our personalities because we already have these models of this kind of strategies and goals and values we instantiate for particular situations.

And so it's not far fetched that the same models afford us also sense certain personality-like themes in situations.

Because that is literally the kind of brain system we use.

We use a brain system of persons to do this, right?

The brain system, it's only where frontal, there's a lot of frontal area.

We have next to each other, the brain area activated when we do self-modeling.

And next to that's modeling other people.

And so that is also exhibited in how easily we attribute personality or intention to inanimate, super-simplified objects.

And that speaks to, in my opinion, the validity of the core assumptions in this paper, that personality can be decomposed, and indeed, that's counter-effect of values, strategies, and goals.


SPEAKER_07:
um sorry i went on a ramble i thought i was going to say but but yeah our relational architecture the way that we talk about organic chemistry and this chlorine wants to do that and this galaxy wants to do that the intention the intentional stance that relational thinking is so deep and the way that you put it with the super personality it's like the superman is the collective leviathan it's not just the better individual nest mate

It's that and in the context of something that's actually super or supra, like above, not just better.

Scott, and then anyone else who wants to make a final comment, but this has been really great.


SPEAKER_02:
Marco, that was so beautiful.

I was starting to think of the choreography of consciousness.

That's what it felt like.

It's such a beautiful notion.

I always used to tell my kids, now they're in their 20s, I used to say the only time you see reality is when you see paradoxes.

and any other time you're inside a model.

And the paradox, and that goes right, the paradox is the reality.

That's the reality of our interaction.

You know you're interacting then.

You know you're encountering something.

And so that notion of embracing the paradoxical and the dance and the negotiation of it, it reminds me, the last point I was gonna make is it reminds me of the research they did on fish swimming.

They took a semi-rigid piece of plastic and they put it in a stream and they started increasing the speed of the stream.

And at a certain speed of the stream, the plastic undulated with a periodicity that was akin to how fish swim.

And they realized that fish don't swim through water, they pass through the water.

And because the water is causing them their swim.

similarly that choreography of consciousness is that right we're not we don't just situate our cognition we situate our persona and our and and it's constructed externally and internally so the last thing i wondered about is is each system gadelian

So each system is incomplete, has questions within it that can't be answered from within it.

And maybe our novelty seeking is an intrinsic recognition that we're all good aliens, that we need to go outside to find answers.

So anyway, great discussion.

Love it.

Thank you guys.


SPEAKER_07:
Thanks as always for coming on Scott.

So let's just go from Dave, Colin, Marco, and then we'll probably call it unless someone else has a burning desire.


SPEAKER_08:
The only time we need to be conscious is when we're in that zone of paradox.

We ought to understand it, and we don't.


SPEAKER_07:
Nice.

Colin?


SPEAKER_10:
Well, on the same theme, I really like that idea of paradox being reality, too, and that's the same as the prima materia of the alchemists.

Right.

It's what is the thing behind everything that gives birth to those things.

And it's precisely the thing that we don't understand.

It's the thing that's unknown.

Right.

And so that's the chaos that's on the other side of the border where we're at the edge of chaos.

And yeah, from especially from the perspective of consciousness, what you need to be conscious of is precisely only those things that you don't understand perfectly already.


SPEAKER_07:
Marco?


SPEAKER_09:
Yeah, Scott, thank you.

That was beautiful.

Yeah, I just wanted to riff on that.

So I laughed because I feel comfortable saying this here.

So me and my friends, we were interested in psychedelics.

So I find it very, very fascinating that there's a huge variety in what I call idiosyncratic encounters.

So a lot of my friends with the psychedelics have this one thing that they feel like, oh, wow, that was so fundamental.

And one of my friends, let's call her Lutha,

um she had exactly that right she said i couldn't escape the idea that everything is paradox right and uh though i won't go into it but every other such quintessential encounter is a disagreeing powder also in my opinion relates to something uh formalizable in in terms of active inference

And I really, really like your notion of choreography of dance.

I use the metaphor a lot too.

You might also be interested in Fridtjof Kapla's work, who also wrote Tao of Physics, and he also had this moment of insight about physics simply being this dance, right?

He used the metaphor of Gali, a deity in Hinduism.

But more formally and interestingly,

Well, my attempt to formally make it interesting is, as we noted, cybernetics acts upon configurations of models simply because systems are compositional, distributed, and constantly reorganizing.

So at the very least, I can say that it's about configurations.

Yet, going back to an earlier thread, if conscious indeed is intermediating cybernetics, then they need to intermediate the balancing or the metaconfiguration of configuration.

which themselves are constantly changing.

So exactly in the example you took with the fish, they are embedded or immersed in fluid dynamics, right?

There are flows.

And I say that formally, these are informational flows.

So they're immersed in all these flows and they need to find, or that space needs to find, the space needs to situate itself in between those flows.

And by virtue of doing that, it is regulating them.

And so I think that's a very beautiful idea.

And the last thing I think is also very beautiful.

So we're all Godelian.

We're all incomplete, which reminds me of conversations I've had with Simon Dedeo, a researcher at SFI Institute.

Very, very good researcher, very interesting.

Has some very, very nice work on Bayesianism and the nature of knowledge.

And I think I said to him exactly what you said, right?

We're all Godelian.

But how I phrase it is we're all each other's oracles.

So an oracle, I'm not sure if you know in computer science, but they give you an answer that you can't actually compute.

If you would have the answer, then things would become easier.

So it is by virtue of the, no, we are incomplete, and that is allowed because other people's incomplete systems can act as an oracle for us.

And so I think that's also something that speaks to our experience of how we are aware of certain things, but it's in fact actually very incomplete.

But we trust that it's okay to be incomplete.

And if you're interested in that, then I'm sure you know Hofstadter, Gildascher Bach.

Terence Deacon, Incomplete Nature, as Adam mentioned, and The Dale, as I mentioned.

So yeah, thanks so much.

That was very stimulating.

Great.

I hope you found that interesting.


SPEAKER_07:
I close it with William Blake quotation he wrote in his notebook.

Do what you will, this life's a fiction and is made up of contradiction.

They're beautiful.

I applaud to that.

Peace out everyone.

Thanks for participating.

Thanks for watching it.

Hope to like have more participation.

Join the stream if you're not on it already and we'll see you next time.

Thank you so much for hosting this.

Bye.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks everyone.
