## KX62d4gvFAY

Hello and welcome everyone. It is November 2nd, 2023, and Blue and I are here in ACTIM
live stream 56.0, kicking off the 56 series on a set of four papers.
Welcome to the Active Inference Institute. We are a participatory online institute that
is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference. You can find us at links here.
This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.
All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow video etiquette for live streams.
Head over to activeinference.org if you want to learn more about the institute,
get involved in any activities or learning groups. Let's begin with a little bit of an introduction
and warm up, say hello, and then maybe just one thing that we found interesting about these papers
or that made us want to jump in for the 56 series. So I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in California,
and I was very interested to learn about what the relationship is between different neural
inspired approaches to machine learning and active inference. Blue?
Blue?
Blue?
I mean, same, this kind of always like the neurobiologically inspired
machine learning is always kind of something that piques my interest and I'm still here, still
excited about it. And in this like set of papers, I was actually like,
particularly interested in like sparsity and how that is maybe something that's particularly
biological or not, or just kind of learning and diving deeper into sparsity as like a topic of consideration.
Cool. All right. Well, in this series and in this video, we're going to discuss four papers,
and we'll get to why we have four soon. Four papers are the Neural Coding Framework for Learning Generative Models, 2022.
Convolutional Neural Generative Coding Scaling Predictive Coding to Natural Images, 2022.
Spiking Neural Predictive Coding for Continually Learning from Data Streams, 2023.
And CogNGen, Building the Kernel for Hyperdimensional Predictive Processing Cognitive Architecture, 2022.
And as there are four papers, we're going to use acronyms for each paper and also go through them in this order.
And again, we'll return to why there's four and why this order. The four acronyms are NCF-22,
CGN-C-22, SNPC-23, PPCA-22. So the video is going to be an introduction. We're going to cover
the big questions and then basically jump immediately into the four papers. And this is just an introduction.
Feel free to write comments or if you're around in time to join for these upcoming discussions that
we're going to have with Author. So, Blue, what big questions are you excited about here?
So I think I already talked about sparsity, but I would like to know what other types of tasks that
are perhaps maybe non-visual could Neural Generative Coding be suited to? And then the concept of,
in the last paper, we'll get to it, of a memory echo as a prediction. I think,
is prediction just a memory echo? And then that leads into what is the difference between I predict,
or I expect, or I hope, right? I predict that the Eagles might win the Super Bowl with maybe
50 to 60%. That's the probability, right? 50 to 60% probability that the Eagles win the Super Bowl,
but I totally hope that the Eagles win the Super Bowl 100%. So where's the difference between hoping?
And I can actually, I thought about it and it's like action, the role, you hope something happens,
you hope you get into a good college, you predict that you'll go to college, you hope you get into
a good college, you get good grades, do all the things, and then you can act based on that hope.
But I actually can take no action to affect whether or not the Eagles win the Super Bowl. So
action is not necessarily a key role there, but how is hope different from prediction and
expectation? And how would you approach modeling something like that? It's just something that
derailed me anyway. That's interesting. Yep. So my big questions first, just on the scope.
How is it different now that we're in our first quadruple dot zero? We've done one paper at once,
we've done two at once, side by side, four is double side by side, and we love the four.
And we're going to get a little bit more. About the topics though, we are going to get very
micro and zoomed in, and we're going to have some of the formalisms brought in, but there's a lot more
in the paper. So how do these really mechanistic and or abstract micro level discussions of like neuron
spiking help us get closer to real cognitive architectures and modeling? And then I think
to kind of for, um, warn of the fourth paper, here's where we're going to see something like
the cognitive architecture that includes not just perception and memory and all these things,
but also the action component. So how does this connect to active inference? Like, is this driving
down the low road coming from the high road? Is it another road? So where's the work that we're
going to be looking at in this sequence of research related to Bayesian mechanics, free energy principle,
some of these more first principles, intelligence conversations that we have. So let's talk about
why there are four papers. So I hope this is okay. That from Aurobia, I share something that he wrote.
He suggested the four papers and said, almost in that sort of order from the more base neural
generative model coding, predictive coding framework, and CF-22, that's going to be the first paper we
discuss to its convolutional generalization, CNGC 22, down to its spike level generalization SNPC 23,
and back to its part in generalizing active inference to a robotic setting, PPCA 22, in a sort of
progression slash series. So hopefully this lays out our approach to these four papers, which we were
happy to accept this curriculum and challenge. The first paper that we're going to look at is going to
set the kind of base canvas or overarching umbrella model, the NGC. Then there's going to be a
convolutional and a spike level generalization or kind of additional motif. And then we'll get to this
question of more integrated cognitive modeling in the fourth bit. Any overall thoughts just on the
four papers, Blue, before we go to the first one? I mean, I'm curious to ask, like, what was the order
that these like started in? And like, how, like, what, like, you know, I mean, sometimes you just
finish everything at once, or sometimes like you start something that takes forever. So I'd like to know,
like, what were the order that the projects were started in, as opposed to like, I mean, we'd have the
publication dates and whatever. But I would like to know, like, did they start and go in this order,
just as like a narrative from the author? That's a great question. All right, first paper,
Neural Coding Framework for Learning Generative Models, Aurobia and Kiffer 2022. So just let me know
when to switch slides for this section, Blue. Thank you. Awesome. Okay, so we'll read the abstract.
I'll go, I'll just, maybe I'll take a couple sentences and then pass it to you, Daniel, if you don't mind.
Okay. Neural generative models can be used to learn complex probability distributions from data,
to sample from them, and to produce probability density estimates. We propose a computational
framework for developing neural generative models inspired by the theory of predictive processing
in the brain. According to predictive processing theory, the neurons in the brain form a hierarchy
in which neurons in one level form expectations about sensory inputs from another level.
Do you want to read the rest? These neurons update their local models based on differences
between their expectations and the observed signals. In a similar way, artificial neurons in
our generative models predict what neighboring neurons will do and adjust their parameters based
on how well the predictions match reality. In this work, we show that the neural generative models learned
within our framework perform well in practice across several benchmark datasets and metrics,
and either remain competitive with or significantly outperform other generative models with similar
functionality such as variational auto-encover.
Cool. Thanks. So the roadmap, this is a nature paper and it's dense. So there are like 18 different
formalisms in this paper and like many, many different models and sets of experiments. So the roadmap is here,
and we are not going to go that deep into this because we're doing four papers and you know, hopefully under 90 minutes.
And so we're going to go deep into the maths here, but hopefully we can get more heavy into it in the dot one.
So pretty much introduction results, discussion and methods, but really what happens here is
the results section kind of gives a lot more introductory information about like the back propagation and what
learning looks like in the brain and the neural coding framework and how this kind of, you know,
forms a bridge here and then training the model and how the model updates everything and then what can
the model actually do. So we're going to kind of get into a little bit about the model and what the model
can actually do. And then Daniel, I think we'll delve deeper into the next couple of papers into the model,
and then finally tie it back into active inference in the final paper. So just that's an overall roadmap,
and then the roadmap for this paper too. So go ahead and flip it to the next one.
All right. So in this paper, the author states that in neurobiological systems, neurons make use
of the information immediately available to them in both time and space and do not wait on distant
regions in order to adjust their synapses with global information provided through neurotransmitters
such as dopamine. Also later in the paper, he says, while the question as to how credit assignment is
exactly implemented in the brain is an open one, it would prove useful to machine learning,
computational neuroscience, and cognitive science to have a framework that demonstrates how a neural
system can learn something as complex as a generative model without backpropagation using
mechanisms and rules that are brain inspired. So that's kind of what they set out to do in this
paper. So let's go ahead and flip it.
So here, this is figure one, and this is like figure 1A looking at a backpropagation model.
And so this is from the legend in the figure. He says credit assignment in backpropagation or in
backprop. I won't keep elongating that credit assignment in backprop requires a strict global
feedback pathway, which requires the completion of the forward pass that carries information upstream,
right to left. This feedback pathway carries the error message E0 at the output layer back along
left to right, the same synapses used in the forward pass to update downstream neurons Z1 and Z2.
Backprop differs from brain-like learning because, so this is within the paper, not the legend,
the synapses that make up the forward information pathway need to be directly used in reverse to
communicate teaching signals, which is the, this is known as the weight transport problem. And so you
can see that here. So here it's going from left to right, like the output layer is here at E0, or the
error message is here at E0. And then the backpropagation happens is here at this red arrow. Thank you,
Daniel. As I'm pointing to the screen, you're following my finger along. Okay. Neurons need to know about and
communicate their own activation functions first derivative. And that is shown here in the little
deltas. So neurons must wait for the neurons ahead of them to percolate their own error signals backwards
before they know when or how to adjust their own synapses. And this is known as the update locking
problem. And then also there is a distinct form of information propagation for error feedback,
one that starts from the system's output and works its way back to the input layer. So that's shown here in
figure one, which does not influence neural activity. So in other words, the global feedback pathway
problem backprop creates signals that only affect weights, but do not at least directly affect or
improve the network, the network's representation of the environment. So it seems like a lot of extra
steps. And then the error signals have a one to one correspondence with neurons. So we can flip to the next
side. So in this paper, the first four of those points are addressed by neural generative coding. So
everything except the final point, the one to one correspondence between the error signal and the
neuron. So this is the neural generative coding model. So it says the proposed NGC model sidesteps this
neurobiologically implausible requirement by learning with short local error transmission pathways pathways
that are made possible through recurrent error synapses and stateful neural activities. Credit assignment
under neural generative coding operates with local mismatch signals E1 and E2 that readily communicate this
information to their respective layers Z1 and Z2. So here the black arrows are forward propagation while the red arrows
are backwards transmission. Solid lines indicate that a signal is transformed along a synapse while dashed lines
indicate direct copying of information. So it's like the identity function, no transformation of the signal.
And then the delta shows the communication of the neurons first derivative. The triangle represents the
computed change to the synapse of the forward pass that will use the nearby error signal. And then the dot is
the multiplication of incoming signals, which you see those all like we don't see the dot here, but it's in the
the backprop model. So in the previous one. Okay, so that's the model. That's all we're going to talk
about for this so far so far. So we're going to see now like what are the different models that they
compared against. So I'm just going to list them right here. So they used backprop models, the regular
regularized autoencoder. And these are the abbreviations that are used here. The Gaussian
variational autoencoder, the constant various constant variance Gaussian variational autoencoder,
the adversarial autoencoder, and then the deep sparse rectifier network. And that's purely
discriminatively trained. So I just want to point that out. And it'll be important as we get later,
just the last one. And then the neural generative coding models. So this is actually the first one is
from the like super seminal Rao and Ballard 1999 paper. And then also a super seminal paper by Friston
in 2008. And then the later two models, which we'll talk about more in the dot one are models that are
developed by the authors of this paper. So these GNCN models are both developed by the author. And then
the Gaussian mixture model is like just another classic benchmark model that's not backpropagation or
the generative coding. It's just, yeah, a mixture of a Gaussian distribution. So, okay, next.
So what can these models do? So generative neural coding can learn viable auto associative generative
models. And let's check out some of the results that they got. All right, so here we are table one.
So I gave you all the models so that you can kind of see what's over here. So the only ones that are
neural generative coding are the GNCN ones. So the last four, and then the first two, the first one's
from the Rao paper that says Rao. And then the second one with the sigma is the Friston. So we see here
the regularized autoencoder, auto associative network least equipped to serve as a data synthesizer
model. So the other GVAE ones. And then while the variational autoencoder models yield worse
reconstruction than the regularized autoencoder, they obtain much better log likelihoods, especially
compared to the Gaussian mixed model baseline, indicating that they are strong data samplers.
And then the neural generative coding models, the ones developed by the authors here, obtain
competitive log likelihood with the variational autoencoder models. And with the GNCN PDH yields the
best log likelihood of all of them for all four datasets. And so the datasets that they're talking about
here, we're going to see some pictures of them in a little bit, but they're like the number datasets,
the MNIST. So not all of them are numbers. So MNIST is like the classic number dataset. And then the FMNIST
is like pieces of clothes. And then the Caltech one is like, I don't know, some strange shapes. So let's
flip to the next one. And maybe it'll show us I think it does actually. Oh, no, let's flip to back to
figure four so we can look at the datasets or to figure the next one. Yeah, and then we'll flip back.
Yeah, let's let's see the datasets. There you go. Perfect. So sorry, I should have reordered these.
But you can see I'm trying to describe these samples. So this one is like, some like handwriting.
I'm not sure is that language Daniel, the KMNIST? Do you know?
Daniel K. No.
Daniel K. No.
It's you know, it's not any language. I was like, is it like, I don't know.
Is it Chinese Arabic? I could I can't read it. So I don't know. But you can see here,
the MNIST is numbers, the FMNIST is clothes, the count and like the rest are just like symbolic
representations. So just so you guys know, this is what they're looking at. This is what they're
trying to generate. So then let's go back to figure four.
Oh, there we go. Okay, so figure four. This is the error, the BCE loss measurements. So lower is better
for pattern reconstruction on data subsets. So this is measured in terms of the percentage of the
original database samples. So here you can see that the BCE loss, which is like, we want less,
less is better for all of the different models here shown. So the RAE is blue. The variational
is light green, the GAN, AE, that's like another auto encoder that is dark green. And then the three,
the pink, purple and orange are neural generative coding models from first in and then the two shown
here. So like they're not always, they don't always show every model in every figure. But you can see
here that the error for the three, like the pink, pink, orange, pink, pink, orange is pretty low all the
way across the board here. So I think that that's the important result. And then let's get we can flip on.
So neural generative coding also yields strong downstream pattern classifiers. So let's see how
the authors found that. In table two, in terms of test error, we can see them all here. So here's
the different models. The DSRN is the discriminatively trained model. And then that's the auto encoder,
the back, these are all the back propagation ones, the first four, and then the last four
are the neural generative coding models. And with the final two being the ones used here,
developed here by the authors. So we can see the data sets. So the top two of each,
the top two pictures in each row are the data sets like from the original data. And then the bottom two
are generated by the model. So we can see that this is how they are, like how they're generating the
data samples. So here the the bottom two, even the very bottom one. Wait, yeah, the bottom three are
competitive with the purely discriminatively trained model, the top one, which has the best output. And
they outperform all of the generative models, even the DSRN in one case. So the bottom, the bottom
model, bottom two models do really well in generating data. So good. And then figure six, I think shows
kind of the same thing. So in figure six, a, this is a TSN plot of the data and the data clustering. So we
provide qualitative evidence that the latent representations of neural generative coding, this is from the NCN PDH,
they appear to yield a stronger natural separation of the test data into class respective clusters
compared with the back propagation based model, which was this was the best performing backprop model
with respect to log likelihood and reconstruction error. So we can see that there's like a more
distinct clustering here. And I think that that's, that's what the authors are saying is the qualitative
evidence. Again, we emphasize that the neural generative coding model acquired representations
without labeled information. So the class based relationships have emerged as a result of very
sparse neural activities. This is why like I'm so interested in the sparsity here. This offers some
promising evidence that the neural generative coding models representations offer benefits beyond the
original density estimation task, allowing reuse of the same system for downstream tasks like
categorization. So pretty neat. And then neural generative coding can conduct pattern completion.
We'll click on the next one. So this, they didn't show the data here, they showed like a little bit in
the methods. But they said that another interesting ability attributed to auto-associative memory models,
associative memory models, is their ability to complete partially corrupted or incomplete patterns.
And they hypothesize that a neural generative coding model's ability to conduct pattern completion
better than the auto-encoder models is due to its iterative inference processes. So I'd like to see
future work that kind of probes at this a little bit.
Thank you, Blue. That's super helpful. Very nice. Any other comments on the paper?
No. Yeah. They replaced this time lock, weight transport bound, global feedback constraint
setting with a biologically inspired, locally computable, etc., etc., architecture.
So that is kind of the base case that we're now going to dive into two specifications or
elaborations of convolutional first, then spike level. And then in the fourth paper, it's going to come
back to mainly blue with the overview of the cognitive architecture. Okay. Can you read the abstract for this one?
Sure. In this work, we develop convolutional neural generative coding, ConvNGC, a generalization of
predictive coding to the case of convolution-deconvolution-based computation. Specifically,
we correctly implement a flexible neurobiologically motivated algorithm that progressively refines
latent state feature maps in order to dynamically form a more accurate internal representation
slash reconstruction model of natural images. The performance of the resulting sensory processing
system is evaluated on complex data sets such as the color minced, CIFAR-10, and street house view numbers.
We study the effectiveness of our brain-inspired model on the tasks of reconstruction and image
denoising and find that it is competitive with convolutional auto-encoding systems trained by
backpropagation of errors and outperforms them with respect to out-of-distribution reconstruction,
including the full 90K CINIC-10 test set. Thank you. So this paper is somewhat similar and related to
the previous paper, except as promised, it's going to generalize it into the convolutional setting. So
there's also a lot of nice exposition in this paper, so it will be good to get some background too.
Introduction, then the convolutional neural generative coding model, details on the theory and the
practice of the experiments about what was tested and done, and they summarize contributions as follows.
One, we propose a new neural perception model, CONV-NGC, which acquires robust representations of
natural images in an unsupervised fashion. Two, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first work
in the literature where visual inputs are processed using deep deconvolutional layers directly and
naturally within a framework of predictive coding, significantly enhancing its representation
power for vision-based tasks. And three, we demonstrate on several natural image datasets,
that the proposed CONV-NGC is competitive with existing back-prop-based models of similar
architectural designs on the tasks of image reconstruction and image denoising and outperforms
them with respect to out-of-distribution prediction. So some of the first sentences of this paper that set the
stage really well. The first sentence begins with back-propagation and highlighting that while it's
done well, riding on the tide of increasing power of hardware and software, there are still some
limitations associated with back-prop-based AI. The field still has a long way to go towards developing
artificial general intelligence. I think it'll be an interesting question. Is that what this field or
who in this field means what by that? In order to increase task-level performance, the size of deep
networks has increased greatly over the years up to hundreds of billions of synaptic parameters as
seen in modern-day transformer networks. This scaling-is-all-you-need paradigm increases the
number of parameters and the deployment of multiple motifs, like transformer architectures, attention motifs,
and so on, as well as changing and curing datasets. And we are now getting up to models in the 2020s that
have billions of parameters. However, this trend has started to raise concerns related to energy consumption
and more. Energy consumption, limited flexibility and generalization, limited biological plausibility,
and this results in some computational constraints and limitations, especially around parallelization,
federation, learning, all these kinds of settings that we want to have effective algorithms for.
So, people are looking into different methods, biologically based and otherwise, that speak to
different aspects of this. They write, some of the most promising pathways in addressing all those problems
listed previously come from the emerging domain of research known as brain-inspired computation,
which seeks to develop neural architectures and their respective credit assignment algorithms that
leverage only local information motivated strongly by how learning is conducted in the brain.
The promise of brain-inspired computing brings with it synaptic adjustment mechanisms that are
neurobiologically grounded, as well as neural computation and inference that is flexible,
capable of providing a wide variety of operations,
at biologically more faithful levels, facilitating massive algorithmic parallelization at scale,
and adaption on analog and neuromorphic hardware.
So, it's an interesting discussion topics.
What aspects, what aspects or properties or processes or features or perspectives are we trying to copy about the brain?
And while we were preparing for this in some open sessions, someone told me about this spy kid's third brain,
and this kind of designing a brain, and what does it mean to really design cognitive architectures?
What does it mean to consider diverse intelligences?
How is this related to the kinds of large-scale scientific research projects that are going on in the human brain?
Any thoughts on that, Blue?
Okay.
At the end of the introduction, they again summarize their contributions that we looked at previously.
And before we jump in, this is from the appendix of the paper.
Here's some key symbol operator abbreviation definitions in Table 3.
A little bit of exposure to the symbols we're going to see.
Section 2. Convolutional Neural Generative Coding.
We start by describing our model instantiation of a convolutional neural generative coding,
convmvgc, which is tasked with learning from streams of natural images in an unsupervised
fashion.
Typically, in a visual recognition task, input patterns belonging to different object classes
arranged into batches are presented to a processing system at different time points for training.
Here, they formalize the problem and give a bit more information on the notation.
Convngc is a generalization of the NGC computational framework from 41.
That was the NCF 22 paper that we just heard about.
And generalizing it to the case of natural image data.
So in those other data sets like MNIST and others, every pixel is just passed in of a relatively small
image. So the whole image can be taken in as a matrix, like a binary matrix with black and white
squares or a grayscale matrix. However, real visual data coming in, for example, off of a camera sensor
is apt to have a much higher resolution. And so a biologically inspired design pattern
that we find in the retina and other kinds of biological visual sensors is this idea of convolution,
where a convolving function is used to blur and essentially get a coarse graining across a high
resolution visual input. The underlying process of ConvNGc can be divided into three components.
Local prediction and error unit map calculation, latent state map correction, and local synaptic
adjustment. So this is drawing on the architecture and the motifs that were introduced previously.
So this is drawing on the architecture and the model of the NGC model.
Here's the ConvNGc model. It consists of a set of L predictive layers,
typically arranged hierarchically, though this is not a strict architectural requirement.
E.g. Figure 1 depicts a non-hierarchical NGC circuit. So that was Figure 1.
Here's Figure 2, which is, I guess, a more hierarchically structured ConvNGc with three layers.
Section 3 goes into more detail on this model. In this section, we provide concrete implementation
details of the neural coding process described earlier, depicting how layer-wise state prediction,
state correction, and synaptic parameter updating occurs specifically in the context of visual object
reconstruction. The first two steps of the algorithm iteratively predict and correct the representations
of the ConvNGc model for observed input values, natural images of the current dataset.
After T iterations, the final step entails adjusting model synaptic efficacies using simple
Hebbian-like updates. So these are the three main steps. There's a two-stroke engine with prediction and
correction, kind of like an expectation maximization. And then after a certain number of iterations T,
there's the adjustment of synaptic efficacies. So here is from the appendix. This is the pseudocode of the algorithm.
Section 3.1. Inference, predicting and correcting neural states. Going through those steps. Layer-wise
state map prediction and state map correction. Then 3.2. Training. Updating the model's parameters.
Having described the model, essentially, they go to Section 4, the experiment.
We compare ConvNGc to powerful back-prop-based models such as the convolutional autoencoder,
denoising convolutional autoencoder, as well as the fully connected form of neural generative coding,
which under certain conditions recovers the unsupervised form of the model in 55, which is
Salvatore et al. Hierarchical Predictive Coding Network.
Details are provided about the datasets used. And tables 1 and 2 provide some performance measures
evaluated in terms of mean squared error, structural similarity index measures, and peak signal-to-noise ratios.
One can look to the tables to see where the different models do well or not.
Here are figures 4 and 3. Figure 3 shows an image randomly sampled from a dataset. Left,
the same image corrupted with noise. So here's the original image, a 5 and some kind of object. And then
a digitally corrupted version with a normally distributed noise term added. And then after
processing, this is the denoised image. That's figure 3. Figure 4. Feature maps for the bottom
three layers of a trained ConvNGC model. So this just shows a little bit of kind of the inner workings of
the model. And surprisingly, with respect to the out-of-distribution experiments, OOD, ConvNGC
outperforms all the baseline models. This desirable improvement is indicated by the higher trial-averaged
out-of-distribution peak signal-to-noise ratio, as well as the structural similarity scores.
What is most impressive is that the ConvNGC model was trained on natural images
in the housing numbers dataset that did not contain any of the objects found within either CIFAR-10
and CENIC-10, and was still able to reconstruct with top performance. This result offers a promising
future direction worth exploring for ConvNGC and NGC predictive coding systems in general,
their ability to generalize to unseen patterns that violate the assumption that they were generated by
a distribution similar to that of a training data. So this is, I think, going to be an interesting
discussion point. It's kind of like if you classified a visual detector based upon only a data set with a
certain kind of edge or surface, then it's possible that the model wouldn't learn more general features
of edges and surfaces. It might be able to use a back-propagation type updating and credit assignment
paradigm so that something really, really high level and abstract, like whether it's a cat or a dog,
could be tagged with something very micro, which is overfit to cats versus dogs, or even more locally,
like that cat versus that dog data set. And so potentially constraining to these local connections
only, making a kind of enforced sparsity means that the messages that get passed are not just more
biologically plausible and fewer of them, but potentially they extract features more like the
visual system does in terms of extracting generalized edges and features through lower level features
that kind of percolate up into higher level features in a really methodical way, which is why
we can like recognize a shape that we've never seen before. So in conclusion, here's the whole conclusion.
Our results mark an important step towards crafting more robust general brain inspired neural
architectures and learning processes capable of handling complex machine learning tasks.
So some questions for discussion are written here. And there are three very informative appendices in this
paper. So for more detail, if you think this is cool, definitely read the paper, check out the appendices.
Onto the third paper. This is SNPC 23. Want to add anything on that, Blue?
Spiking neural predictive coding for continually learning from data streams.
Do you want to read the abstract?
Sure. For energy efficient computation in specialized neuromorphic hardware, we present
spiking neural coding and instantiation of a family of artificial neural models grounded in the theory of
predictive coding. This model, the first of its kind, works by operating in a never-ending process of
guess and check, where neurons predict the activity values of one another and then adjust their own
activities to make better future predictions. The iterative, interactive nature of our system fits
well into the continuous time formulation of sensory stream prediction and, as we show, the model
structure yields a local synaptic update rule, which can be used to complement or as an alternative to
online spike timing dependent plasticity. In this article, we experiment with an instantiation of our
model consisting of leaky integrate and fire units. However, the framework within which our system is
situated can naturally incorporate more complex neurons such as the Hodgkin-Huxley model.
Our experimental results in pattern recognition demonstrate the potential of the model when binary
spike trains are the primary paradigm for inter-neuron communication. Notably, spiking neural coding is
competitive in terms of classification performance and experiences less forgetting when learning from
a task sequence, offering a more computationally economical, biologically motivated alternative to
popular artificial neural networks. Awesome. Thank you. Okay, here's the roadmap and the key piece of
this paper. So they start with the introduction, then go to the methodology, define the problem really well,
and introduce the spiking neural coding framework in order to implement this kind of continual error
correction from the spike trains. Section 3 covers the experimental results, simulations, and limitations.
Then there's conclusion and an appendix. They write, in this paper, we propose spiking neural coding,
as well as a concrete model instantiation that is composed of leaky integrate and fire neurons
and its learning process for adjusting synaptic weight strength incrementally. Although we only examined
one kind of spiking neural models, one kind of spiking neural neural framework, our general framework can
accommodate simulated neural models of varying complexity. So it's going to be a simple version
of spiking with a binary spike train and a leaky integrate and fire neuron. However, there's even sub
generalizations within this spiking paradigm. So just as a kind of reminder, we introduced the general
local compute-only predictive coding architecture in the first paper. Second paper looked into the
convolutional generalization. Both the first and the second paper, though, were trained in essentially
batch mode. Training datasets were loaded in and they were trained in a sort of batch-based approach.
Here, through this spiking mechanism, think about a trace through time and spikes happening along that
timeline. The data are coming in not in a batch that the computer gets to process at the kind of pace or
way it wants, but rather the data are coming in real time. So this generalization is much more fit to
both the real-time like Internet of Things semantic spatial web setting, but also the biological perception
setting. Here, there's a similar introduction. Instead of just harping on backprop though, artificial
neural networks, ANNs are the models which are described in terms of being very large and powerful,
but with challenges. And surprise, surprise, people are using brain-inspired computing to formalize and
implement various kinds of neural computation and learning mechanisms currently known in cognitive
neuroscience. And we only bring a few of these onto the slides, but I have been taking many sections of
text and passing it through different image generators. So it's always fun to like see visual semantics of
what sometimes these otherwise really wordy sections are about. So section 2, 2.1, problem definition,
continually predicting sensory stream inputs. So this is the key difference. Spiking is a motif or an
architecture that is going to enable us to move from the batch-based setting to the real-time or the
online setting. The neural agents that we are ultimately concerned with process sensory stimuli,
which are sampled from an environment or a stochastic process over time. So here we see a really nice
connection to epistemic foraging, information foraging in active inference. And here are some specifications of
what is meant by that, and also more about the data stream formulation. It still treats each data point as a
discrete element, though spiking neural networks are intended to process input stimuli that arrive with a continuous
flow of time. In order to truly adapt the above stream to the spiking neural net, we further generalize the settings
so that each tuple is presented to the learner for a fixed period of simulated time. And the length of the stimulus and
interstimulus times will vary depending on the data problem and application. So it's not the case that
it's just an infinitely short flash. It's the case that it's there for a defined amount of time, kind of like a video
frame. So if a video is 25 or 30 frames per second, then that is in this sort of 30 to 50 milliseconds range of
presentation of a given stimuli. So that allows the connection between the frequency of the regularities
in the pattern in the environment to be connected to the rate of updating and of like the real biophysics
of neuronal membranes or of some neuromorphic computer. 2.2 gives a mechanistic description of the
spiking neural coding network. So this is the spiking based generalization. More formalisms and information.
Here's what it looks like in Figure 1. A two-layer spiking neural coding network architecture.
We see a lot of motifs from the previous papers. This kind of local loop and the E's and the Z's. Green
diamonds indicate the error units E, which in this simplified model depiction compute the amount of
mismatch between the current predictions, which are the Z's of sub-mu, and the target signal traces Z's of T.
Variables s represent the binary spike outputs of a particular vector grouping of neural units at time T.
So more formalisms are provided. And just like the last paper, there is an algorithm in the appendix.
Here's what the spNCN algorithm looks like.
Figure 2. I'm just overlaying Figure 1 just on top. It's not meant to overlay it directly, but just to
remember that this is the kind of architecture that spike trains are being passed through or are
occurring within. So Figure 2 is showing these kind of biologically reasonable, despite the simple
integrate and fire model, traces. Kind of like a single neuron recording from inside of this little
in silico brain. Section 3 in silico results with the model simulation. First, they looked at the MNIST,
the digit classification data set. They presented two sets of experiments that tested the SPNCN's ability
to generate and classify patterns, as well as its ability to retain knowledge over task sequence,
and the appendix has more experiments. So Table 1, 2, and 3 have different evaluations and scores.
And then also, just like the t-SNE that Blue mentioned in the first paper, here's the t-SNE now
of the SPNCN with access to MNIST training up front. In the middle, the continual SPNCN,
and a continual SPNCN with a buff versus the lat. So we'll go into more detail with these subvariants,
but here we can see that this real-time learning is actually recapitulating similar structure and
near enough similar learning performance as batch learners, which is a big theme of the paper.
So here is a figure 5, showing task accuracy normalized to 0, 1 over proportion of a current
task data. And so on the x-axis is the portion of the task completed. On the y-axis is the accuracy
range. So here it's shown for the three SPNCN variants, but that was done for not just one data
set, but that was actually done for a whole set of data sets in figure 5. And so the big takeaway
from this whole figure is that SPNCN obtains competitive cross-task performance even though
it is trained online. It only processes data patterns once, whereas to obtain top performance,
rate-coded baselines were trained on each task for multiple epoch. Pretty cool. And then figure 4,
again, is a t-SNE layout of these different model variants. 3.2 describes some limitations.
And then the conclusion. In this paper, we propose spiking neural coding, as well as a concrete model
instantiation composed of leaky integrate and fire neurons and its learning process for adjusting
synaptic weight strengths incrementally. Pattern classification and continual learning experiments
demonstrate the generalization ability of our model in the realm of online continuous time-based learning.
And the model is competitive with many spiking neural networks learned with spike time-dependent
plasticity, STDP, or other mechanism. Further, our model exhibits better computational economy and is
more biologically plausible than modern-day non-spiking artificial neural networks. And then it'll be cool to
discuss future work. So to kind of close this paper and head into our fourth one, we started with a big
picture with predictive coding, things that we've talked about in many live streams. We just heard in
the last two papers, the convolutional extension, which enables higher resolution naturalistic images.
And then this spiking variant, which brings it into the setting of real-time online learning through
spiking, which also has lower energy requirements than non-spiking neural networks. And now,
back to blue for the fourth paper, Cog and Gen building the kernel for a hyperdimensional predictive
processing cognitive architecture. Cool. Thanks, Daniel. That was neat. Do you want to read this abstract?
Sure. We present a new cognitive architecture that combines two neurobiologically plausible
computational elements. One, a variant of predictive processing known as neural generative coding, NGC,
and two, hyperdimensional slash vector symbolic models of human memory. We draw inspiration from well-known
cognitive architectures such as ACT-R, SOAR, Liabra, and Spown-Nengo. Our cognitive architecture,
the cognitive neural generative system, Cog and Gen, is in broad agreement with these architectures,
but provides a level of detail between ACT-R's high-level symbolic description of human cognition,
and Spown's low-level neurobiological description. Cog and Gen creates the groundwork for developing
agents that learn continually from diverse tasks and model human performance at larger scales than what is
possible with existent cognitive architectures. We aim to develop a cognitive architecture that has
the power of modern machine learning techniques while retaining long-term memory, single-trial planning,
transfer learning, planning, and other capacities associated with high-level cognition. We test Cog and Gen
on a set of maze learning tasks, including mazes that test short-term memory and planning,
and find that the synergy between its predictive processing and vector symbolic components allow it
to master the maze tasks. Future work includes testing Cog and Gen on more tasks and exploring
methods for efficiently scaling hyperdimensional memory models to lifetime learning.
ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
models, namely a variant of predictive processing known as neural generative coding from this 2020
paper, which we did not go into here today, and vector symbolic, also known as hyperdimensional
models of memory. And we're going to talk a lot about this Hintzman 1986 model. It's called Minerva
2, and then a few other references here. Okay, so this is the common model of cognition, and this is
like a conglomeration of all these different references that are here in the legend, and it
just shows like there's some commonalities that go like across different cognition system models. Okay,
so you have declarative long-term memory, also that's associated with the hippocampus and the
temporal lobe, and here that's achieved with Minerva 2. There is working memory, which is the
frontal parietal network. They did this with Minerva 2, or the self-recurrent slot buffer,
which we'll talk about later, later, later. And then there's procedural memory, that's associated
with the basal ganglia, done with neural generative coding here. Perception and action. So finally,
we get to perception and action after, you know, what, are we an hour deep so far? Oh, an hour in.
So finally, we're here at perception and action. We've arrived. So the perception is the sensory
cortices, and action is the motor cortex, and both of these are achieved with the neural generative coding
model. Next slide. Cool. Okay, so we talk about a lot of neural building blocks. I mean, I think that we just
went through kind of all of the cognitive architecture building blocks. And here, just to kind of get into
the model a little bit. So this first equation one is at the top right. Okay, so given an input-output
pair of sensory vectors, Xi and XO, where Xi is the input and XO is the output, the circuit clamps
the last layer, ZL, so you see that up here in equation one, to the input and clamps the first
layer, Z0, to the output. Once clamped, the neural generative coding circuit will undergo a settling
cycle where it processes the input and output vectors for k steps in time. So it processes sensory
signals over a stimulus window of k discrete time steps. So that's just kind of like a broad
overview of how the system is working. E is a matrix with error synapses that passes mismatch
signals across the layers from L minus one to L. And then let's look. So beta is the neural state
update coefficient that's set according to one over tau, where tau is the integration time constant
in the order of milliseconds. So here you can see that this update equation indicates that a vector of
neural activity changes at each step within a settling cycle according to, from left to right in equation
one, a leak term modulated by gamma, the bottom pressure from mismatched signals in lower level
regions, and a top-down pressure from the neural region above. So that's kind of how this algorithm
is working in a short summary kind of way. Okay, do you want to flip to the next one?
Okay, so neural building blocks adding to memory. So this is this reference that I told you we were
going to talk a lot about from 1984. I think it's some it's at 1986 somewhere. Maybe there's like an
updated model. But Minerva 2 stores memory traces, observations, or sequences of observations of the
state of the world. Each memory trace is represented as an array of real numbers, a vector. Minerva 2 stores
all memory traces separately as rows in a continuously growing table. We use Minerva 2's forgetting
mechanism. Oh, that's the 1986 reference to randomly delete values from memory each time
memory is updated at sufficiently high probability to impose a computationally tractable limit on
the size of the memory. So if there was no forgetting, there would be like this would be an impossible
problem, just an impossible method by which to store the memory. Okay, next.
So this is how you get things out of memory. So in Minerva 2, memory retrieval is not a lookup
process. It's a reconstruction process. So when a retrieval queue or a probe is presented, like the
smell of chocolate chip cookies, each vector in the memory table is activated in proportion
to its similarity to its similarity to the queue. So similarity is computed as a normalized dot product of the
queue's vector with the stored vector. So every stored vector is activated by its similarity to the probe raised to a
power. And by raising the similarity to some power, the contribution of the most similar vectors is emphasized.
And then this is the what I was talking about at the very beginning about an echo. So it says here an echo is retrieved from memory as a weighted sum.
So that's this equation in the top right. So where ME is the echo or the output from memory. MI is the ith trace in memory.
MP is the probe or input to memory. And M is the number of traces in the memory table.
And so we're going to look in the next slide about so is is like prediction just an echo from memory. So we're going to look at that maybe here. Oh yeah, it's here.
So it says in Cog and Gen, we combine insights from several versions of Minerva 2. We make an architecture wide commitment to predict then correct learning.
Predict then correct can be implemented in Minerva 2 as discrepancy encoding. Given a sequence of observations, Minerva 2 can predict the next observation based on past experience.
After the prediction, a new observation is made. We update memory with the difference between observation MX and prediction ME. So it was not just an echo.
Is prediction an echo from memory? Like I think that that's what they're saying here. So MX minus ME. So observation minus prediction such that if the prediction is correct, no change is made to memory.
Whereas if the prediction is wrong, that prediction is inhibited in similar future contexts.
This is awesome. I love that you're pulling this kind of echo and prediction and memory because it's also related to how we
learn. Like we predict then correct. And that's kind of like the prepare, measure, learn, quantum information, quantum FEP connection.
But then how rich could a learning experience be if we predicted, what do you think the next slide is going to be?
Like then I learn about you. I learn about the paper and then no skin in the game. It comes up. I was off.
I was off because I didn't know you learn that's the update and then you learn on the learning.
So there's no end to how many layers you could learn with just like one data point.
Right. Like what's my prediction of the next slide? I theoretically have that in my memory as an echo somewhere, but it's not coming to mind.
So we'll find out when we get there.
All right, here we are.
So short term versus long term memory.
So for Cog and Jen, we adopt Collins et alts 2020 approach and model both working and declarative memory using Minerva 2.
Our working Minerva 2 is cleared after a task is completed.
For example, a maze is solved.
Whereas the contents of the declarative Minerva 2, which serves as the episodic memory in this paper's instantiation of Cog and Jen,
persist across tasks.
So there's some memory clear when the task is over.
Yeah. Short term memory that gets cleared after like each example, like each question on a test, each maze.
But then the declarative way of knowing is being kept episodically.
So like a memory of solving that maze is stored declaratively.
But each maze is each only being addressed with the working memory.
So that's cool.
So there's not a lot here in the perception place.
So they say that the environment that they investigate, which is Jim Mini Grid, which is an open AI environment.
So if you guys are interested, you can go check out open AI Jim Mini Grid.
But it provides a fixed problem specific encoder FE and decoder FG.
So they use a fixed encoding and decoding scheme to simplify the simulation.
And future work is going to investigate learning the perception modules as neural generative coding circuits instead.
So they didn't do that for this paper.
Next paper.
That's coming.
Okay.
Okay.
So neural generative procedural memory.
Action selection is driven by changes in the neural activity of basal ganglia, which estimate the value of the expected reward.
And these authors were motivated by the finding of expected value estimation in the brain.
So they made the cog and gens procedural module implement a neural circuit that produces intrinsic reward signals.
At a high level, this neural machinery facilitates some of the functionality offered by the basal ganglia and procedural memory, simulating an internal reward creation process.
So they say, we implement a neural generative coding dynamics model from which a reward signal is calculated as a function of its own error neurons.
We couple the dynamics model with a short-term memory module based on Minerva 2, which adjusts the reward value produced by the dynamic circuit by determining if an observed state is familiar or not.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.

Yeah.
And then...
Well, just, you're lacking...
You're going to see that in a figure, in the next figure.
Okay.
I'm just going to...
I'm going to let your internet just return.
Okay.
Okay, Blue?
I shut off my video.
Okay.

Okay.
Yeah.
The only comment on this is this idea of the intrinsic reward signal happening from a procedural module.
Yeah.
I'm good.
Can you hear me?
Yeah.
So it's like epistemic foraging.
You have a procedure for foraging.
And then there's an intrinsic reward even arising just by carrying out the procedure, which might be the predict and learn and reflect dot zero dot one dot two with an intrinsic smooth reward signal rather than kind of a needle in the haystack.
Yeah.










































like being just in a continuous flow.
Is your internet back?
I think so. Can you hear me?
Okay. Yes. Figure three then continue.
Okay. Nice.
You can hear me?
Yep. Go for it.
Okay. Perfect.
I just, I turned off my video.
So if I get the flash again,
I'll turn it off because sometimes it's easier.
Okay. Figure three.
Perfect.
So, and just what you were saying
about the intrinsic reward
before I delve into figure three,
they did talk a little bit in this paper,
and I don't know if I pushed it into here,
but maybe we'll get into it in the dot two,
but they did talk about trying to push exploration
via an intrinsic reward signal.
So we can kind of get into that exploration exploitation
discussion in the dot two a little bit more.
Okay. So figure three, the Cog and Jen dynamics model.
It says that arrows transformed data
across similar across synapses.
And then the gray circles represent stateful neurons
and the green diamonds represent error neurons.
So this is the multi-layer model that we're looking at here
with an external input and Z of T.
And we can see the layers across time.
So I think it's maybe it says more in the next slide.
Let's see.
So building upon the notion of planning is inference.
We generalize neural generative coding to the case of action driven tasks,
which we call active neural generative coding.
Notably within the neural generative coding action motor model is a modifiable working memory
that allows the model to store a finite quantity of projected latent state vectors
into a set of self-recurrent memory vector slots.
This particular working memory module, which we call the self-recurrent slot buffer,
serves as the glue that joins the models of Cog and Jen together.
So we talked, we heard about the slot buffer a long time ago.
And here we go back to the slot buffer.
And then in the next figure, we're going to look at the action driven task in the next figure.
Perfect.
So this is the motor model where the internal control portion produces signals.
Those are the CINT that manipulate working memory and the external control portion transmits signals.
So this is the CXT down at the bottom that affects the environment.
And so both the internal and external control share the same working memory, which is interesting.
So explicit declarative memory, episodic memory.
So Cog and Jen implements a replay mechanism in the form of an episodic memory constructed with Minerva.
Information is transferred to memory through an intermediate working buffer
where pieces of the transition are progressively stored as they are encountered
through the agent environment interaction process.
We do not update the motor action and dynamics models online,
but instead update their parameters only when episodic memory is sampled.
Thus, the Cog and Jen computational process has two phases at each time step of the simulation,
the processing step and the learning step.
And so we'll see figure two.
I think I have it next.
Yeah, perfect.
I reordered them because they were mentioned in different orders in the paper.
So Daniel showed this to us earlier.
Do you want to maybe talk a little bit about this figure while I go grab my computer plug?
Yeah.
Do you mind?
Cool.
Well, a few ways to look at it.
One of them is we're dealing with this fundamental interface question, blanket question, boundary question,
which is how we begin in active inference and free energy principle about the agent in their boundedness,
interfacing with the environment.
And then while we might see this in a partially observable Markov decision process generative model,
here we basically see the formalism from the last several papers, this paper specifically,
being represented in the way that we've seen agent environment interface before.
Observation coming in at time step t, latent space here.
It's actually a more sophisticated latent space.
It's not just like one Gaussian parameter that's getting updated.
There's this entire dialectic with the procedural and the working memory and the episodic, all
of these cognitive features.
And then there is motor or action control.
Action is emitted within the time step.
And then there's the observation at the next time step.
So this is a cognitive architecture that brings together a lot of the features that we've been
talking about, plus these higher order structured, purely cognitive aspects.
Thank you so much.
My computer thinks you as well.
So this, um, so I'm curious here in this model, how things get from the working memory into the episodic memory.
So I would like to see like maybe more details about that as we go into the dot two.
Um, yeah.
Okay.
So in the mini grid world problem, um, they are investigating two tasks, uh, to evaluate
the agents that they used.
So one is the door key task, the DK task, and the other is the memory task.
So everybody's in a grid.
It's a partially observable view of the agent's environment.
Um, and there's a three channel object.
Um, yeah, so the agent's environment is a three channel object, a tensor created by mapping each
visible grid cell to three integer values.
So everything, each tile contains either nothing, one object and a discrete object type.
So ultimately each file is encoded to an object index.
So it's unseen empty wall and then a color index, red, green, whatever, and then a state index,
which is open, closed or locked.
So those are the three, um, three.
Yeah.
Things, three things, three things in the environment.
Okay.
Next.
So.
The agent is restricted to picking up one single object, a key and may open a locked
door if it carries a key that matches the door color.
So that's the door key problem.
The discrete action space for the agent is six actions, turn left, right, forward, pick up an
object or drop the object that it's currently carrying or activate.
Such as like opening a door or interacting with an object.
The reward signal provided by all tasks is sparse.
The agent is only given a positive extrinsic reward if it, extrinsic reward, if it reaches a
green goal tile and otherwise making all problems difficult from a reinforce, reinforcement learning
perspective because it's sparse.
And that's, that's like, again, at the very beginning, like I act, I asked about the sparsity
and what is the, the, like, I mean, there's some overarching like level of complexity when
there's a sparse set of rewards, a sparse set of problems, a sparse set of activated neurons,
I mean, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, right?
Sparse networks are hard to deal with mathematically and computationally.
And I guess in terms of programming a system with sparse learning, it's beneficial.
It seems that way anyway.
Okay.
So each problem has a specific time step, time step limit limit allotted to allow the agent to
complete the task.
So you do it within a certain time where you fail.
Yeah.
Very interesting.
Their sparsity in architecture, space, time, reward, utility, epistemic value, all like we
don't live in flatlands.
We live on the rough and variable peaks and the very embodied constraints and limitations
of how things can actually be connected to each other.
So that's wild.
Cool.
Okay.
So for the door key problem, agent must find the key, the position of the key changes inside
of a locker room and then pick up the key in order to unlock the door so it can leave the room.
Upon entering the second room, the agent must find the green tile in order to successfully exit,
terminating the episode by reaching the goal state to receive a positive reward.
So they use a six by six grid.
The memory task is a different test.
It's posed as a memory test.
So in the memory test, the agent starts in a small room where it can see an object,
a key or a ball.
And they, they modified the problem to ensure that the agent starts looking in the direction
of the object.
That's interesting.
I wonder why, like, so that they don't have to, it does just save time.
Like, so you don't have to look right, look front, look left, look behind you.
I wonder why they modified the problem in that way.
So after perceiving the object, the agent has to turn around, exit the room and go through a narrow
hollow that ends in a split.
At the end of the split, the agent can either go up or down.
At the end of each of these splits is a different object, either a key or a ball.
To successfully complete the episode and receive a positive reward, the agent must remember the
initial object that it saw and go to the split that contains the correct matching object.
So did you see a key or did you see a ball?
And then which way are you going to go at the end of the maze?
Um, and then they did a seven by seven grid for that one.
Okay, let's see what they found.
Oh, not yet.
So these are the models of comparison.
So they use their model.
And a standard DQ network model distillation, and that's the DQN, R and D, which is a curiosity
model, and then a DQN that learns through account based formulation of the be bold exploration
framework, which we'll have to learn more about in the dot two.
So these are the models that they tested against.
And then this is what they found.
So success rate in the memory task for the cog and gen was like off the hook, like blew the other
ones out of the water, right?
Um, like 98 success rate for the memory task, which is pretty crazy.
Um, and then the door key task was, I guess like zero for the DQN and then a hundred percent,
a hundred percent, a hundred percent for the other ones.
Um, or maybe then the reverse.
So let's see from left to right, the door key task, the memory task in the bottom row is success
rate over the last hundred episodes.
The right is the episode length.
Oh, there you go.
The percentage in case of the maximum worst case episode length.
So that is, um, DQN having the worst, right?
And then cog and gen wasn't the fastest.
So, oh yeah, you can see the episode.
Yeah.
That's crazy.
I think it's just a pure coincidence that this one's a hundred point zero,
but this is a hundred percent zero, like a hundred percent.
And this one's 100 time steps point zero, but either way, DQN does worse than all three,
which can solve the problems, but a problem, but the cog and gen is twice as good on the
mem problem.
And then the episode lengths are pretty comparable.
And except the DQN.
Yeah.
Yeah.
This one's just kind of a baseline.
It takes forever.
All right.
It takes forever and doesn't do very well in the memory task.
Um, so yeah, there you go.
All right.
So that's how, that's a lot of time on the model and very little time on the results.
Uh, and then this is just some more of the results here.
So, um, you can just see the, the average reward episode length, um, smooth for the door key
problem and the memory task, which is the right.
So the door key is the left.
The memory task is the right.
Um, and here you can see the cog and gen on this bottom one.
Do you see this curve?
That is the, um, the curve depicts the mean and standard deviation over five trials.
And the left is the average reward, I think.
Oh yeah.
Episodic reward.
So that is the, where we saw 98 for the cog engine.
Um, and that's here too for the door key task memory task.
Okay.
Results and discussion based on the results.
We find that cog and gen is able to learn the grid world task.
The performance is comparable to, or on par with powerful deep intrinsic curiosity.
Reinforce reinforcement learning methods that have access to problem specific global information.
And cog engine can successfully solve and outperform all baselines on the memory task.
So bravo, we have arrived.
Wow.
Blue.
What a ride.
Yeah.
What do you think about the four paper, the four paper, uh, model?
Well, I can only return to what Alex wrote in an email, which is, it makes sense to have done it,
how it was done.
I think it'd be easy to look at a cognitive architecture like this, which integrates the
analytical components and also these more psychological or cognitive features like
epistatic and procedural memory.
It's easy to look at that in a way that's disconnected from the actual computational
implementation because connecting up the formalism feels as easy as just writing an
equation or just drawing something.
And then to say, well, maybe, maybe the working memory, you know, sends a message to this other
buffer.
It's like, you can just draw that out and nothing's going to stop you.
But then the first three papers kept it connected very closely to the actual locally
implementable computation.
So then we were able to get to this point of, um, looking at such an interesting cognitive model
that's also performant and be able to talk about where it could be applied or what would be different
or limitations or like these different features of this.
But it, it feels very different to look at this after the first three, which is the research direction.
So I think it was a great selection and I'm just looking forward to talking with Alex.
What about you?
Yeah, I'm looking forward to like diving deeper into, um, the, the models and kind of understanding
more about like getting under the hood, maybe so to speak.
So what, what makes them tick in a little bit more detail?
So should be good.
Cool.
Any other comments?
Awesome.
Well, thank you for preparing and having fun working on this dot zero leading up to now.
And yeah, in the coming weeks, we will proceed with 56.1 and 0.2.
So thank you everybody.
Until next time.
Yeah, thank you.






























Thank you.

## BMrgdUnF2iI

Hello and welcome everyone. This is ActInv Livestream 56.1. It's November 14th, 2023,
and we're continuing our discussion series on these four papers by Alexander Aurobia et al.
Welcome to the Active Inference Institute, everyone. We're a participatory online institute
that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference. This is a recorded
and an archived and a published live stream, so please provide us feedback so we can improve our
work. All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow video etiquette for live streams.
Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about projects and learning groups at the institute.
Well, today in 56.0, we're bringing out all of the four entrees, and we'll see where we go with these
big topics and with Alex here to discuss. So we'll begin with intros and go from there. So I'm Daniel,
I'm a researcher in California, and what I would like to explore in this stream beyond the trails that
were left in the dot zero is to get the zoomed in. What is the space of these micro motifs?
And then to compose those zooming in into the bigger picture? What do cognitive architectures look like
in 2023? How is that difference in theory and in practice than 1983? And then where is this all
heading in terms of how we can do useful and important research? Blue?
Blue? Cool. Thanks. Yeah, I'm interested in the 2043 cognitive architecture also. And maybe exploring the
space of human cognitive architecture, but also like non human cognitive architecture and what that looks
like and where maybe that might take us. Yeah, that's good. Alex?
Alex Vervia, All right. Yeah, I'm Alex Vervia. And I am the director of the Neural Adaptive Computing
Laboratory and computer science assistant faculty professor here at RIT in computer science. I'm also
affiliate professor in psychology, soon to be affiliate professor in cognitive science and
affiliate faculty in computational neuroscience, kind of a mouthful of different involvements, but I do a lot.
Alex Vervia, All right. So yeah, I've known about the Active Inference Institute before. Some of my
students are fans of the channel already. So it's very exciting to be here to talk to you guys. And
I think that you have some really good questions. And I think this set of papers that you picked
is a nice little pathway through some of the thinking that I've done over the years. What was funny when I
was watching the dot zero is, and again, I also noted this to both Blue and Daniel and email,
is that I thought, Oh, there's these other papers that I've written that would have clarified or could
have come so very easily, this could have become like, why don't you do 25 different papers? And you
know, I think that might have become quite a burden. But some of my bonus slides that I know Daniel told me,
I didn't have to make any, or it's not typical, but I have some slides taken from some pieces of those
other papers that might have might give some clarity to some pieces of your guys questions, depending on
which ones we start with. And you know, this and the dot two of next week. So again, thank you for
happening. This is very exciting. Awesome. I guess to begin, how did you get into cognitive sciences or
cognitive modeling? Oh, okay. The history, the origin story, right? Yeah, it's interesting. So when I,
without going into too much and spending too much of the podcast on one's own life story, when I started
out in computer engineering or computer science and engineering, when I was a young undergraduate.
And, you know, I even came from like a background of art and digital arts, which is kind of interesting.
I had learned a program late in high school. And then I'm entering in Bucknell University was where I
went for my undergraduate education. And it was really strange, I did not do much, I actually did not know
at all of machine learning, let alone cognitive models or computational neuroscience. It was more
of that strict engineering education. However, I like to think that something that I did, which was,
I'm a philosophy minor, philosophy of mind is what I studied. I like to think that's what biased me and
kind of launched me to where I am today. So I was always studying things like consciousness,
consciousness, also ethics and other aspects of philosophy and Greek philosophy. But philosophy of
mind and identity was something that sort of motivated me to think, well, hey, maybe this stuff I'm doing
in, you know, hardware and engineering, I could combine the two, you know, is there a way to sort of emulate
this concept of identity or consciousness? Little did I even know what, you know, the free energy principle.
And so then towards the end, I worked on complex adaptive systems, again, nothing to do with
machine learning. However, it ties so beautifully, especially nowadays, over the last year, I've done
thinking in working with Carl on the free energy principle and aspects of the Markov blanket. It's
funny how all that construct ties back together. And I was like, all that stuff I studied years ago,
wow, it comes back into force full into play really, really strongly. And then grad school,
I was in Dr. Celie Giles's lab, who's actually a very well known information retrieval scientist and
a classical deep learning researcher. And, and then I was, and he was more artificial intelligence.
But that's the reason why I got into deep learning, he gave me a survey, I was exposed to neural nets,
and he actually said to me years later, the reason he gave me that survey was to discourage me from
going into it. But he told me he was glad that it didn't work. And then along the way, this is the
part where I would, the cognition comes in. I was co-advised by a cognitive psychologist, Dr. David
Ryder at Penn State, who also worked a lot with another well known cognitive scientist, Dr. Frank Ritter,
who is, he himself was advised by Alan Newell and Herbert Simon. So some of the greats of our time
in cognitive science and classical artificial intelligence. So I was in the applied cognitive
sciences lab as well. And so between those two worlds, I think that's what sort of solidified me
to saying, hey, there's these big problems in machine learning, particularly with credit assignment.
So I don't know, I'm pretty sure you guys are familiar with these concepts in one form or another.
But credit assignment is just like when we're doing back propagation on a big neural network,
we want to play the blame game. How much does this neuron contribute in a positive or negative way
to some cost function? And for some reason, that always felt at odds with me, because along the way,
I worked with all kinds of really non mainstream models, like hot field networks and Boltsman
machines were actually my first loves, if you will. That's what I did in my early PhD thesis. So that was
at odds with what's going on in deep learning, even though Boltsman machines were used at the very
beginning, and then everyone threw them away. And so I think those ideas of like memory consolidation and
memory storage and the fact that hot field network couldn't remember everything actually had very
limited storage was awesome to me. And I was like, I want to probe that more. Can I build systems with
this? And so I was one of the early days working on Boltsman machines, but like trying to sell them as
the thing we should care about. And then towards the end of my PhD, so now I'm going to skip around a bit.
I did work on recurrent neural nets with Thomas Mikolov. He's one of my friends. And then towards
the end of my PhD, I had somewhere along the line over the years found predictive coding. My joke to
my grad students is Rajesh Rouse and Dana Ballard's classical 1990s paper on predictive coding and
classical effects of the eye was something that I read so many times that I said I slept with it under
my pillow to hope that I would absorb how incredible it really was. So that paper probably was the
strongest influence on why I decided, you know what, for the rest of my life, I'm going to do
predictive coding. I think we need a lot of work here because it's again also not a mainstream area.
It resonated with some aspects of Boltsman machines for me because I love iterative processing.
And I also read parallel distributed processing by McClellan, Rommelhard, Hinton,
Jeff back in the day. And so all of those things kind of rolled together. And so that led me to saying,
I want to do credit assignment, but in a biological way. So backprop's got to go. It's clearly not what
the brain is doing. I mean, if it turns out it does, I'm okay with being wrong. At least we explored some
other parts in the space that was beyond backprop. And so I do like the Bayesian brain theory and the free
energy interpretations of predictive coding. This is why I'm a fan of aspects of Carl's work.
And so, you know, taking that interpretation that came a little bit later, I would say once I,
so after grad school or my PhD, I got faculty position at RIT. And that's where the free energy
principles sort of biased me and active inference a little bit later on. Actually, most of my students in
my lab, if at least two of them that promised they would watch the stream, they both work on active
inference. So, so we talk a lot about that or read a lot of these papers. And then of course,
very recently have I finally gotten in touch and, and I collaborate now, you know, I would say rather
readily now with Chris Buckley, who's really, really well known in active inference, Carl in free energy
stuff, you know, and, and, and Bradress Rao was on the survey. So it was really great. The, if I actually
did not give you in blue, Daniel, that big survey, that I recently worked with Thomas Salvatore and Ankur
Mali. But we have this big review of predictive coding over the last like three plus decades. And
Carl's on there, Rajesh Rao's on there, Chris Buckley's on there, Thomas is on there. So there's a lot of
really nice names and they're really great people. And it was crazy when I got to talk to Rajesh Rao,
just as I told you earlier, I slept with under the pillow with, you know, his 1990s nature paper. So
to actually meet him in where I meet him in zoom was rather incredible. It was actually a, it was a fun
experience to get to ask him even the questions I've always had on the tip of my tongue. And so anyway,
that, that sort of is what molded me. And the cognitive science, cognitive architecture part,
which we'll talk about in point two, that was heavily biased by David Ryder and Frank Ritter and
my discussions with them and understanding architectures like Akdar and Soar, which are
these older ones, as you mentioned, I believe Daniel, but or, or blue, like in 1989 or in the 1980s. And
what's the future. And we can have some fun chats about that as well. So yeah, I would say that
because of that interesting blend that sort of led me to say that I'm not just the guy that says,
we got to get rid of back prop and here's how we do it. And, oh, well, let's use the Bayesian brain
theory of predictive coding or predictive processing to do that. But rather let's use that. But also
let's look to the common model of cognition, which is sort of like the grand theory or the blueprint
theory in cognitive science that I've also sold my soul to. I was just at DC a couple of weeks ago at the
cognitive science symposium, one of the FSS symposiums for AAAI. And I was talking to Andrea
Stocko and John Laird and all the greats from like the old cognitive architectures or brain imaging and
brain science. And we were talking about the directions where these go. So actually, if we talk
about later the future of cognitive architectures, I might bring and bring some of my thoughts from
that really, really nice symposium. And yeah, and I could keep blabbing. I don't know if that really
completely answered your question as to why, but I guess too long didn't read TLDR. Cognitive science
co-advisor in grad school combined with an AI main advisor in grad school philosophy of mind in my
undergrad strongly biased me with complex systems. And I guess I'll just blame Boltzmann machines because
honestly, those were, those were wonderful, wonderful. And I still think elegant little models
that sort of like said, we got to look to things that don't do, uh, don't work with at least gradients,
uh, with the reverse mode, uh, differentiation algorithm that sort of characterized the back problem.
All the credit goes to Boltzmann in the end.
Always. Oh, and we should give Helmholtz some love too. Von Helmholtz and the Helmholtz machines.
And you know, those are wonderful too.
Well, Blue, if you want to begin with a question or I'm happy to ask.
There was a lot there, so I could follow up a few times, but, um, um, I am interested in,
um, what you said about the Hopfield network forgetting and like how you thought that that
was perfect and like the most exciting thing that it, it didn't like recollect perfectly the imperfect
memory. Um, and I think that that's interesting to me also, and that, that kind of introduces
variants, which we see like in humans. I I'm a very much like, it's all in your mind. And
like, I like to walk the tight rope between like perception and like reality and like what is reality.
And, um, how, how do you like, when you have a variant, um, uh, in a system, like, because it forgot
X, Y, or Z somewhere along the line, how do you find like the best variant, best variants? Like what
would, and then like, you know, do you go on to selectively refine, like refining selective memory?
And, and what would that look like? Okay. So let me ask a clarification question. What do you mean by
like variant model or variant as in like a deviation that that's maybe some term I'm not quite,
it's not triggering something. So like in bio, in biology, you can't, you get variants, right? Like,
so you have like a biological variant, but I mean, just as in humans, like you have 25 people at a party
and 25, you have 25 different perceptions and 25 different memories of that party. Right. And so,
so in, when you have like a network that forgets, what do you then do with that forgetting? Like what,
you know, you have 25 different networks, 25 different memories, like how do you select the
best one or would you want to, and then how do you, um, like, what, what do you think could be the
outcome of that? Why is that so exciting that you have selective memory in a network?
Okay. Um, so I, now I, I understand now what you're asking, um, to unpack that a little bit,
briefly to answer why I thought Hopfield networks were so cool or so exciting. Uh, and just to make
sure that was clear was the fact that they could only had like linear storage capacity. So as obviously,
you could actually calculate, I think it was even, there's a formula with respect to the dimensionality
of the patterns. You can actually say how many memories I can store vector patterns, especially
binary patterns. Yeah. As I see the diagram being pulled up here, uh, before things start getting
corrupt. So I think that that was fascinating to me because, uh, I guess I had assumed that you could
just store lots and lots and lots of information, these deep networks, right. And the fact that memory can
be corrupted, uh, it is a very human like quality, right? We forget things as you've brought up now,
blue and your, in your comments. Uh, and I think it's a, it is a human like thing, but it also highlights.
And again, later I would discover catastrophic forgetting in deep neural networks, which isn't
really quite, at least in my view, human, like in the way that it happens in machines where, and by the
way, for the audience that may, may or may not know catastrophic forgetting, it's like you train a
neural network on one task, uh, to predict cats and dogs. And then I move on to airplanes and trucks
and I learned to predict that. And then I say, Hey, by the way, can you tell me if this is a cat or
dog? And it gets like 0%. It just, it's abysmal performance. That's not quite like a human.
Cause the joke I tell also my students is, um, I'd be like, Oh, as I learned to play the piano,
I forget how to breathe. Uh, that doesn't quite work. Um, so I think now tying that back. So that,
again, is like motivation and actually have like a bonus slide to say like future directions. This is
like one of the things that I've been working to try to resolve, uh, with biological models. The
Hopfield network was interesting and Boltzmann machines, uh, by extension, cause they're just
Hopfield networks with latent variables. I like the concept of attractors. So when you, when you
build like a Hopfield network, you know, the idea is that because you're learning with contrastive
heavy learning, which was also the algorithm that really caught my attention. I love that idea of
just, Hey, I find equilibrium. I run my model for like a certain phase. I compare it to some clamped
phase and then I just do a big subtraction. You get heavy and rules out of it. That's like one of the
central reasons to, I liked heavy, uh, sorry, uh, Hopfield networks and Boltzmann models.
But these idea of having these attractors in space, where if you could figure out your
optimization landscape, usually it's an energy landscape with a Hopfield model. Uh, we are
pulling the data, let's say templates even, or representative aspects of data at these little
pins that are saying these points in the energy landscape are what I'm going to remember and
patterns that look similar. So I guess this might kind of slightly address your comment on a variant.
So variant as in like variations to particular memories, if I meet someone or I have certain
attributes in a vector, this would fall into this dynamical attractor, right? Which again would fall
into this energy landscape. I really liked that interpretation of how memory works because then
it's not just me storing things in a hard array, right? The idea of like, let me just store every
vector I've ever seen, uh, because now you have this problem of capacity. Uh, and then again, how do
I build the, and you know, there's some value in modeling things in that way. So this isn't a
criticism of any neural models in that regard, but I like the dynamical attractor kind of point of view,
which again, then you can connect it nicely to free energy and say, oh, it's your free energy
functional. And I am just walking along my landscape to plot my memories in there. Um, so I think that's
what fascinated me was the energy based interpretation. Uh, and then again, uh,
Boltzmann machines and restricted Boltzmann machines, also known as harmoniums, uh, they have this
beautiful kind of energy based functional interpretation and they too are recollecting
patterns, right? By this, you could say a dynamical reconstruction, but it's really just like I'm
clamping noise and I'm running this until I reach equilibrium. And that sort of rep retrieves from my
memory, some particular element of life, right? Some, something I've experienced in my niche.
And I pull out that attractor, or I basically, I'm just saying how similar I am to that attractor.
And then of course, later on, there's been a lot of more efficient work and then there's
criticisms of Boltzmann machines. But, um, so I think like that's particularly why I found them
specifically fascinating. Um, I'm going to stop myself there. I don't know,
Blue if that was scratching at least that some type of answer to your question.
That was great. Thank you.
Earlier, you mentioned this grand cognitive science framework, kind of the general
cognitive model. So how do you pursue that or where do we place or enumerate all these features
of diverse intelligences like memory, but clearly just in your answer, there's multiple implementations
that are non-overlapping of memory, almost to the point where it's like, what, what can you really
say memory even is? So what are those core pieces and how will we know or assess that we have the
relevant, even, um, continents sketched out for, for worthwhile pursuit of, of anything other than just
an abstraction? Well, I mean, wonderful question, complex question. And, you know, I, me, I'm not the
only person, I mean, I'm just but one small voice, right. That, you know, should speak to that. I think
all of cognitive, all the great cognitive scientists I've even just met in, uh, the short span of my life,
uh, have some interesting differing thoughts. So I think just to clarify what you said, Daniel, the grand
kind of blueprint theory that I'm referring to is actually well known. There's some nice papers. I can
try to pass them on to you and blue. If you don't already know of them, it's called the common model
of cognition. And, uh, by the way, it is not the only way you can build a mind. Uh, it's just the one
that resonates the most with me. Um, and so I just want to point that out. It's not, again, just like
anything, there's no such thing as a silver bullet. I would even venture to say that there's probably a
no free lunch theorem that applies to cognitive science, just like I teach it in machine learning.
Uh, so there's probably no one cognitive architecture. Cause I think, I think blue said it, but you might've
said it, Daniel, about modeling things that are not necessarily human, uh, which I think could have
generalized to animal cognition, but it could also even, I was my brain weirdly enough went to alien
cognition, right? Things that are not even of, uh, you know, planet earth. Maybe there's other types of
intelligent organizations. And I do believe that that there is probably more than one way to build an,
an intelligent computational entity, but without getting into that also potential can of worms, um,
the common model of cognition, I think to sketch out what you said lays out the continents of the mind,
to use your word. Uh, the reason I like it is that it sort of is like a synthesis. The, when you read
the paper, uh, they themselves at the time, this was now years ago that the original common model of
cognition, uh, paper view paper came out and they looked at things like ACDR, SOAR, uh, Sigma. I don't know if they
looked at like, for example, uh, they might've looked at versions of Randall O'Reilly's work.
He does a lot of really nice stuff like Libra, the Libra architecture. I don't remember if that was in
there. Um, and other variants, of course, I don't think they had, uh, like Chris Elias Smith's group
at Waterloo who does, who did the work on spawn. You might've heard of Nango, which are like spiking
neural model toolkits, uh, spawn is an S P A U N, Daniel, if you want to write that so that way,
because there's like a science paper that he had years ago that came out about spawn. Um,
but they looked at maybe not those specifically, those would be like the updates. Uh, but they
looked at particularly the first three that you have in your, uh, in your notes there. And they,
they synthesize these architectures and what are commonalities here? What are they trying to model?
Um, and I, I, sometimes I misuse the word brain regions, but rather it's more like functional,
uh, continents. I'm going to borrow your terminology, Daniel of the brain. And they
kind of chop it up into saying, well, what are the grand pieces of computation that goes on?
And, uh, let's see if I can distill it from my own limited memory. Uh, you know, we have our motor
functionality, our motor cortex, we have perception. Uh, and of course, now I, of course have added my own
addendums to that, where you could break up perception into modalities like audio, visual,
uh, and then of course, olfactory and touch and taste and all these other elements that maybe we
don't model very well, but we'll leave that again, also as a separate discussion. And then the parts of
memory. So we have, for example, procedural memory, then we have declarative memory and we have working
memory. And those are kind of like the big, big kind of groupings of all the other things inside of
there. There's different types of memory that you could start partitioning up. Um, and so like declarative
memory would be like fact-based knowledge or world-based knowledge. It could also include episodic
memory, which is kind of blobbed into there. Uh, and I've done some work on modeling episodic
memory because I do things with active inference as applied to reinforcement learning. So of course you
need, you know, at least a, a type of replay memory to sort of refresh your, you know, uh, statistics.
And I'll leave that vague for now. And then you have working memory, which are again, this could be a
bias on my end because I have studied things like ActR, but they're like buffers. So I think of working
memory as not just this one module, but rather many little tiny occurrences of this module. And they are
the glue that helps transmit information between various continents in the brain. And then we have
procedural memory and the procedural memory is really interesting to me. And I think it resonates
really strongly with, uh, just cause again, we're, you're the active inference Institute and I have done
research in active inference. So, uh, cause I remember a question you had Daniel on point zero,
you said, where's the action. Uh, and then later you guys answered that question actually, but, uh, just to
be clear, there's other papers too, where I try to show you how to do active inference without even a
cognitive architecture with predictive coding. If I ever show you these bonus slides, we could look
at some of that, but, um, anyway, and, uh, procedural memory, I think resonates really nicely with active
inference in the sense that I put in there it's dynamics model. So again, if we imagine we have
perception and we think of that as, you know, the context of, uh, active inference, which is usually a
POMDP partially observable Markov decision process. Uh, let's assume that Markovian assumptions are okay
for now. I have criticisms of that, but the idea is that we have our input space. We have a latent space.
That's what, uh, your cortices are doing, right? Like the visual cortex is transforming
beams of light or pixels in a computer into some distributed neuronal representation, ideally very
sparse. And this is, again, I know blue is very interested in, uh, my, uh, my aspects of sparsity,
which is something I'm obsessed with. Uh, and I think we all should be obsessed with because that's
very biological. Uh, and then, uh, if we put the motor cortex as like, well, it's going to take other
signals and that's where the action comes in, Daniel. So like, for example, motor cortex is going to take
information from probably information processed in the cortices, maybe information queried from
various pieces of memory, uh, transferred to the working memory, and then they'll do something.
And then we'll get our, our signals, whether they come from another part of the brain, like the prior
preference part of the brain, which is kind of like our, you know, uh, goal oriented signals. Uh, and then
the part that, again, to go back to the procedural memory, the dynamics model that lives in there, or
the way that I've been modeling it, and I do this in cog engine, but also I just do this in my robotics
work too, uh, is that that's kind of living in latent space is trying to guess the next state, the sparse
distributed state of predictive coding circuitry. And with that, it's saying, oh, I'm wrong. Uh, you get
the basis of an epistemic signal, right? And that's how you encourage foraging, right? Because exploration
is like, to me, my view is the soup, the real crux of active inference. Uh, you don't have foraging,
you don't have this, uh, uh, epistemic kind of signal to drive you to be curious about the world. I,
uh, you know, I know you guys have talked about curiosity, uh, but also the, uh, prior preference
and obviously plays a role because you can either encode goals. And if we're doing RL, we sort of do
it like, oh, well, we could use the reward function or maybe we train some prior model. But, uh, the other
way to look at that is that's where also like homeostatic constraints could be, uh, you know, embodied. Uh,
and that's the stuff I'm doing with Carl. Now I'm going to have a nice big paper that's about to come out
to once I finish applying some of his edits and it'll basically address that, the, the life aspect
of this, but put that aside, uh, cause it's another can of worms, lots of can of worms to avoid. Um,
and then the last piece of this puzzles inside procedural memory, uh, there's the basal ganglia,
which is another structure I'm very obsessed with, uh, that in the prefrontal cortex and these
particular constructs in the brain, uh, they do many things. I mean, the basal ganglia is often,
you know, uh, you know, cited and studied for like dopamine application and reward injection.
Uh, that's where the reward signals come and, you know, I've often used that interpretation, but
another thing, and this is why, uh, Andrea Stacco, who's at the symposium and I really, uh, enjoy
talking to him, has done a lot of study of the basal ganglia. He has put in his work and he has
found neuroscientific evidence of it being like an information routing system.
And that to me is a humongous, uh, uh, tool for tackling catastrophic forgetting because the way
I see it is if I have this neural structure that is responsible for deciding what task I'm in the
brain or what pieces of information to play a role in the task that I am doing, uh, it's like suppressing
regions of neurons and exciting other regions. So it also induces sparsity to tie back to sparsity.
At the, the, the most extreme level, right? It's like turning off parts of your brain and saying,
this is task dependent. And the prefrontal cortex can be argued to do some of this too.
I haven't modeled that specifically, but I've seen other people do that. Uh, but again, the basal
ganglia was one thing. And so I have work on that, that you guys aren't also talking about, but again,
I've already thrown too many papers at you, but, uh, focusing on just like, oh, can I do information
routing with some basic predictive coding circuitry? Um, so I think that that sort of big glut of, uh,
uh, of speech that I just threw at you guys sort of gives you an answer, Daniel, as to like how you
would, why the common model of cognition, uh, is so nice is what I just explained was, uh, I just used
their blueprint. I mean, they didn't say the, the, the mechanics and the active inference part. That's
my twist to it, right? Uh, oh, can I reinterpret common model of cognition through free energy?
The answer is, uh, well, I've bet everything I have on that idea. Um, and then, you know,
and I teamed up with someone, uh, uh, Mary Kelly at Carleton university, uh, and she works on,
for example, uh, Minerva two memory and hyper vector, symbolic structures and holographic memory
and hyper vectors. And that's where, even though I know, uh, hot field nets, that's kind of another
world that, you know, they sort of intersect. So we, we put that in there too, but I don't,
you know, that's maybe we should save some stuff for point two. Um, but, uh, the, what I, what I
just explained is I walked you through the blueprint, which was very vague. It just said we should have
these grand continents, uh, and they might do certain things. They have like little arrows in their
diagram about information that's transferred, what modulation is going on. Uh, but then they
leave the implementation level kind of vague, right? The idea is it could be whatever you want.
You could implement it even classically, like in the 1980s with, you know, production systems and
if then statements, yeah, this is a good diagram actually. Um, you know, yeah. And you can kind of
see all some of the key aspects of memory here. Uh, and again, too, what's nice I took from common
model of cognition. And, uh, I do have a slide here. I keep saying I have a slide. Maybe I'll show
you one just so I can prove to the audience. I do have them. Uh, you know, the idea is that the action
element, the active aspect of active inference, common model of cognition also speaks to, right?
It says, well, we have to have a motor cortex. Uh, it doesn't tell you what to do with that motor
cortex, except that it's going to, you know, produce some motor command and then, you know,
it will transmit to the body, uh, and we'll leave embodiment as another thing. That's another can of
worms that I have been trying to address and inactivism, which is your niche and how that
relates to this, but let's just zoom in on the, the, the architecture of the mind and it has all
these components. So the way I envision the future, just to tie this to another question and make sure
that I'm not just blabbing, but keeping us, you know, uh, you know, useful, uh, is that I think
the direction we're gonna head or should head, I don't know if everyone else will follow that,
is that you want to build these biological cognitive architectures, um, rather than just,
okay, you know, let's rely on a production system like we do in act art, which is valuable.
I have, it's not really a criticism of that because maybe the level of modeling you want to do is I
want to encode this knowledge. It's a lot more intuitive sometimes to encode in like, if then
statements and logical statements, as you did in classical architectures, you can interpret it easier.
Um, but the part I think that, uh, we really need to push for is how do we get that type of behavior,
that type of self-organization, uh, without me hard coding this knowledge, right? Because again,
it gets to expert systems and good old fashioned AI, uh, we kind of don't want to be doing that.
We want to say, can we do this in a neural way? And then, uh, the answer I try to jump ahead to is
I say, by the way, don't do back prop because while you could do back prop, then there's, I think, work
on people trying to build types of cognitive architectures with that. At least it's a better step than,
uh, you know, chat GPT and claiming that that solves cognition, because it doesn't. Uh, and I, I am in that camp.
But again, leave that can of worms somewhere else. But the idea is that you skip that and go into
something that's biological, which is predictive coding. Uh, there are other things you can do.
I actually am working on other things besides predictive coding. Uh, maybe we can chat about
that in future directions if that question comes up. Um, but I think predictive coding and predictive
processing offer you a lot, uh, that, you know, other algorithms right now might or might not give
you, they might have drawbacks. Um, and this could even help answer if the question comes up, Daniel,
if you're interested, like, uh, what aspects of neurobiology does that bring to the table? But I also
think it has, uh, uh, the best way to convince machine learning individuals is to explain the
practical elements of it. Uh, cause you know, a lot of times we'll say, well, who cares about
modeling the brain? I just want to build an intelligent system. Um, but you can, you can use
predictive coding, uh, and predictive processing as a pragmatic, uh, type of argument. And you can say,
hey, well, you get this, you get this, you get this. And, uh, among those arguments is sparsity, but
there's, there's even more powerful pieces that we could go into. I think I'm going to stop now
because that's a lot of information. I don't know if I missed any piece of your question.
No, it's great. I'll ask a short question from the chat. Viet writes,
can we represent declarative memory with neural network based techniques such as HopfieldNet?
Was it, did you say Viet? Yes. That's my, I believe that's my, one of my students.
Um, so, uh, yeah, he's also works on active inference as well. So, uh, I'm not surprised
that he would throw a question like that. Um, the answer is yes. Uh, uh, you can,
actually there's a lot of good work already, even without the cognitive architecture kind of structure.
Because again, think of the common model cognition is like a blueprint that tells you
what things you're going to need to have and how they interact. Uh, but if you zoom in on one of
those continents, declarative memory, as was pointed out in the question, uh, for example,
you can use vector symbolic structures. You can use, for example, Minerva 2 memory. Uh, there's a lot
better. I would recommend faster models, which are Hebbian based systems, right? You can model Hebbian
memory, uh, associative memory, hetero associative memory with a lot of these like simple kind of
Hebbian like constructs. The learning is very efficient as well. Uh, they don't come without
the drawbacks, but, um, so the answer is yes. And you can model them with, I think, Hebbian networks,
uh, Hebbian learning, which is a correlational local learning rule. Uh, the other part with the
Hopfield network, you can also do that. And it's weird because while, uh, the work I have currently
done said we will do Hopfield networks in our cognitive architecture, which we'll probably chat
more about that in point two cog engine. Uh, but we do have plans to do like, uh, what do you call it?
Modern Hopfield networks. That's a particular, uh, instantiation of Hopfield nets that
is actually very, uh, efficiently implementable, uh, as I've discussed with my collaborator, Mary and,
uh, and others like Robert West at Carlston, uh, you know, talking about these types of things, but,
uh, you can use a Hopfield network to sort of use, uh, to create that dynamical attractor
interpretation. I was telling blue about earlier, uh, and the idea is that, you know, it'll have a certain
capacity, but the problem is, is we need to make sure that we have enough capacity because again,
uh, I don't think I ever completely properly answered blue's question about variants or,
you know, differences between what's, you know, reality versus what you think reality is. And
there's some interesting connections to predictive coding that also answer that question. Um, but,
um, the idea is that if you have, you know, one single Hopfield network, that might not be enough,
but I imagine chaining a bunch of these together to create what I call an assembly or an assembloid,
to use one of Carl's words, assembloids of Hopfield nets, I think is one way to build, uh, a completely
neural implementation of declarative memory. Uh, another piece of declarative memory that we did model,
I won't argue it was the most efficient thing you should do, uh, but it can be done, is, uh, Minerva 2,
uh, and again, that you can look it up. It's Hintzman and all, and, uh, Hintzman's old work. It's a heavy,
and it's an approximation of a large heavy and audio-associative memory. And, uh, what we did is we
modeled the episodic memory with like a big Minerva 2. The reason I say it's not a good idea is Minerva 2 is
really slow because it's kind of like approximating this heavy-end associativity with like a weird
echo query style lookup table, uh, at least the implementation. And even when you vectorize it and
put it in TensorFlow or, you know, your favorite linear algebra backend, uh, you can only get so
much of a speed up. So for very big memories, I don't think that's the right place to do it. But
the value of what we did is we essentially tried to emulate what episodic memory does when you do
replay and reinforcement learning, right? So, uh, you have to do some weird hacks to make, uh, the, uh,
episodic memory predict the next thing rather than recall this thing from a corrupted input vector.
That's called header-associative memory. Uh, and we did some things with like a window and we said,
hey, have this predict the next sensory or sorry, latent vector since, you know, I told you live in
latent space in, uh, the cognitive architecture, uh, maybe predict what you thought the original
action you're taking and the reward. And we sort of use that to roll out little streams or mini streams
of episodes. Uh, and then we use that to train the modules that are inside the cognitive architecture.
For example, if you do replay, you can refresh the dynamics model. You can refresh the motor cortex
because again, you're querying this episodic declarative memory to say, hey, remember these
little tiny mini experiences. Um, the other problem with Minerva too, was that all you can only remember
so far into the future. So it gets a little wonky and hacky when you try to build like these like
little lookup windows, but there are better memories out there. And I actually, my collaborator and I've
talked about using modern hot field networks as one possible, uh, construct and they're very
cleanly implementable. They almost look like auto encoders, which is kind of crazy, uh, at least from
like the engineering point of view. And so once you understand that you're like, oh, I could build all
of these and build again, what I said earlier, assembloids, right. Or assemblies of, uh, these hot field
network structures, right. And maybe see what those do, uh, when I want to recall particular pieces of
experience. So that would be the answer to your question. Uh, I would say I only have some experience
with the episodic piece of declarative when it comes to like the world fact graph organizational
knowledge. I don't have much to say yet. I know you can use Minerva too and vector symbolic and
holographic memory and hot field memory to emulate that people have done that on like, for example,
language tasks. Um, another really nice name. And he's done work on, I don't know if you guys in the
Active Inference Institute know him, uh, Ben Gertzl. He's, you know, a premier researcher in, okay,
you know, Ben, I see you shaking, you know, an AGI, right. And he has OpenCog. And I know that he's done
some really nice work on graphs, uh, knowledge graphs. And there's people that have had discussions
with him about neural implementations of that. Cause when he and I have talked and I also work a
bit with him too, uh, I've said to him, you know, okay, well, what, what would be the like purely
neural version of this? And there are ways to do it, whether it's simulatable, uh, in our, you know,
computing systems nowadays, I don't know if it can be expensive, but it can be done. So he would be,
open cog might provide a nicer, cleaner answer than I possibly could today about like the world fact
knowledge in graph organization of how we think about concepts. Uh, and you know, and I think
open cog has some of that answer. Uh, but again, I'm going to speak with that as the final statement
and boundary of my knowledge and, you know, let the audience look into that. Uh, but I do recommend
Ben Gertzel's work in that area too. So Robert West, Ben Gertzel, these are some really nice names
to kind of look at how they either use the common model of cognition or they build their own cognitive
architecture and they model certain pieces of this structure, uh, that have nothing to do with,
let's say predictive coding. Cause Ben, the reason he's working with me is cause I've said,
oh, we should do it with predictive coding. And he was like, that's a great idea. Uh, and so, you know,
hence collaborations get born, but, uh, so yeah. And obviously, and as Daniel's writing that statement,
you'll notice I'm extremely, uh, biased, but I think with rather good reasoning, uh, even from a
neuroscientific point of view, there's a lot more evidence for predictive coding than there is for
backprop in the brain. Plus you can approximate backprop with predictive coding if you squint at it
and make the right theoretical assumptions in the right way. So, uh, obviously I'm going to say
everything should be built with predictive coding. Um, and then the, also the beautiful thing, and I
know Carl will like this if he ever watches this is, uh, you know, then you can also state it's
min, uh, it's optimizing or minimizing a variational free energy and we can derive where that comes from.
And it's a, it's a Bayesian model, right? And so you have this Bayesian graphical model interpretation.
Uh, and it's a really, really elegant framework too. So that's another strength I think of predictive
coding. Uh, I guess I am the market man for it now, but, uh, uh, but I, I, I really do believe in it.
And, uh, it's, it's served me well over the last, I mean, as I'm coming up on almost a day, if we count
grad school, almost on a decade of working on, on this. And, uh, and I do think predictive coding is at the
forefront of where we need to go, uh, if we want, you know, biological human, like even, uh, machine
intelligence. And I'm going to stop there too, because I don't know if there's more questions.
I can keep going and very easily. Yeah. It's awesome. Very, um, encouraging.
Certainly you lay it out differently. Everyone does, but you lay it out very differently.
It's actually very rare to start
on a high road. It's not exactly the high road laid out by the free energy principle,
but this kind of approach to cognitive science, which is like, let's sketch out the functionalities
and then drill in. That's how a big tent is built because it clarifies that there's all these different
implementational techniques, none of which can be all things in all settings. And then another,
another piece that, that the work holds up is what's biological when after all the neural network
is the great, great, great grandchild already of a cell type. And so what, what is modern and
biological? And then it just made me think about how there's the pure biomimicry, which is usually like
if somebody were actually interested in studying that system to resolve some pathology or just to
do natural history. And that's one sense that we might be doing biologically inspired computation,
but whether it's leaving the door open to our alien colleagues or developing new synthetic intelligences,
we need something that's both biological, but also novel. And then this leads to consideration of,
well, what are the fundamental constraints other than the historicity of the life forms today with
two wings or six legs or whatever they may be? What are the real features? And that's where we complement
those fundamental attributes identified by the common cognitive model, like memory, action selection,
perception, and perception, where those come together with like local processing only. And then also some
more potentially aspirational things like low energy compute and other features. So these are just some big
topics and it's kind of like, come work on it. These are the challenges because they're laid out. The
challenges are not esoteric at all. Oh, we've either known about some of them for a while and just never
resolve them or, or they're becoming more pressing in today's day and age. Like you brought up the energy
compute part, right. And, uh, energy efficiency and, you know, we hit global warming, regardless of, uh,
whether or not you want to, you know, accept it is, is upon us. Uh, and, uh, we have the problems of even,
even in AI, there's this thing called green AI versus red AI. And I've written a little bit about
this in some of my papers as a motivation, uh, to looking to biology. Cause you know, the brain is
regardless of its, you know, own limitations, every biological system has, you know, trade-offs that it
has to make, but, uh, it is an extremely energy efficient system. And it's an example of beautiful
parallelism, uh, as well as low energy compute. And if we could get even just a little bit of that
in our systems today, that would be huge. So I think that's a nice, uh, motivation. Of course,
I also work in, well, I know you guys talked about one of my papers, spiking neural nets, which gets us
into neuromorphics and neuromorphic computing. Uh, and I think there's a lot of really nice hardware,
uh, in silico that's out there that we could take advantage of. Uh, but the key is finding the right
algorithms that we could implement there, uh, and carry over the best of all the worlds, right? The
best principles, uh, that are software simulations and mathematical arguments make, uh, but then
instantiate them in, you know, you know, let's say a memoristic crossbar. Uh, and, you know, and I've
worked and talked with different people, uh, including Intel's low heat chip, you know, and I'm not saying
that that there's many different ways you can build these constructs though. And, and I know that
because I've, I've watched some of Carl's chats with you guys and talked with Carl about this is also, I
do think the biological chimeric implementations is like a really cool area. Uh, I'm a huge fan of, uh,
organoids and, uh, and organoid intelligence. I, I think that that's a humongous place. Uh, that's like
a new frontier almost, uh, given like Smirnov's work and a couple other people. And, uh, I think
that's where like these ideas of predictive coding and the computational models we build are valuable
to even consider in these biological systems, either study them and see, do they match back to my
mathematical theoretical predictions, or can we manipulate or engineer them to, you know, maybe
induce similar kinds of compute, uh, or maybe we'll just see that it pops out. Maybe they're just doing
predictive coding and we're going to see that these neuronal structures emerge. And I think that would
be fascinating. Uh, a quick point I want to add in, cause I see blue raising her hands. So I just want
to mention that the thing I like about my interpretation of predictive coding, and it's not only my own, it's
just that I carry that forward is predictive coding. As I've talked to people, it's interpreted in a lot of
different ways. Like in psychology, predictive coding kind of has similarities, but it's not quite
where I work, which is the mechanistic version of predictive coding. And it's interesting. I think you
can borrow those worlds like, Hey, the, the idea of predicting error and feeding that back in or matching
discrepancies, you know, in our memories, you know, that's a beautiful concept. And that's, you know,
what psychologists look at cognitive scientists kind of see things in that way. Um, biology,
biologists and neurobiologists might sometimes talk about predictive coding, but they, they might not
necessarily mean it like in the concrete ways that, uh, my work, which was inspired, you know,
by Regis Raus and others, uh, you know, to say, let me build you the exact mechanics and the dynamics.
And I think that's important to get right. Uh, I am, uh, even though recently I'm getting
a little more philosophical, which I love in theoretical, uh, and, in talking to Carl and others
and Ben, uh, there's this engineer in me that cannot divorce away the very specific dynamics and the,
not just the mathematical, like, Oh, the ordinary differential equations, but how does that get
implemented efficiently? Cause I think that's what lies in the future is the marriage of these kind of
high level theoretical, mathematical, philosophical concepts, their mechanistic description, which is
what like predictive coding says, Hey, one set of neurons tries to get another set of neurons firing
rates or their activities. And we can feed that back in and you can repeat this motif and build very
beautiful constructs. Like what I try to do in cognitive architectures or little POMVP systems.
And then we also have the spikes, right? How does that compute happen at this very fine grain level?
And then how does that get put onto a chip? And then I think the other piece that,
then I'll shut up is, uh, the connection to the niche. Uh, I think it goes back to the body
and you can't ignore the body. And I have a lot more to say about that, but I'm going to bite my tongue
for a little bit. Cause I want you guys to read that paper. Maybe we'll have another chat in the future
about it. Uh, Carl and I've really thought very deeply about this, the role of the body. And that
has nothing to do sometimes with neurons, or at least not the neurons that we model and then the
niche itself. And how does that have a role? And then I know you can go into, and I know all the
cognitive theories, like extended cognition, embedded cognition, how do other agents and cultures and
tools play a role, uh, the extended, uh, theory of mind. Cause I, I did study that as a philosopher.
So I think like though, those parts are gonna, those all need to be reconciled and build this
kind of framework. And I think Daniel, you're right. You can use blueprints like the CMC as a stepping
stone. And I think that that top down way is a nice way, but then you also merge it right with all this
bottom up. It's, it's kind of like you're doing predictive coding, but in the scientific realm,
right? You have this top down kind of direction you want to fill, but then you have all this mechanical
low level stuff that you really can't ignore if you want like energy efficiency and where do they
meet in the middle? So it's a bottom up top down, which is beautiful. Cause it, it repeats the,
the metaphor of biology and I'll stop. Cause I see blue. It's time to put someone else speak.
Yeah. So you really like stole my thunder there. Oh, sorry about that. I have a lot to say sometimes.
It's okay. No, no, no, it's perfect. So I really wanted to ask about the role of the niche and
especially like in, when we're talking about like energy efficiency and predictive coding and the
compute power, et cetera. Like I think about, um, like what makes us efficiently able to do cognition
and it really is like cognitive offloading into the niche, like the internet, the phone, like click,
click, click now I know this. Right. And then even like with non-human systems like ants, like leaving
pheromone traces in the environment that convey a ton of information as to where to go and what to do.
And so how can we then bring the efficiency of cognitive, our cognitive offloading into cognitive
architectures that we can then leverage for increased compute power with very little, um, you know, effort
on in terms of like the actual compute.
So the answer to your question is extremely hard, right? It's a grand challenge, if you will. Um, I would say
that the right path and I, these things are okay for me to share because thankfully, uh, they're not all of my
my invention. Uh, so to think about how other agents and other tools could be efficiently used to allow
our own agents, right? Our artificial agents to achieve their tasks. You do need to now finally
answer the question of the body and the question of the environment. And I've been thinking a lot about
this and let's just assume that you can simulate it. And that's another issue in of itself, but you pick
your world, right? So let's say I'm going to, so I, okay, actually I'll pick up. I'm going to start
with my body. I'm going to do a quadruped robot, right? Like, you know, uh, what is it? Big dog
or spot, right? The little robots that are out there. And that's going to be my, my actual
morphological construct, the body in which that I'm going to manipulate it. Now that body, let's assume
that I have access to all aspects of its physical mechanics. Okay. And it's artificial hard-coded
routines because robotics have a lot of like automated procedures. Like you're not going to
necessarily need to manipulate every piece of the arm. You know, you're going to use, like take
advantage of inverse kinematics and other algorithms that allow you to say, I just need to move this
point and the rest of the arm will kind of coordinate around that. And that is an offload of what the
neurons need to do or the neural compute. And let's say organized, and I'm a fan of common model
cognition. So let's assume you build your little brain from the CMC point of view. That's going to,
again, not worry that much about the fine grain mechanics of the pieces of, let's say the quadruped's
front right arm, right? Or front left arm. It's going to offload because it knows that as long as I
tell you, I plan to move this piece of my, you know, I don't know, joint in this direction, the rest of
the arm's going to fall along. You've already now done embodiment, which is embodied cognition,
which says the, and I'm, I'm on the extreme end. There's like spectrums. I've studied cognitive
science. There's the body kind of influences the mind. Then there's isolated cognition,
brain in a vat. And then there's really strong embodiment, which says the body does a lot. And
the brain kind of just says, Hey, let me send you a little control signals to manipulate you.
So that's the embodiment. Now we get to the niche. And by the way, so I've already started to answer
your question because I picked the body. You're going to need to commit yourself to a construct,
which by the way, means you're not as general as you would want to be, but it gets you a chance
to answer the question because now you say quadruped. Now you say, what's the niche? Where's
that quadruped going to operate? And I don't know. I'm going to pick something really simple.
Uh, outside my office, there's, you know, some hills and some grass and some trees.
Uh, and I'm going to specify this little world. Uh, maybe I going to design some way of recharging
that robot's batteries, you know, cause obviously we need to create some type of life giving force
some resources, uh, for this to look for. And I specify other properties in my environment. Now I've
specified my niche. Now I've answered concretely the exact world that my quadruped is going to operate.
So now I know the inactive cognition comes into play, right? Because now I have to interact with
the physics of my world. It's going to manipulate the robot. It's going to damage the robot. The robot's
going to have to respond to this. Uh, so remember under the hood is like a CMC neural predictive kind of
neural construct. It's offloading a lot of its cognition to the body. The body says, oh,
I'm going to also take advantage of sensors that I can read in my environment. I know like, I don't
want to be maybe in a very hot area that starts to, you know, interact badly with certain properties of
the robotic construct. And then to now get at, uh, the answer to what you said about other things.
Well, in this world, I should also, and I think there's some work in, uh, I cited it in the one
paper that's going to come out, uh, uh, about, uh, like tools. You have to specify what are objects
that are manipulable. So you need to define your affordances. And by the way, this is again,
defining the niche. I think it's really important not to just say, oh, I'm going to throw it in any
environment and we'll just, it'll work somehow. You need to define the properties of your niche to some
degree because that's how we can also experimentally analyze and study what's going on. And you say,
what are the affordances? What are things that I can do? What properties of environment am I able
to manipulate that I, let's say even one that could help you model this? Uh, and then you introduce
other quadrupeds with the same exact underlying cognitive structure, because let's say we're not
going to do heterogeneous, uh, multi-agent systems. So, you know, I introduce a couple other spots,
right? Which are also operating under the same principles. They minimize a variational free energy
inside the common model of cognition. They have the same, you know, roughly, uh, you know, artificial
dynamics that they can offload to their robot bodies and they could work together, right? They
could create herds, right? They could have herd behavior or group behavior because maybe now they're
going to find those port charges or whatever the resources is that I allow them. Maybe there's,
maybe they're solar powered. I don't know. I mean, they have solar panels and they need to
collect from the sunlight, but obviously if it rains, they need to hide. And so you can now say
those dynamics, those groups, now they interact. Maybe one of the spot bots found a good area,
and this is a really good place to exploit their prior preference, which is, you know, to survive.
Hey, I want more energy. I need to just continue living, right? Because I think life is the,
the place you have to look, uh, they, they don't want to die. They don't want to terminate. So
they're going to work together to do that. So that answers the embedded part, right? Because the
embedded aspect of it is the cultural, and this is an approximation. I'm not going to claim that
a little herd of quadruped spot bots, right? Are going to have a society. I, I don't know. That's
an emergent property perhaps, but they'll have some means of communication and that way allows
them to organize themselves as their own little system, you know, in their niche. And then of
course, because we specified the affordances and properties in the environment that you can
manipulate, you have extended cognition, right? Because these tools allow them to better survive,
better find those areas that, for example, allow them to charge their batteries or, you know, collect sun
at the right times and avoid damage from the world, you know, when it's raining or when there's
inclement weather. And again, I'm kind of like vaguely describing a very complex niche. You could
really experimentally control it. Maybe you make it a lab and, you know, you have artificial blocks
and charging ports, and maybe you could kind of simplify this a little bit. But I think that's where
that doesn't like give you the exact answer. Cause you know, if I had the exact answer,
I probably would have implemented it and we would have solved AGI, right? But I do think that's the
pathway to answering your question, right? It says, if you want to even have a chance at scratching at
the answer of efficient interactions with the environment, using objects and tools to solve
problems and offload your cognition to these, let's say, non-neural, non-biological entities, or these non-living,
or non-planning entities. I know Carl talked to you guys long ago about the difference between like,
well, the environment's also its own system, but it doesn't plan, but it's, you know, subject to
thermodynamic constraints and the entity itself is also, you know, that one is different because it
can plan. So there's like a little bit of like, you know, its own ability to change its outcomes with
planning as inference. So you could kind of like use that as your starting point to say, I need to
define the niche. I need to define the body. Then I need to define the organization of the brain
structure that goes into that body. Cause you should, you do need to have the neural part.
We're gonna, if we're interested in modeling, let's say a very high level cognition,
behavior, and how does that interact with the hardware? And that's another question in of itself
that, you know, I'm, I've been thinking about. And I think with all of that, you get a chance to now
simulate, do experiments, uh, and actually see how does that efficient interaction emerge,
right? What can we study aspects of embedded cognition, right? Into this little, uh, experimental
niche and agent niche and collective agent niche setup that I've constructed. So I think that's like
an interesting place that I would, this is where I would go. Right. And I'd love to go if I had
resources, but, uh, you know, these are that, I think that gives you a chance to begin to answer
that question. And then it will tell you what's wrong with a lot of things too. Cause I think it'll
say you're, you're going to quickly, especially if you just even pick the body and you're doing a body
cognition, you say, uh, Hey, wait a minute, this neural construct, let's see back prop, right?
Uh, it isn't working very well, right? Because why I need to unroll in time. I need a time machine
to do back prop with time-based data. Um, but predictive coding doesn't really need that,
right? Oh, probably that might be the right neural structure for the brain, uh, because now it interacts
with my robot hardware, which has very limited resources. You have very limited memory and compute
that you can run with. So already there, you've now manipulated your software. You have now co-designed
the hardware and the software a little bit to interact in the context of this morphological
construct, your body. And because you've, you've also defined where it's going to operate. You also
understand what properties of the environment you need to be aware of. Maybe you can build that as an
inductive bias into the system because we don't want to play evolution because that's usually how you
emerge these systems. But I don't know if I want to wait doing genetic algorithms for, you know,
whatever simulated thousands and thousands of years. So maybe we need to build those inductive biases as
well. And that's another interesting research area. I think now I'm, I'm digressing. So I'm going to stop
there. It's great. Again, again, oh, just the pathway is clear. And in fact, this is even in some ways, an
anti-reductionist pathway that actually starts from the bigger context, you stepped through
specification of the niche in the context, getting to the embodiment, including the extended embodiment,
pheromones and all of this with a niche, like each time you step through, then to the brain, the body,
then into the multi-agent. And then that is where the evolutionary and the ecological dynamics kick into
play. EcoEvoDevo is going to pick up once there's like a population, even if it's an in silico population
that has resource constraints, or it actually is a materialized system. Then the ball's rolling and it either
persists or doesn't.
And it's like a landing strip for our efforts and, and a organizing principle for our research, whether
we're like just beginning to do cognitive science research and thinking about going to grad school
or something, or trying to recap on this flurry of development over the last years of being aware for a
long time. Um, it's actually a, to me, a mark of the advancement, not just like how fast or performant
the systems are, but how many index card type
agreements or ways of coordinating that we have. We have the common model. We have, of course, active and free
energy principle, which we've barely talked upon. We have this kind of general agreement of the structuring
of cognitive systems. And then that organizes otherwise what would be essentially arbitrary,
unlimited information because the scope of cognitive sciences is so vast that having some of these
categorizing strategies as part of our recall system is part of it. And then that's an interesting question
about jumpstarting it. And what do you bring to zero? What do you bring to the table? And then were the
agents with our tools that are building other agents and tools and all of the like reflexivity and also
relevance that comes along with that?
Yeah. Yeah. I like that summary.
I go on and on and on and on about it. I even have different names for these things, but, uh,
I want to, there's a little bit of thunder I can't steal just yet. Uh, but I will ping you guys. I did. I
have a couple of people in mind about sharing, uh, a manuscript I've been working on for, for many months at
this point. And, uh, it, it, it, this is related, uh, especially the relationship between neurons, the body,
the environment and beyond and how that all ties together. So this is stuff I've been thinking a lot
about. So it's actually timely. Your questions are great. I didn't know we'd get into this part, but, uh,
you know, that that's, it's fun. And, uh, there's more to the story too. Uh, there, there's other, but I, I want to save that thunder.
Yeah. Dot three. Maybe, maybe you could have me on about that paper if you ever read that, but, uh, you know,
that's a different, different thing. 56 never dies. Um, exactly. He doesn't leave, leave us alone.
Or like a sequel, like a one paper, a one paper sequel, because I will say like four, four papers was,
was challenging. And I don't think we've really like, we we've skimmed the surface of, of each paper,
but like not even, you know, there's, there's so, so many interesting threads to untangle in just what
we've talked about here. Um, and like, are you sure you don't want to go into evolution? Um, are you sure?
I'm not opposed to it. I think the problem is resources blue.
Yeah, no, I, I don't know that genetic algorithms is necessarily like the, the way or the means like
that, that I mean, but I, I really am curious about like unraveling maybe alien cognition.
Like, what does that look like when I really start to think about like, what is the most different
kind of cognition that I could imagine? What is the most different from my own? Like, I really think
about plant cognition and then like active inference becomes kind of problematic because you know, they,
they like, they're really limited. They have a really restricted like course of action. Right.
Um, but, but I, I think about like what, you know, how, how plants have evolved and how they've co-evolved
with humans, like, and how they've, you know, they produce all these lovely things that we like to
eat and they produce things that alter our own cognition, you know, so, so like they can totally
drastically influence our information transmission pathways. And, and I really think about what does
that cognitive system look like, or what is it like to, to be a plant or to have a memory that looks like
a plant memory, right? All of your memory is essentially chemical, like, or evolutionary.
And I think about that in terms of like, why like evolutionary memory might be important, um, and
across species and across, you know, evolutionary time, like not necessarily evolving through genetic
algorithms, but, but what does that evolutionary memory start to look like?
I mean, it's a great question. Uh, I, I've only, I, while I don't have any work of
my own, well, I have worked weirdly enough with, by the way, I will say I have worked with
neuroevolution. Uh, actually you guys had, uh, I know, you know, the, the ant colony paper,
uh, optimization with, uh, Abdelrahman and Travis, right? I was in the audience and I chimed in and
talked to you about active inference. Uh, uh, so I, I have hedged my bets a little bit, you know, to look
at other ways of doing things. So I, while I did say I sold my soul to predictive coding and common
models of cognition, uh, I guess it's not completely the truth because I do look at other things.
But, uh, so, but I do think that it's interesting, Blue, that you bring up about things that are not
human or even maybe animal-like, right? Because there's also animal cognition, which is, there's some
differences. Um, so when you go into something like plant evolution, it's interesting because
there are, there is work as I have found. Again, I, I want to say it in a way that, again, I don't
steal too much thunder from this one paper. I'm like, like, it's on the tips of my tongue, you know,
and it's like, I got no, no, hold, hold. It's almost done. I got to finish the edits, put it on archive,
and then we can all chat about it. Um, but there, there is a dressel of plant cognition and let's,
like you said, alien cognition or just let's say non-human cognition. And, uh, I can, this work's
existed. It's wonderful work to read. Have you guys heard of the, uh, life-mind continuity thesis,
thesis, uh, by Kirchhoff and others? They're also heavily influenced by Carl and Free Energy. I,
they might've even worked with him. I, I, sometimes cause Carl's everywhere. Uh, but, uh, with,
with that in mind, uh, I liked the life-mind continuity thesis because it, it addresses a
lot of things that have emerged from evolutionary psychology, biology, uh, even like work that
touches in the world of Michael Levin's world, which Carl also worked a lot with. Uh, and, uh,
these ideas that there is cognition at the plant level or organism level, you can even go simpler.
Like, by the way, that's hard for me, Blue, to imagine I've been studying them, uh, not physically,
but, you know, theoretically, uh, you know, my, um, bacterial organisms, right? Or, you know,
even like E. coli is a wonderful example of studying its behavior. It too, also minimizes
this Variational Free Energy. Uh, it opens the story to other things, which is also what inspires
this work that I've done very recently with Carl that I keep teasing everyone about, but it's, it is,
I promise it will come out. Uh, but all of these things have cognition, but they are not cognitive
in the way that humans are. So there's like, and I've long thought about this ever since, uh, I was,
you know, studying philosophy of mind as a young undergrad. Uh, now, of course the, the thing,
and when I was very young was about consciousness and consciousness is very big world with a lot of
implications that I have to be careful because there's been philosophical theories forever and
everyone has their holes that they need to fill. And then there's flaws. And I don't want to go into
like Thomas Nagel or Dennett concepts right now, but, um, you know, I always thought, well, animals
are conscious and plants are conscious. They're just not conscious in the same way. There's degrees
of consciousness. And the reason I brought up the life, mind, continuity thesis is that it sort of
talks about like gradations or degrees of cognition and cognitive functionality. And as you go from,
cause it, and I like this premise, I think it's an important premise. And since it's published
work from them, I, it's not like I'm stealing any thunder now, it's already out there and you guys
even are nodding. So I know, you know, of it, um, you have the neurons and nervous systems,
which evolved a lot later in, you know, when you look at the picture of life, right? And so
what was below that? What are things that are more foundational because other organisms might not even
have nervous systems and yet they do beautifully complex things. They elicit beautifully complex
behavior. Uh, even doing photosynthesis in a plant is beautifully complex. If you study the details,
uh, and it's, you know, it's also an alien way of which they get their nutrients, right? We don't do
photosynthesis, uh, you know, and so that it's a completely different evolute evolved behavior.
And so Michael Levin and other researchers, not just Michael, but like others have this thing called
basal cognition, which is this really, really, really low level cognitive functionality that
emerges through the memory of evolution. So I agree with you, Blue, you can't completely ignore the role
of evolution. In fact, it's another piece of the puzzle that you sort of have to somehow account for.
And that's where the life, mind, continuity thesis goes in the opposite direction. It says,
uh, we have high level cognition or complex minds and brains. We also have simple minds and brains,
and it's not like all of a sudden there's this hard discrete flip switch where you say,
all of a sudden there's a brain and then there's not a brain. It's like, no, plants do have a brain,
just not the brain in which we have a brain, right? And it's not a nervous system. It's,
you know, these evolved biological constructs that, you know, have emerged from their primordial
biochemical soup of evolution, uh, to then allow them to, for example, uh, manipulate their structure
and response to the weather and rotate and move towards the light, right. To better conduct photosynthesis,
you know, and their growth mechanisms. And so they're very simple behavior. Obviously the plant's
not going to get up and walk and figure out, oh, I, I know I want to attack this other plant, right.
That's more high level behavior, although we can come up with a really cool science fictions about it.
But, um, you know, that level of behavior is cognitive. It's just basal cognitive. And so that gives you
what's called a simple mind or even just a mind in a different part of the spectrum. And so how do we account for that?
Um, I have some thoughts and I don't want to steal that thunder, but there's also the role of evolution.
They talk about evolution and life mind continuity thesis and how you actually can't get even the
complex minds to emerge without a memory that is evolutionary, right? So that's where you have an
aggregate. And so that leads you in, uh, the engineer in me gets a little, uh, anxious about this premise,
uh, but not because it's not the right path. It's rather my ability to contribute properly to it.
Uh, cause there's only so much you can do, which is, well, now you do have to think in collectives,
right? You can't just model the individual. You do have to have many individuals and you need a
population to then induce some type of evolutionary process. Cause you need what, uh, Kirchhoff and they
say in the life mind continuity thesis is a selection history. You need the selection history.
It can be through the evolutionary process. Maybe there's other ways to do it that they didn't say
specifically. Uh, it's just what biology does. And that's what gives you this emergent behavior,
right? To create, for example, the plant cognition that we observe. Uh, and of course, you know, the
very long chain that gave rise to the evolution of, you know, apes and primates and then the humans
from that. Uh, and so you have that selection history. So that means we need to model populations
in, you know, the processes of which they evolve. Um, I, the, and the reason I said the engineer in me
gets anxious is it's extremely my world complex to computationally simulate just even one agent.
So, and when I do evolution and I've done neuroevolution, you usually simplify the little
agents, even the ant colony, the, the paper that you guys talked about. Well, that was a really
beautiful example of emergence and other really neat things. Uh, those ant agents that can't, says,
uh, my colleague talked to them, they're very simple. They weren't even neural nets, let alone a
common, imagine running a thousand common model of cognition. And that's not even enough to do the
evolution scale that we want. So that's where I say, oh, um, and again, knowing that that might
limit what I could do and researchers like me that go on this pathway, uh, maybe the other solution is,
okay, well, uh, I'm just going to figure out what the inductive biases would have been that were
evolved from the evolution. And I'll just skip the evolutionary phase. However, that means you could be
wrong. You could have gotten the bias wrong, right? So you just say, well, I need something.
So I'm going to go from there. Cause I'm not given a supercomputer to do the simulations that I dream
of doing. I have a GPU. So I'm going to build my little agent and I'll, and I'll just say,
when blue, you criticize it and you say, well, you know, that could be the right,
why is that the right bias? I'll say, oh, it's probably wrong, but you know, it does give me
these behaviors, you know? So if we have the right behavior, plug in my agent into
your simulation framework and I'd love to see what happens. So yeah. And I'll stop there.
So is this where sparsity then comes in when it becomes like too computationally intensive in terms
of like, you know, evolving a million little tiny creatures, or maybe this is a, a, a good time to
talk about sparsity. I mean, oh, first of all, oh, I see you put a link here in the chat. I didn't.
Yeah. Yeah. So if you want to see a plant walk around, watch the MIT. So, so the MIT media lab has
made the, what's it called? LO, LON. Um, anyway. Yeah. If you want to see the plant walk around,
I've shown this before, but they, the plant will move. There's a little plant robot. So.
Oh, okay. I have to read about this. Yeah. It's cool.
On the plant topic, I, I, I brought in these papers from 2017 with Friston and Calvo on predictive
processing and plants. And then a paper from 89 with Silvertown and Gordon making essentially the
exact same points in a broader behavioral setting. It's just like wave after wave of the realization
that there are diverse intelligences over different spatial and temporal scales. And the same things that
people remarked upon looking at a piece of grass cracking up through the concrete now is being
instrumentally unified with the most advanced cognitive modeling that we have. And, and also Mike
Levin's work certainly is that point. You made a great point also about intelligence, accelerating
evolution and on Mike Levin's YouTube channel, there's actually a series of very good discussions
to that point. Um, evolution trial by error and selection and pruning, and then quantum intelligence,
basically just teleporting you and getting to the solution without needing to
traverse the entire landscape. I'll read a question. There's a little bit of Chris fields there too,
right? Cause quantum, and I know he and Carl been doing the quantum version of free energy and markup
blankets. Yeah. Yeah. And the course that Chris provided at the Institute over the previous months has
helped put a lot of things more in a quantum footing, but that's a super exciting direction.
Um, I'll read a question from the chat.
Can there be self-regulation of ensembles of noisy oracles without intelligence? If so,
it would be extremely helpful for a robot mind so it can discount components that are malfunctioning.
Okay. Okay. So maybe repeat the question one more time. So I make sure it's a little bit of a loaded question.
It's so it's aren't they all?
Of course. Yeah. I think I need to parse it. Repeat it one more time. Make sure I get it.
Can there be self-regulation of ensembles of noisy oracles without intelligence?
Okay.
Yeah. The without intelligence part is a little bit of a curve at the end, but can there be ensembles
engaging in distributed regulation? Seems like, yes, that was the sparsely connected hop field system
that you described.
So I think the key, I wish the, there could be a clarification about oracle, right? Because
that's usually something you ask for an answer, right? You know, but I guess if it's just to say,
oh, it's like a sensory reading or a, hey, I need to query this part of myself, right? Of my morphology
or my body. And I need to understand what's going on. And I say, hey, tell me, and you give me the answer.
If I interpret it that way and not maybe some other interpretation. Yeah, I would agree. I think,
I think our discussion has lent itself to the implication that you want ensembles. I mean,
I've said this already or assemblies, right? I've said even earlier when I was addressing some comments
for blue and Viet's question, I believe was part of this piece about how you implement memory. Even
just even classical work on like auto-associative and hetero-associative memory back before even like
talking about the hop field nets, like, oh, I have a matrix and I can update it with some heavy and
learning and outer products of vectors. And what I remember when I was studying that is that they said,
well, you wouldn't use this one little matrix as the memory, you would actually stitch together
an assembly of them, right? And so that's how you get this complex behavior because, you know,
even in biology, all the ranging up to nervous systems to modules and structures in the brain,
they are these like self-organizing systems of parts and relationships between those parts,
right? And we can interpret them as dynamical systems and there's a lot of nice little frameworks
we can apply. So the answer to that or the general gist to that question is yes, you could build
robotic systems because I think that was the kind of the application area. And would you get things
like fault tolerance or would you get, for example, if a part of the robot's morphology or body is
damaged with that, I think that that would be the right design paradigm, right? That would be an
appropriate design paradigm to construct where you have like a distributed form of intelligence.
These, uh, you might not, it might the, I think the nature of the assembly might be important. For
example, it would probably be semi-hierarchical or heterarchical in nature. Uh, Karl has done some
really nice, uh, theoretical sketches of like, uh, Markov blankets of Markov blankets, which, uh, I,
I will just borrow this question and that statement to address a piece of something I forgot to say to
say to blue in our earlier discussion of the body and the niche and the neurology or the neuron neuronal
constructs is that I also think it's going to be important going forward to embrace again, there might,
there are other ways to probably do this, but I do like the Markov blanket formalism because it
partitions, uh, the states of the outer world, the internal states and dynamics of the system,
which is very vague, but it leaves that on purpose. And then you have sensory and active states,
as your blanket, right? Your little Markov blankie. Um, and I think you need to specify that, uh,
and that will give you the notion of like, okay, well, there's the theoretical body and then we need
to answer the question on how to physically instantiate that. So that was just a quick thing
I had in my notes. I wanted to make sure I didn't forget to say that. So I think that's another piece
of that puzzle. You need to, uh, embrace that. And then there's other arguments for it, but that
does something quickly. And now that goes back to the answer to the question is that
you would want to construct, uh, you know, a cognitive system to manipulate the robot. Let's
even leave the common model and predictive coding, because those are just other tools that you could
use to construct your brain. Uh, but rather think of like the nervous system of the robot and think
of it as I want a Markov blanket of Markov blankets, right? Uh, and Markov blanket is a Markov blanket.
And you can keep doing this recursive nature where now you have your little atomic unit and that Markov
blanket kind of construct, right? Is your Oracle, right? It has its own internal states and that map
to some physical component of the robot. I think the part is that now you are no longer just saying,
I abstractly modeled the robot in the software sense, but it actually is grounded in some physical
component, uh, hardware property, maybe a particular piece of the robot. And then you model these with
these little Markov blankets, and then you have macroscopic or gradually increasing macroscopic
level Markov blankets that allow you to say, well, now I have this organization, but the internal states of
the higher level Markov blanket are, you know, these other Markov blankets that have their relationships.
And that goes back to my biased background in complex adaptive systems, because what do you get out of
that? You get what Herbert Simon and some of the greats of our time, you know, uh, in the past, you
know, talk about heterarchical, partially decomposable hierarchies, right? And you build these beautiful,
complicated systems of control, right? You have top-down modulation because the upper level markup
blankets are maintaining their internal states and there's dynamics that we should probably figure
out how to model that. I'm leaving the engineering side of this out, uh, because that's an interesting
question of itself. Um, and then those dynamics and those relationships and laws between those higher
level units, well, they affect those lower level units, right? Because those lower level units upwardly
cause the emergence or the existence of the internal states of the upper level Markov blanket, but the rules of
the upper level Markov blanket, uh, downwardly cause, there's, there's directions of causation,
modulate and shape the behavior and interactions of those lower level modules. So I think the answer is
yes, you could do the, uh, assembly and the noisy oracle, well, noise is always a part of it because,
you know, for example, physics. We always have a thermodynamic exchange with our world. There's always loss of
heat. Entropy must go up even if we are an open system, uh, and the entropy within us goes down.
The entropy of the entire system of the niche and the agent, uh, must go up because you can't violate
the second law of thermodynamics. And I think that when you consider that you're going to have this and
you're also going to have inc, uh, what do you call it? Um, imperfect sensors, right? And you're going to have
noisy sensors. I guess that's where the noisy oracle comes into play because you're not always going to
have a perfect reading and you're going to have to make decisions based on that. And that's where the
uncertainty part comes into play. Uh, the precision weighting mechanisms of active inference and free
energy come into play. Um, and then how do those dynamics change when, for example, a part of my system
fails, right? I do think that that's a viable pathway or a design paradigm for constructing.
I would even not even don't even need to worry about the common model part, the nervous system,
right? Of the robot. So we just build, you know, that complex interaction, which is neuronal, right?
Uh, but we're using sort of that hierarchy or the, uh, recursive Markov blanket formulation to design
this. And you can tell I like Markov blankets because they are a nice little entity that tells you
what's going on. So I don't know if that was a useful enough answer to the question, but yeah,
it's great. I'll, I'll just note two key pieces first in terms of what does free energy principle
and active inference offer in alternative or in addition to these other frameworks, a very clear
principled articulation between the math and the theory and the implementation, which is already there.
in the common framework, but then to actually separate out the discussion of how to structure
the Markov blankets and generative models from the micro implementational message passing on factor
graphs and these features that can improve the component tree as a capacity building work,
while blueprinting can be blueprinting rather than kind of needing to build the blueprint on the ground,
which is always going to end up with like an overly bespoke setting. And then also like, even when we are
seemingly talking about a single mind, whatever an individual would be, we are really always talking
about the relationship with the niche, the multiple agents, similar and different types and the whole life
cycle. And then you said that kind of like made you nervous or something as an engineer, because it's
like, when you want to think about engineering, the car, not the car engineer, but one account would be
to focus on the car on the freeway driving and everything working. But then actually the real systems
engineering of the car is the supply chain on through the recycling and all the different ways that it
can interface with things that are outside of the control. And so to just build a cognitive model that
is like in silico or just has this kind of like inward perfect
gaze, it may be an interesting project, but then to engage with the messiness of the world,
that's where we again, go back to biology, look at how it's done and then try to
accelerate or compliment it.
Yeah. I mean, we can learn a lot from biology. So, uh, I think that's, I think you said it well.
Um, we could look a little bit to a paper, one of the, maybe the first
Blue, you focused on the first paper or how about just, what do you see in figure two, Alex? How would
you describe figure two, or if there's another figure from this first paper that you want to
describe, but just if you, whichever one you feel like is the best graphical abstract,
just describe how you see it.
Alex Bialik
I like figure two. Um, there's a couple other nice diagrams in the paper. I'm not sure. Uh,
so I think this one is a nice diagram. I saw you guys go through this. I think
everyone should watch point zero because I think you guys did a nice job at least dissecting parts
of it and summarizing the, the main takeaways. Um, this is just showing you, this is now very fine
grain, you know, our discussion. I don't know if that was the intent or maybe that's good thing.
I don't know how the, the podcast likes to keep things constrained, but, uh, we sort of went really
high level and then philosophical, mathematically conceptual. Uh, and then, like you said, we
haven't really talked about the papers, but I would say this paper in general is sort of like, okay,
given that discussion, now you're back to being the engineer and saying, okay, where do I start?
What's my Lego blocks? If you play with Legos or little toys and put things together to build a
tower, I call this a Lego block, right? This is a computational unit. Now you could still go further
as you guys also did look at another paper called spiking predictive coding. I guess we'll save that
one for next week, next session. Um, which is like the same thing. It's just really, really, uh, intricate.
And that would be what you'd put on neuromorphic chips. So this is like, okay, I want to build a
little circuit of neurons and I want them to relate to each other. And that's what like figure A1 is
trying to tell you. It says that would be sort of like your network in what's called prediction mode.
And, uh, the idea is that like the little two dots, the gray dots actually in general are what are called
state nodes or just the neuronal units. And the reason I call them state nodes is this is very different
than deep learning, uh, or at least most of deep learning where these units always exist. And that's
kind of a, this is, this goes back to maybe the earlier part of our discussion. Uh, this paper is
what I would call mechanistic predictive coding, right? It's saying, I'm not just telling you the
principles of, Oh, error. And I bounce it around and I somehow form impressions. It's like, okay, how do I
build this? And what would the neuronal model, something actually in your brain, maybe a little
group of like six neurons, how would they be related to each other? Or, you know, maybe you're looking at
it a little more abstractly, but, uh, this is supposed to describe cortical structure specifically, but I
like to think that this paradigm repeats itself and almost everywhere in the brain, there might be other
ways of doing things. So in figure A1, the little two dots, the two gray circles in Z2, those are just like,
okay, I have two neurons. So I have little regions and those are layer two. Then there's these other two gray
circles in one called Z1. Those are another set of state neurons. And then we have another set of neurons, Z0,
and that's at the bottom. So those are the actual physical neurons and they exist all the time. Uh, and what I
mean by that is that we simulate their dynamics. This is why I keep saying neural dynamics is that
they're emulated through like an ordinary differential equation, right? So you have maybe
an initial condition, which is just a number that you put inside each one. So these, this model and
this paper still has some biological constraints that, oh, they are modeling roughly firing rates,
if you want to say that. Uh, so these are like rate coded neurons. Uh, my spiking implementation and my dis, my
my generalization of predictive coding, uh, tries to say, well, maybe I'm not interested in modeling spike
rates. I want to model the spike trains. And this is a stepping stone to that. You actually
understanding this and understanding those ordinary differential equations that govern Z of L, which is like Z2,
Z1, Z0. Um, you kind of just modify them a little bit and you out pop spike trains, which is like
really cool. And, uh, and I have slides that mention this a little bit, but maybe I'll use them next time
since we're, we're, you know, we're going over, I'll just play off you guys and the material you have
here. And so Z2 and A1 is predicting Z1. And what do I mean by that? Well, Z2, I just told you,
has numbers inside each of those gray circles, right? It has at a particular snapshot in time,
they have a firing rate, right? And it's just represented by a number, a scalar, and they emit
a prediction using those black diamond arrows that are like kind of connecting to E1. Well, we'll talk
about E1 in a minute, but those little black diamond arrows, and I have, you know, like terminology for
excitatory and inhibitory neurons, just to tell you, oh, when do you subtract and when do you add?
But let's just forget about the math, because if we get in the math, that takes a while. And I've found
confuses people, especially on these types of presentations. So just imagine those scalar
values inside of Z2 are being transmitted along those black diamond arrows down to Z bar of one.
That's what that little bar, I think you can kind of see it in your visual. And that's the mean of a
Gaussian distribution, because what the model that we're sort of constructing is we're saying
every local set of neurons, they are driving like a car, the car of a Gaussian, multivariate
Gaussian distribution. And so I embrace more of a, let's say, a Fristonian kind of view, which is that
we're going to learn in this case, somewhat of a hierarchical Gaussian model. And so Z2 makes a
prediction of the mean, and that's what Z bar one is in the paper. And you can see it in this diagram,
but it's not like super clear. There's also a precision matrix, or a covariance matrix, because a
multivariate Gaussian is defined by a vector mean, and then a square symmetric matrix for covariance
parameters. And it's kind of like it lies off to the side, it's like lateral connections really.
And they are what those weird little diamond, open diamond connections in E1 are. That's the precision
weights, if you will, or the covariance weights. And so between those, you multiply the mean by the
precision weights, which is like a lateral competition, not even competition, it's more
like a lateral pressure. And then you're done, you've made a prediction from Z2 to Z1. Z1, right,
I told you has numbers inside of it, right? Because again, these neural dynamics exist at every snapshot
in time. So E1 is what is known in mechanistic predictive coding as the error neurons. And we're
we're making other biological simplifications, we could discuss them later for those criticisms. But
E1 says, okay, I also have two little diamonds, these orange diamonds, and I need two of them,
right? Because Z2 has to predict Z1, which has two nodes, so it needs to have a dimensionality of two.
And I need one error neuron to compare each dimension. So there's a mapping of one to one,
there's a biological criticism of that. But for computational purposes, it's good. So we're going
to go with it. And Z1, each dimension is compared to each dimension in Z bar one. And we can emulate
this very simply as in the paper, you can take derivatives of a free energy functional. But at the
end of the day, you do all the math, and it comes out to be a subtraction, Z1 minus Z bar one, that's it.
So that's called a mismatch signal. And that's sort of emulating in a very, very simple way.
You know, what what's known as like the superficial pyramidal cells in your brain,
which sometimes are argued to do like these mismatch computations. That's kind of one in one
interpretation of them. And the idea make sure that I actually wrote that down, make sure I didn't get
that flipped. Yeah, no, I'm right. Yeah, yeah, the superficial and then the the state neurons are
what are called deep excitatory pyramidal cells. So these are you could almost argue I'm using a lot of
pyramidal cells. But they're just neuronal units. That's just the bio interpretation. And that's pretty
much it. So E1 compares Z bar one to Z1. And now you just repeat, right? So Z1 would be guessing the
activity of Z zero, which means it emulates Z bar of zero, which is the mean of the Gaussian of the
layer below. And you know, you'll have a precision matrix, you'll have a set of error neurons, but the
calculation just repeats. And that's pretty much it. You have now a canonical predictive coding circuit.
This the the interesting piece of this is this is very similar to like Regis Rao's model,
uh, except it's not applied to image patches, it's just applied to sort of the vector space directly.
Um, that's what parentheses one is, it's like the prediction mode. And then A2 says, okay, you made those
predictions, by the way, Z one, sorry, Z two predicting Z one is made in parallel, which is a
beautiful property that I want to emphasize right now, to Z one predicting Z zero, by the way, Z zero,
in this case, you would clamp those numbers to a data point. So for example, like I do in this paper,
and I know you and Blue talked about it last time, pixels of an image, right? And maybe by the way,
you can change the distribution, I will add a quick caveat that the bottom layer is actually a
multivariate Bernoulli distribution, because I'm modeling binary pixels, but it doesn't really
matter, just pretend everything's Gaussian, because it's easy to visualize for the audience.
Um, and so that's prediction mode, those things happen in parallel, notice that the prediction Z zero
bar does not depend on anything except Z one. So for free, you get something that's already brainlike,
which is a kind of answering a question I know you and Blue had about like, what do I get from this?
Right? What do I get? It's kind of like, what was what does predictive coding bring to the table?
You get layer wise parallelism for free. And that's a really nice property, because if you can,
you know, emulate that, you have multiple GPUs or CPUs, you have a performance cluster,
uh, you know, you could now actually do literal parallelism, whereas deep learning, you have to
kind of like run a four propagation pass, everything is locked into sequence, this is parallel. Now,
the problem with that is, now you have to do message passing, which I know you guys are familiar
with it. So I don't need to maybe go into so much detail. But that's what two is, it tells you how to
take the messages at E one and E zero, which are error messages, right? They tell you how far off was
the prediction made to the thing I wanted to look at. And then I backwards transmit that information
along a different set of synapses, which is sort of what makes neural generative coding a little bit
unique. We talk about this in my survey as well, compared to Regis Rao's model and even Carl's older
models, which are essentially you would just take the transpose of the weight matrix for Ford prediction.
But that's not biological, because we don't reuse synapses, there is no evidence of the weight
transport problem, which is I go back along the weights that I've transmitted Ford, the brain is
really recurrent. And so I embrace that. And so you have a different set of synapses, you can call
them feedback if you want, but I call them error synapses, it doesn't matter. And that's what those
little diamond or sorry, dashed open circle lines are doing is they are taking the little diamonds,
the orange diamond values, and they are backwards transmitting them to a particular layer. And it's
usually back to the state neurons that made the original prediction. And then the last piece of the
puzzle, if you just want to understand why are what are those dashed solid diamond ones? Well,
those aren't actually synapses, they could be. They are just basically, oh, let me take the error message
and let me subtract it. And this is how you get top down pressure, because you need to have bottom
up top down pressures at every layer of neurons. And so this is where that message passing happens that
one step right now, I've only shown you one step, Z1's dynamics are going to be perturbed
by the message that was passed from the layer below. So in this case for Z1, it's the message from E0.
And then the prediction or the reverse of the prediction of layer Z2, which is the minus E1.
And that's what I have in the equations in the paper. And I could show some slides that walk you through
these steps if you want, maybe next time. But the idea is that that happens at Z1. By the way, all the layers
of neurons do this, as long as they're not clamped to data. Because if you clamp them, that means you fix them
to a set of values that you're saying, well, I know what the data is, I don't need to infer it. So I'm going to put it here.
So that's Z0, in this case would always be pixels of an image. Maybe they change with time, but let's keep it static.
And then all you do is you repeat step one and step two multiple times, right, until you reach a steady state,
which is one thing you could do, which is how many times you repeat that while you reach equilibrium.
Or you just bound it and you say, I'm going to run this for, like I do in the paper, a number K, you know, 10 steps, right?
And what is this doing is it's changing the values inside of Z1 and Z2 only. Notice I've said nothing about synapses.
The synapses are just whatever numbers they are. The synaptic strengths are fixed at this point.
So let's say I reach a steady state or I do this for like K times. Then you make an update to all the synapses.
So the solid diamond arrows, which were the generative weights and the dashed open circle synapses,
those are put inside matrices and you just calculate their updates with heavy and learning, right?
It's really easy. I have statistics. Paper shows you those rules. It's just some outer product.
What is this doing? Well, you probably are familiar with like dynamic expectation maximization from none other than Carl, right?
And generalized filtering. It's a form of that. It's just a biological manifestation of dynamic EM in this specific context.
Um, when you do things at the spiking level, you don't need to wait so long to do synaptic plasticity updates.
Uh, I do those online. That means every step in time synapses change and you write out their ordinary differential equation.
We can save that for, I think that is actually supposed to be for next time.
So we can dive into that fun pile of dynamics later. And that's pretty much it.
I mean, the little diagram B is just trying to show you, oh, what do the cells look like?
So if I just zoom in on like two, uh, one single state node and one single error neuron cell, you're looking at scalars, right?
And I'm just saying, well, this is how they wire together.
And then the, so that's just a zoom in if you want, if you will, if you don't like matrices,
because engineers, we love vectors and matrices and vectorizing because then you can run them on a GPU.
Uh, but, uh, the old fashioned way in the eighties was scalars. And then on the right, uh, we have diagram C and that's actually showing you all four models that we investigated in that journal article.
And it's cool because this paper's long, by the way. So it's funny. Um, I admire you guys for doing four of my papers and on top of them, they weren't short little guys either.
Um, this paper has a very long appendix. I don't know if you found the supplementary material. Uh, that was the reviewers. I, they, they had us do a lot of extra things.
Um, the appendix actually tells you a lot. Uh, and among the things that it does is it emphasizes something that I think the message kind of got a little tiny bit muted in the main article, but that's just how nature is.
It wants you to sort of say, give me the main thing, show me the results, all the beautiful math, box it up in this nice little corner. And if people really care, they'll look at it.
Um, and so the diagram to the right emphasizes something that in the appendix talks about a naming convention. So neural generative coding isn't just predictive coding.
It's like a computational framework that tries to unify as much of predictive coding as I felt that I could in the paper. And so that's why the model has underneath there GNCNT1.
In the appendix was like a section that tells you how to interpret. Why do I use the word GNCN? What is T1? It means type one. T2 means type two. And those refer to the error synapses.
Cause you'll see route register Rouse name in the model there at the bottom. And that's to pay homage. Cause you know, I'm a, I'm a big buff for historical research and I like to pay credit.
Whereas a lot of people don't, uh, to old work cause we stand on the shoulders of giants. And so, as I told you, I've read a lot of Rouse work. Um, that model's named after him because it is effectively like the fully connected version of his patch model in his classical nature paper.
And that is a neural generative coding network under specific assumptions. And so like any mathematician, you just say, Oh, I recover this older model because it's a subset of my theory. Uh, and then, uh, the middle of the second model,
usually it's a little bit similar to Regish Rouse is essentially Carl's model from, uh, is either 2008 or 2010. Uh, the reviewers wanted us to implement that.
And it's not a model that many people, I hate to say implement besides Carl. So I had to do that and, uh, it was fun. And basically it's just a large piece of it is making sure you get those precision matrices, right?
Cause he introduces that in one of his like graphical model papers. And so that's why it's named after him.
Uh, that pays homage to his classical work. And then the, uh, two to the right are the new models. And that's for the ones that like, for example, have separate feedback synapses, which is not something that older models directly addressed.
Carl has mentioned them, but at least the mathematics or the models that of those papers did not concretely tell you how to implement them, let alone how to learn them.
Um, so all the, my models, all my synapses are learned with like heavy and like plasticity. And then the last model, the farthest one to the right, the reason I like, the reason I'm spending time on these is because those are the core models we looked at in the paper.
So, um, the one to the far right just says, oh, well, because NGC is such a broad framework, you are not committed to a hierarchical model. You could build a heterarchical model or a weird model that has skip connections. Right?
And so that's why you see this like weird arrow going from the very, very top layer all the way down to the bottom. And so the math in the paper shows you, oh, I can turn off with these little gating variables.
Uh, these weird kind of skip connections that violate the hierarchy, but you can still learn them in heavy and ways. So the efficiency is all there. Uh, turns out that model actually worked the best.
And so, um, there are, you guys actually showed in point zero, the, the data samples. And those are what I used to, I used the final model, the GNCN PDH. That's like a little compression because when you use a, uh, a naming convention, the names get really long to a certain point.
So you're just like, well, I'm not going to say GNCN T2 L sigma, which refers to the lateral connections and the synapse and the precision weights and PDH. I'll just call it PDH, right?
And you can just say that to your friends and it's quick and, uh, rolls off the tongue. Um, so that, that's a little weird naming thing I did.
And so the nice thing about these models is they, they do show you pretty much all the mechanics, uh, at least visually.
And then the other piece of this puzzle is you'll notice those gray circles back in figure A also have synapses that I didn't really address.
Those are lateral synapses at the state node level, which is also something that, you know, you know, classical work like RALS and Fristen's models and others don't really use.
This is something we introduced, which encourages like what I would argue extreme sparsity and the motivation for that.
Cause I know blue had a question or just wanted to chat a little bit about sparsity.
So maybe this is a way I'll sneak it in is that, uh, RAL, for example, introduced sparsity by imposing a cartotic Laplacian prior, which just is basically a pointy distribution over the neural firing rates that just say,
I want some of these neurons to go to zero and other ones to be high.
And I want, you know, as many of them to be zero as possible.
And that's a useful way to do sparsity.
It actually comes from Bruno housing and sparse coding work.
And I cite Bruno, I've met Bruno housing.
He's a cool guy.
Uh, you know, you can get these activities to be really, really, really sparse.
So most of them are zero because zero, why do we care about zero?
Not just from a biological point of view, hardware loves zero, zero means I don't compute it.
So if I don't have to compute it, I don't use any hardware resources for it.
I can ignore it.
It's those numbers that aren't zero that are annoying for a computer.
And so instead of doing a Laplacian prior, which I did investigate in this paper, and I think I even have the dynamics in there as well.
It's like one of the equations.
And to be faithful to Raoul Rajesh, I had to put that in there.
But the lateral synaptic connections, the state nodes, what they do is you, what we did in this one is we introduced fixed weights because that's the easiest thing to do.
You don't have to learn them.
Later on, I've learned them.
That's like some future work.
And what these lateral synapses do is they have, it's like a matrix, and they are shaped to be a square.
And they are like, let's say, the dimensionality of a layer.
So in the top layer, it'd be two cross two.
Along the main diagonal are a set of positive numbers or maybe negative numbers.
You have to make sure that the middle diagonal is excitatory, and it's called self-excitatory,
which means if a single neuron fires at a step in time, its new firing rate is going to be amplified by its own firing rate.
So that's called self-excitatory or self-excitation.
And the off-diagonal, so the lower and upper right triangle of this lateral matrix that I'm talking to you about, that has to be the opposite sign.
So I would believe it would be negative unless you wrote the negative sign in the ODE, then it changes.
And those are negative numbers.
And the idea is that those put a downward pressure and says this neuron, let's say in this one element of the column, will laterally inhibit other neurons in that layer.
And the cool part, and again, it's in the super long appendix of that paper.
You can find it.
That matrix, even though I fix it, because you could try to learn it with like heavy and learning, and I later like investigated that, you might say, okay, I'll put some random numbers in that matrix.
But wait a minute.
Do I really want every neuron in the main diagonal to inhibit all the other neurons?
The answer is probably not.
You could.
That is a type of pattern.
What I did is I initialized a masking matrix.
And in that matrix, without going into the details of that, because there's a little bit of an algorithm, it just basically says little groups of neurons inhibit each other and no one else.
And so you basically turn off things in that matrix.
You fix it with a mask.
And now you get group sparsity.
And so the long story short with all of that cool description is that you get K winner take all type lateral competition, but it's biologically implemented.
So I'm not like using an activation function.
And as you go through the dynamics of this model, this matrix, what it'll do is it'll emphasize neurons that are really important for the object that you're processing.
And it will shut up all the other neurons that aren't relevant.
Right.
And so this is to answer a question.
I believe it was blue.
And you, Daniel, were discussing last week about the results that we had in this paper, because it's not shown here in this diagram.
But the idea is that we also got really good classification performance.
This model has no label.
Right.
So we trained like a little probe or whatever on the topmost layer.
And we also showed some TS and E plots.
And the reason I think that the model works as well as it does for something it wasn't trained to do, which is discrete categorization of object categories, like different numbers, like the digit zeros, the zero category, is because of that sparsity.
And we did measure the sparsity levels.
And they were really, really, really tiny.
And the proportion of neurons that were active as you go through these dynamics, especially as it learned, is it said, oh, I don't need a lot of neurons to represent zero.
So it's sort of like extracted out little subnetworks that specialize to these templates.
Right.
So I don't we didn't we didn't exactly probe that hypothesis, but that's what I speculate is going on.
And it's also very easy.
You can justify it from the past.
You can say sparsity is a really important way to do memory retrieval.
It's a beautiful way to fight catastrophic forgetting, which is another piece of my work that tries to look at that.
And the idea is that you're going to get non overlapping representations.
Right.
So, you know, if we only have a few neurons in a sparse distributed memory, semantically, if these units activate, they're probably related to roughly the same concept.
And you'll learn as long as you have big enough layers, of course, is the thing where you do need like brain level stuff.
You need lots of neurons.
You'll find that they don't crosstalk with each other.
They don't fight each other so much.
So knowledge for zero doesn't fight with the knowledge of two.
And so you'll have this nice, beautiful separation.
And I think it makes things like classification a little bit easier.
It's really nice for fighting forgetting because you'll remember things a lot more until eventually you run out of capacity and then you just need more neurons.
And it's also energy efficient.
So the big, big argument is if everything is zero, except for like a few neurons firing, that's a perfect candidate for neuromorphic computing.
And then if we can make them spike, which is what the other paper you guys reviewed tried to do, then we solve all of those weird things because you should only be communicating with bits.
You shouldn't be communicating with rate-coded continuous values, which are clean, but they're not good for hardware like a neuromorphic chip or a memristor.
So that's kind of the general gist of it.
And I think that's where you get this beautiful benefit of sparsity and you see this nice interaction and you're learning a generative model.
And of course, that paper actually synthesizes the models.
We look at what samples are produced.
Yeah, and I could keep going on and on, but hopefully that that was useful and made sense.
I see blue is gone, so maybe I got boring here.
That was great and a lot.
Yeah, it was a lot.
Did it make sense?
It helped me.
It helped me even after reading all the papers multiple times, hearing this explanation still really did help.
I hope it's helpful for other people too.
There's an enormous amount of condensation, but you really are laying it out like an engineer.
How do we build the three-story building?
What's the wiring diagram of each floor?
And then you're clearly striking a fine balance with how much of the mathematics to visually convey versus explore here.
And that's why there's appendices.
That's why there's sequences of papers.
What are you looking forward to in .2?
Or just as we kind of close out?
Yeah, I don't know if we went too long.
I'm sorry.
Oh, it's fine.
Well, I mean, I'm looking forward to continuing some of this discussion.
I think we didn't really even touch on the convolutional one, which is really, you could even argue is more of a, to use Carl's terms,
you could think of it as the convolutional neural coding is a corollary to the neural generative coding framework,
because it just says, wait a minute, how do I do image processing in an efficient way?
Let's do deconvolution or convolution.
That could be something we briefly touch on next time.
I'm looking forward to the spiking stuff, because I really, really love spiking neuronal cells.
And I don't think he was able to make it, but one of my students works with me on spike timing and synaptic plasticity is driven through solely spikes.
So I, you know, I have a particular soft spot for that.
And I think the future predictive coding, at least where I'm trying to lead the crowd, is to do things at the spike level,
because neuromorphic computing offers beautiful energy efficiency.
We could do edge computing.
So I'm looking forward to some of that chat.
I also love, we sort of borrowed a big chunk of what I think you wanted, Daniel, us to do with the cognitive architecture,
because we kind of brought all that today.
I know Blue is very interested in that.
So we sort of front loaded with a lot of that.
So I was going to say, I'm looking forward to that.
But I mean, I'm always looking forward to chatting more.
I think we front loaded it.
So maybe we could address more of the predictive coding pieces.
However, I do have slides that I'll probably share if you want me to,
and maybe talk about other aspects of the cognitive architecture that aren't just the cog engine,
but rather like, oh, I'll show you something I did in robotics.
I'll show you some things about how you can make predictive coding do something a little bit more concretely active inference without obscuring it with the common model.
Because I think the common model is like, you get kind of lost, not you, but the audience in general,
might say, oh, all these continents of mind, and how do they relate?
Well, wait, where's the active inference?
And I talk about, it's in there.
I think sometimes it's good to say, let me throw away all that for just a minute, because memory can kind of cloud it.
Let's just look at epistemic foraging and prior preference, and maybe do something simple like have a robot arm manipulate it,
manipulate an object, and I could talk about that.
And also just chatting more about the future of this.
I think that this is, I think what I am trying to represent, and actually with a lot of discussion with Carl,
I think I've narrowed down what I bring to the table to the fields of cognitive science, computational neuroscience,
and machine learning, which is the three, the triad that my lab represents, is this thing called biomimetic intelligence.
And I think that we need to understand the neurophysiology, the biology of things, and also understand the physics of things,
and understand how the niche and the body and the neuronal constructs all interplay together,
to then build technological artifacts that do things like robotics in an energy efficient way.
And I think this is that path, this is one possible pathway to AGI.
I think it's the path, but I obviously could be clearly wrong.
You know, we all don't know until we get there, and we have perfect hindsight.
But I think that that could be a fun little bit of discussion, because I know you guys were interested in knowing about the future work that my team has been trying to do,
as well as the history of those papers, which I didn't even get to talk about.
I know Blue had said something she was interested to know, what was the order of these papers?
And I had this in my notes.
So we can save those for the next session if you guys want to talk about them, or other questions.
I'm open to anything, really.
Yeah, this was huge.
It really is a tour de force of cognitive science and engineering.
So I hope that people enjoyed it.
Looking forward to talking next week.
If you're watching Dot One now and you want to join next week, this may be possible.
And thanks again.
See you.
And thank you.
Thank you for having me.
We appreciate it.
See you.
Bye.
Take care.
Bye.






















Thank you.

## 0CY0fTqtdHo

All right. Hello and welcome everyone. It's November 21st, 2023. We're here in ActInf
livestream number 56.2 discussing a quartet of papers with Alex Arurbia. This is the third
discussion we've had. We had a .0 giving some background and context.
Great. Hello and welcome everyone. It's November 21st, 2022. We're in ActInf livestream.
Empirical demonstration of the feedback delay of livestreaming. So let's just jump in. Perhaps
Blue, if you have any initial kind of remarks or questions, then to Alex. And also if anyone's
watching live, they can of course write a question and I'll check it out. So go for it, Blue, and we'll
just jump in. So for me today, I think I'm really excited to get into the cognitive model. So like
the last paper was my favorite and it was I think maybe like the most zoomed out. So I'm really kind
of looking forward to getting into that and then maybe exploring what that would look like
like in a non-human system. So that's I mean, I kind of always want to go there, but I'm still I still want to go there.
Cool. What figure should we jump to or what part of the paper should we jump to, Alex?
Alex. I mean, whichever one caught, I think yours and Blue's interest, I guess we could go to the
architecture one. Oh, I do want to, if you don't mind, a tiny shameless plug that I just want to take
the moment right now. I'm going to post this link in the chat because it relates to our conversation
we had in point one. So this is a paper that just came out the end of last week.
I just want to add that as contextualization, especially Blue, you might find it interesting
because this was work I worked on. I think I even alluded to it over the like the last seven months.
This is why I was talking about inactive and embodied cognition. And there's a lot more. So now,
now it's out there. I don't have to pretend like, oh, it's a secret project. That was it. So that's my
only shameless plug. Let's go back. I should start with this. So the, the, um, the as not to steal the
thunders of 56.1 were this paper that came out in the time between. Yeah. It literally came out last
end of last week. Yeah. Wow. So, I mean, maybe just while we're here, like, could you just, you
don't have to review it. I've already had some, you already have so many papers, but it might be worth it.
Yeah. Like, could you just give us like the elevator pitch about this paper and, um,
like maybe your favorite figure? Cause I mean, we were really excited for your comments last week.
Okay. So scroll up, Daniel. Uh, it's, it's actually early. There's, there's cool stuff, but go to the,
it's a very long paper. Yeah. That picture. It has, it also has an appendix or supplement, but,
uh, so, and it was a longer original paper too. Uh, just that way, again, I don't steal a thunder of
this particular podcast cause our focus was different. Um, now the, the general idea is, uh,
my, my thesis or Carl and my Cthist thesis is about a moral computation, which was a phrase that
Jeffrey Hinton, uh, introduced, uh, very briefly, like in about like two sentences or a small paragraph
in his paper in December. Uh, and I have written at length about it in a couple of my own papers,
end of December of last year and January and February. Um, so this is sort of like, uh, the big,
uh, deep dive into what does it mean to make a computer that is not immortal, which is what we
have in computer science today. Uh, the computer is inextricably bound or rather the software is
inextricably bound to the hardware. Uh, sorry, not bound to the hardware. I'm just making a mistake
there. So if for example, we can copy our software or machine intelligence program across any amount of
computers and it doesn't really matter. Um, and, uh, it's also extremely energy inefficient. And then
the opposite side of that is mortal computation, which is essentially drawing inspiration from life
itself. Uh, for example, uh, when any one of us dies, a human dies, uh, your computations, your memories,
your quirks, the things that define who you are, are essentially gone, right? Because it's unique to you
and that is because you're an embodied inactive agent. Um, and so what's kind of nice about this
diagram is it's, it's a really colorful, pretty diagram, but it's in, it sort of synthesizes two
out of the three perspectives in this paper. So, uh, Carl and I investigated biophysics, uh, which is
sort of like the intersection of physics, physiology, biology, chemistry, and the ideas that have echoed over,
I mean, essentially the last century. Uh, and that's the top half. The bottom half is a classical and
very interesting domain called cybernetics, which is like the intersection of, uh, computer science,
control theory, also physics, and a bunch of other domains and information theory. And it also has
similar ideas and everything centers around this idea of homeostasis and all the millions of, uh,
variations and higher order, uh, you know, uh, concepts that build on that. And the ideas that, uh,
our intelligence and, uh, essentially is driven by our, our per desire to persist and to survive in an
environment. And so this actually takes my comments from the last point one podcast with you guys, uh, to
its natural conclusion, which is, I don't just believe you need a body, you need an environment, you need,
essentially a drive to persist and to fight, uh, thermodynamic dissolution or dissipation into the
environment or disintegration is a better word. Um, so we are essentially applying the biological
second law of thermodynamics, which is why it's also about free energy. Uh, and so then, uh, we,
and then there's another person, but it's also, that it's a later diagram, cognitive science.
And, uh, Carl and I, uh, propose 5E cognitive theory, which is just taking the classical 4E theory.
Um, I don't remember if I said this to you last time, but embedded, uh, extended, uh, inactive,
and, uh, you know, the, uh, yeah, embedded, oh, embodied, the 4E, the traditional 4Es, we added
something called elementary cognition, which I did say to you guys, basal cognition last time. So
this kind of like ties these three areas together, as well as the philosophy of life and death and
existentialism and kinds of combines them together into a unified framework. And then, uh, we, we dive
into Markov blankets. Uh, I, I think they're a beautiful and elegant formalism for tying these
ideas together and getting us a step towards, uh, you know, the mortal computation, mortal computer design.
And then we, we, we talk about the free energy principle underpinnings that essentially the,
the mortal, uh, computer embodies. And we review, uh, a couple of existing mortal computers, which do
exist. So, uh, organoids or microphysiological intelligence is a beautiful example of this.
Uh, even, uh, we talk about fungal computers, also Michael Levin's work on xenobots. So we have like a
nice little table and then there's an appendix with a little bit of expansion on that. Uh, also we have to
give credit to, uh, Ashby, uh, who's a really well-known and, or, uh, a very important cybernetical scientist,
cyber cybernetic, cybernetician, um, and his homeostat, which is also an example of an in-silicon
moral computer. So long story short, uh, we, if we want one path to artificial general intelligence
is not going to be the way we have it now. Uh, it's not through just bigger and bigger transformers,
which are extremely energy efficient. They're labeled in the domain of AI itself, red AI. If we
want green AI, we want edge computing, we want neuro robots, uh, that are also able to do human-like
actions and, uh, enact in human-like behavior, uh, because we think for example, the human model or
even animal models, right, are a good template for how we can interact and engage in our environment.
Um, then the idea is that we need to transition to this idea of mortal computation and leave behind,
my last point here, uh, the tool oriented view of artificial general intelligence, because the way
we treat AGI today, and we say this towards the end of the paper, um, that while it's very important
and very helpful for humanity, uh, to build artificial intelligence systems that are very, very narrow and
very tool-centric, they are more to support something for a particular task. If we want to build general
intelligence, uh, then, uh, Carl and I put forth the mortal computation thesis as one possible pathway,
uh, to go into the future. So this is sort of also a call for researchers across all these different
domains to come together, ranging from biophysics to biology to computer science and machine learning,
to computational neuroscience, cognitive science, it's pretty much, and cybernetics, of course,
all of them kind of converging, perhaps build, uh, a different pathway to what we call the mortal
computer. And so I think that wasn't quite a good elevator pitch. That was a little bit longer, but
I'm going to stop there because I think then you can just read the paper. It's, it's, it's fun.
Well, it's a tall elevator. There's a lot of floors in the bunker.
I think there's a perfect articulation there. 56.2, let's focus on living, functioning, cognitive
frameworks, but it's really cool that you're going into the life and death elements that way. So,
I do think that the paper that Blue wants to talk about, there's a compliment to it because we do
mention very briefly in this paper, cognitive architectures, like the common, and also the
common model of cognition blueprint that we also talked about in point one, which is the center basis
for the paper that, uh, Blue was going to ask some questions about. I think, uh, it's mentioned here
briefly in that we also talked about as that being, uh, a potential, maybe we don't say it this way.
I said it in conversation to someone, but a, uh, a car, an inductive bias, which you did write,
uh, you wrote basis. I also talk about it as like the idea of cognitive architecture and modules of mind
serve sort of like as a prior, and that is, uh, produced by evolution. And, uh, we also talk in the
paper too, the moral computing paper evolution is important. Natural selection is an important
ingredient. Uh, and if we don't use that, uh, then we have to design the results of evolution. So,
I think the common model of cognition, which can help segue into the paper now, um, is a beautiful bias.
It is one of our best bets for how do we emulate the modules of mind and how things interact. Um,
and this would get at the, the neural computation component of a mortal computer. Obviously,
it does not say anything about the body, about the niche, about other agents, but, you know, you can imagine
it is a little block that would go into this framework and that would be one step towards a
mortal computer. So. So can I just temporarily derail us? I just have to ask a follow-up question.
I have to ask. I fall for derailing at the beginning. Um, so just in terms when you're,
when you're talking about mortal computing, I mean, I just couldn't help but go to quantum computing,
where the computation itself is so heavily dependent on the substrate and the modality of the hardware,
right? Like the, the computation, the hardware and the computation are like really inextricably linked
there. Um, and, and in the same way that like, you know, I can write a paper, you can write a paper,
all of these things will outlast us. Like, so some of our computations will survive beyond like the
point where we're biologically dead. Right? So in a quantum computer, similarly, all of those computations can
then be taken and translated and put into Python and all, all of the things. Right. Um, but I, I just
wonder to what, um, extent, and like, I know, I, I kind of know where quantum computers and artificial
intelligence like meet, you know, like everything's gotta go into the cubo and then the answer comes out.
And so then we take the answer and put it back into Python and do regular AI things with it or in some
language, right? Not always Python, but sometimes, right? So where do you think can a quantum computer
or can we ever get quantum computation or what is the role of quantum computation? How can that
intermingle with artificial intelligence and then become a mortal computer? Or is that just like
too far fetched? We're not going to think about that.
Well, so the paper doesn't go into that specifically. However, we touch on a little bit because, uh,
a little bit of the paper and we, we cited plenty, uh, Carl's work with Chris Fields, which I know he's
been on, you guys have been doing a series with him on quantum computing, quantum information theory.
Um, he had a paper, uh, neuromorphic computing induces the free energy principle or some version
of that title. I read that many times as well. And in there I think is the way that quantum computing
or quantum information theory would interact with the mortal computer. And so I don't see,
I see it as another perspective. There could have been a fourth perspective in this already long paper.
Um, and, uh, I did originally have some ambition to write something about that. And we distilled it
to just the concept that Chris Fields introduces, which was the interface. So I think the quantum
information theoretic interpretation of the brain and the body, uh, especially like as presented in that
paper and related work could be a better way to deal with the Markov blanket formalism that, uh, Carl and I,
uh, constructed in this paper, this paper, uh, which is largely grounded by also my educational background too,
because I only have, uh, you know, some moderate knowledge in, you know, quantum mechanics. Uh, and it
was a while since I studied that, but, um, in there we are treating the paper is like a classical
interpretation, or you could say almost the Newtonian interpretation of the free energy principle.
And, uh, and Carl and I discussed this many times as we were working on this paper, um, that, that has a
limitation. It's not necessarily that you can't build a more. I think this paper gives you all the
foundation you need to literally build a mortal computer or get started. It's a, like a theoretical
mathematical conceptualization. However, um, there are some weird things about the thermodynamic
energy exchange between the internal states of your agent, your entity, and the environment. And
originally I had a different diagram of the Markov blanket so that there is later in the paper,
you'll see it. And I really liked that diagram because it really made it. Yeah. You probably
saw it. It was there towards the end. It looked like a spider almost. Um, yeah, that. So this
originally had a different version where I had these, uh, extra states, uh, because I like to take old
concepts and extend them myself. And I had these thermodynamic states in there and I had them tried
and I had probabilistic arcs that wired them. All these arcs are designed carefully to make sure that it adheres to
the Markov blanket principles of like, you know, the dependency relationships between children and
parents and the children of children or the children of parents, um, and how they relate together. So I had
embedded extra states and Carl said that I should remove those because it's, uh, it violates the
classical interpretation of the free energy principle. And long story short is that you have this energy
exchange in the diagram and you can represent that as dissipation, but it's not a state that the agent
would have like access to in the Markov blanket. So now back to the Chris Fields interpretation.
If you go to the interface, uh, I think he calls it like a quantum interface. He added me or, um,
he had a name for it. It has like this really fancy symbol in the, in the paper. Um, if you use that,
you get access, it's not like you have access to manipulate it, but you can sort of perceive it
from the perspective of the agent. You see the sensory and the action states or the, uh, the partitions
of that field. Um, and I'm probably butchering his language, Chris's language, but, and then you also
have like the thermodynamic exchange portion or partition of that field. Uh, and like, it's like, uh,
the non-manipulatable and manipulable portions of it. And so I think that interpretation could be a
more powerful way to, like you said, blue earlier that quantum information theory and quantum, uh,
sorry, quantum information, theoretic and quantum computing interpretations lend themselves to that
natural entanglement that this, that this paper, uh, takes from. So again, we surveyed work all the way
back to Descartes, uh, and Emmanuel Kahn, but you know, and tying all their ideas together. Cause by the
way, even though we're putting forth the phrase mortal computation, the mortal computation thesis,
uh, and trying to essentially establish that as our foundation for all of science to build on,
uh, it's kind of been echoed, right? Uh, brilliant minds, thinkers, theoreticians,
engineers have existed forever. So, uh, it's kind of like, uh, a synthesis and unification of already
wonderful ideas across vast parts of all the domains. Um, but I think the quantum information
theoretic way could be the next step, the fourth perspective to quantum computing, and it could lend
itself to maybe easier implementation, especially if you have access to a quantum computer. Obviously
this is the joke we had last time, uh, when we talked about evolution and why I specifically might
not directly work in that. Although I have some work in, uh, genetic algorithms and neuroevolutionary with,
uh, Travis Dessel, who was on here for the ant colony optimization work that was presented. Um,
it's compute, right? I don't have access to the quantum computers of our time or maybe the simulator. And of
course the knowledge to perhaps use that effectively. However, I think that someone who does could
perhaps take the principles that are put forth here, take the Chris Fields, uh, uh, interface
interpretation. And he goes into a lot more detail. Like he talks about, he had something called like a
T-D-N-N or something. It was like the quantum neural network and they were trying to come up with the
morphology. But the, uh, the principles there are echoed in some sense here too. And we cite that word,
but, um, obviously, but, uh, Carl's on there too, but, uh, the, the, uh, the principles of morphology,
uh, which are like essentially, and we originally had another word in the title called morphic, uh,
because the idea is that intelligence should ultimately, you can't divorce it from any form of
instantiation. You got to choose something. You're going to be brittle, but you're going to be thermodynamically
efficient. And I think if you could interpret it from that perspective, the quantum information
theoretic that might lend itself to a more powerful implementation, uh, the last comment I'll make,
and I'm already long-winded on this. So the final point is we do also briefly mention in the conclusion
of this paper, you know, we haven't even talked about the papers that, uh, we wanted to about today,
but in the conclusion, uh, I also mentioned quantum computing, but in a weird way. So I hope it doesn't
feel too contradictory to that. I just said that if you take the quantum information,
theoretic interpretation of mortal computing or build your own interpretation, because we don't
really do it much for you here, uh, except mention the, the, the interface, um, while that could be a
powerful and perhaps the best way, who knows, to implement it, we also mentioned quantum computation
as sort of like, okay, others have been looking at this in AI. And for example, saying like we can do,
if we have a properly developed, uh, quantum computer, we can do big brute force search, right?
We can do simulated annealing faster than our minds ever could have conceived with classical computing.
And that's kind of just been in what's we can do machine learning better. Um, and we, we sort of argue
a little tiny bit against it, uh, not against the interpretation, but rather the, the fact that
quantum computing plus machine learning is just another way to do what we currently do, which is
narrow AI brute force search better and faster. And so that's essentially, it keeps alive immortal
computation, right? Because what are we going to probably do? I, I, I, I not, uh, not pretending to be
a seer. I'm not pretending to predict the future. There's no way I can know of all
people, but, um, the way we're going about it is that, oh, we're going to try to put chat GPT or
some transformer like model in a quantum computer. And yeah, it's going to work a lot faster. It might
be more efficient, but at the end of the day, we're going to be programming that quantum computer
at a separation level, right? We're going to try, try to deal with it. Like we do in a normal
operating system. Maybe we all have to learn a little quantum mechanics to do it. Um, and we write
our code and we write our software, and then we just hope that the quantum computer can execute it
really fast. That's not the premise that I would want a quantum computer to be used. That's still
immortal computation just done in an accelerated faster way. So we do warn or rather are rather even
just more like slightly common that while quantum computing will be important and, uh, we, there is, uh,
promise there to even speed up the computations we do today. It's not necessarily its current use,
or the way we sort of project to use it is not the right path to AGI either. So, or biomimetic
intelligence, which is really what the paper's trying to say. If we want to build biomimetic AGI,
maybe there's other types of AGI. And I don't mean like animal, because animals are definitely a part
of this paper, uh, organisms, anything that maintains homeostasis to some level. That's what this paper
says is the, the pathway to that style of AGI. There might be something else. Again, I don't want
to comment on whether or not, uh, large language models and transformers and these new architectures,
there might be something alien that I can't foresee. And maybe quantum computing will make that,
uh, you know, more energy efficient in some way or faster. It's still going to carry forward though,
the premise of tool-based AI and, uh, you know, AI, uh, in the way that we do a narrow AI. I don't think
it's going to lend itself to the path that we would really want general intelligence and general
intelligence really is tied, uh, at least if we use organisms as our exemplar, it's tied to the fact that
we, we don't have forever, right? Uh, that we, we know to some degree, whether we're conscious or
unconsciously aware of the fact that I am at odds with my environment, I'm going to behave in this
way in service of that. And of course, evolution, uh, encode some of that knowledge going into it.
Um, so I just want to comment that I, I think that it's, it depends on how you use the quantum
perspective. Like if you use it from like the Chris Fields quantum information,
theoretic interpretation of the markup blanket, that might be a really excellent way for someone
to even follow up on this and add the fourth perspective that Carl and I kind of just dance
around a little bit or an implementation. I think there could be some really fascinating things here,
but if you're just using quantum computing, uh, to accelerate your normal run, it's current day
machine learning, the current approaches that we have, uh, then you're just still carrying forward
the banner of immortal computation. And again, too, I want to make one last comment just because we
talked about it. Um, this paper says we need mortal computation and, uh, it was weird. There isn't, uh,
much more than Jeff's one mention of it in his 2022 forward forward learning paper. Then my paper had a
little bit longer section, the predictive forward forward algorithm. And then I had the spiking
version of the forward forward, uh, the, the pioneered that idea. And we had like an introduction,
like about a page about mortal computation. And then there's this one with Carl, which is, you know,
a really, really long, uh, doozy of a paper. Um, so aside from that, I've only seen mortal computation
sort of discussed, Oh, I see a little bit of mortal combat appearing. Um, I see discussions like brief
mentions of mortal computation, but there was something that Jeff mentioned somewhere along the
line, or maybe it was an interpretation of it. I don't also think mortal computation completely
replace immortal computation. I think both have a place in society. We just need to understand that
they both do different things and they both have different purposes. If we want, you know,
intelligent agents and neuro robots, I'm on the camp. You need mortal computation to do it, right?
But, uh, if we want that type of general behavior, but immortal computation is not going to go away.
It's just more like we understand it has a very high thermodynamic cost because we have to deal with
the von Neumann bottleneck, the memory bottleneck. We're not using a memory processing. Um, maybe quantum
computing will speed that up too. And then immortal computation can live side by side and we'll have
those as tools. So I also want to make that clear for anyone that ever watches, you know, this recording
later, uh, that the mortal computation thesis isn't to say it's the only way to do computation. It's just,
we should shake up the roots of computer science at its foundation and say, maybe there's another way to
do it and we should have both live side by side and Hey, this one might lend itself to AGI. Um,
which by the way, some people might disagree with that as well. I don't, again, I, we do offer it very
humbly in the paper as one possible pathway, not V because again, I could be completely wrong. There
could be a better way to do this, but, um, yeah. So, well, that was a really good answer and you
really articulated like what I was trying to ask about. And I think, um, it's actually really easy
to get access to a quantum computer, but it's not, it's really easy to get access to the interface
to a quantum computer. And I think that what you, what you keyed in on is like, you need the morphology,
you need the structure. Like, so in order to play with a quantum computer and program the quantum
computer to do mortal computation, you actually have to play with the substrate itself and not just
have access to the computer through some interface network. Right. Yep. That was key. Bingo.
To kind of bring us towards the non-human cognitive modeling slash fourth paper,
something coming up in that was all the different ways that we talk about interface and also the
different ways we represent it. Like this is really creative and I've never seen the, um,
blanket represented this way with a, with a zone and which connects nicely to the blanket index, but
whether we're talking about the kind of strict analytical base graph Markov blanket or the quantum
interface or just an engineering interface, input output, or flow diagram systems dynamics,
or the kind of perhaps most general or accounting system of them all like applied category theory,
we're describing these different facets of the interface. So that's one place to begin when modeling
a non-human or a human cognitive architecture is its interfaces. It's like, if those aren't accounted for,
we're either speculating information that we're measuring or observing or interacting with this
cognitive thing, whether speculating about what we could do or about what we could measure,
or we're missing things that we actually can intervene with and measure. So maybe how do we go about
before even wondering about which formalism it's going to be described as, how do we think about the
interface of a cognitive system? Well, I think that's, yeah. Well, you just brought up a really
good point. I just want to point out that you said, uh, if we don't design, you know, the interface
between let's say the internal states of the agent, which just to connect it to the cognitive modeling
paper, you could think of the common model of cognition as the design of the internal states, right?
It's the brain, right? And, uh, let's just keep it like the organizational principles of the brain.
Because again, I think of CMC common model of cognition as a blueprint and, you know, cog engine,
which is what that paper is about is a physical, well, it is a computational instantiation of some
pieces of CMC. Um, and even that is still only a part of the puzzle. So, but you could think of that,
that's going to be what's inside the Markov blanket. All right. Uh, and then of course,
inside of it could be more Markov blankets. Cause we also talk about Markov blankets of Markov blankets
of Markov blankets. And there's a recursive assembly kind of, but, uh, you brought up Daniel, if you don't
design, uh, it could also be an engineered, you know, uh, permeable boundary with pumps and things that,
you know, for example, remove toxins from the internals of the agent and brings in nutrients
and energy, which we do talk about as well in the, in the mortal computation paper. Um,
regardless of the formalism, you're all, if you don't account for it and you don't, so while cog
engine does not account for it, it's still one of those like, well, we're going to just say,
we're looking at some very, very specific internal states and we're going to probe it in a very specific
way. Although we kind of have an agent cause we do use the gym mini grid. So there is a body,
but it's like a really, really, really simplified body. Uh, you're missing out on a lot of intelligence
and cognition that the boundary itself will give you. So even in cells, right? So this is to take
what you said, Daniel, and you know, Jack, uh, boost it even higher. The boost, the signal, uh, is that
I also believe a lot of the intelligent computations that we do can be, are offloaded,
right? This is the embodiment thesis of cognitive science. The, the, even the permeable cell boundary,
right? Of just single celled organisms or multicellular organisms. Uh, it does a lot of
beautiful things that the internal states are not doing like, uh, consciously or directly with effort.
May I should be careful with consciousness at different levels, but, um, the, that boundary,
the Markov blanket offloads some of that compute that the brain or the internal states need to
worry about. Um, and it can, they can sort of rely on what the boundary does. Now, of course,
there's more to that story that even the Markov blanket doesn't necessarily need to address it.
Uh, but there's the fact that there's also autopiesis. So the idea is that the system reproduces,
it's self-reproducing. That's where, why there's a lot more, it's a paper that very much is like an
iceberg. You can read the beginning and be like, that's a beautiful phrase. And then what's underneath
it is this extremely deep. And I don't even think I, Carl and I have properly even captured all the
facets that you could add to this. There's more like we just talked about the quantum interpretations
as well. Um, so assuming that we have everything taken care of, that things self heal, self repair,
uh, the, the boundary itself is in, you know, constant reconstruction, uh, you, you have this nice power
or nice advantage that you not only account for how energy flows in and out of the system and things
that you would normally not account for in our traditional agents that we designed today. Um, but
you would also have the ability to offload cognition. There's even a domain. We mentioned it in the paper
too, but, uh, you might've heard of morphological robotics. Um, and there's even classical ideas going
back to even, I believe even Rodney Brooks mentioned aspects of this as well. And some of his early work,
if you study the way that we move our joints and our arms, uh, you know, there's a lot of, uh, cognition
offloaded into that act. And you can also get that in terms of robotics too. And just saying by
understanding the, you know, kinematics that drive an arm, then now the robotic brain, if you will,
the neuro robot only needs to say, I need to move my hand to this point. And then it can sort of trust
its digital nervous system or rather the actual constructs and the robotic hardware to move the
rest of the arm. Like he doesn't have to think consciously about moving the elbow, just needs to move
the point. If you know from computer graphics, inverse kinematics, right? You only need to move
the point of the hand to where you want to go. And then the rest takes care of the motion. And it looks,
you know, it doesn't break the constraints of how like the bones are structured and the skeletal
structure of the armature of the character. So, uh, I think you, you, there's even more to just model,
not just, so we do talk about modeling too, because some of us, uh, or a lot of us might not have access
to the hardware as well. Right. I think it's in the appendix. I think it had to be moved to the
supplement of the paper because it was already very long. Uh, yeah, it is in the supplement,
but we have this problem called the body niche problem. Uh, and besides the fact, it's a nice
sounding philosophical problem. There's this issue that, uh, robotic hardware or even organoid, you know,
constructs or biological substrates or chimeric won't be available to everyone. So if we want a
democratize things, we're going to probably need to model these digitally. And so we have this concept
called a digital morphology. So maybe we can take whatever principles of physics and other aspects
of thermodynamics. Maybe we can construct bodies that we can simulate for cheap so that we people
can work on mortal computers simulated. Right. Uh, although the ultimate would be you just like
blue brought up earlier about the best way to use them, a quantum computer would be to literally have
access to the more quantum computer and then design your internal states, your software that would run
run it, uh, literally on chip, right. Or on, on quantum computer, whatever the right word for that would be,
but they're entangled. So you're completely, uh, you're only paying the cost, the thermodynamic cost of
reading and writing to the memory right on the chips or right on the actual platform itself,
uh, rather than having these separations, right. Even including like operating systems and the
transfer of memory and a hierarchy. And so having the actual hardware would be the best. And I think
that's where, uh, you know, even the work kind of says this is where the future really lies, but
probably along the way we could probably work with digital morphologies as well. So long answer,
but just to say that your point is great and we could boost it even further by offloading cognition
to the body. And I also think, cause you said, what formalism would you choose? And I don't think
any one formalism is, you know, like superior per se, they give you different things. I think the
Markov blanket is nice because it connects to a Bayesian probability, and then you can kind of
at least characterize the relationships between states. Um, but from an engineering point of view,
I don't think you like directly have to design the exact Markov blanket because now you're dealing with
a graphical model and what would you do? What do we usually do? We usually choose discrete states and
the world's continuous. I've thought about this. Like I thought, okay, now that this paper has come out,
how do I build my own mortal computer, right? To show how we could do this. Uh, but you know,
I think Michael Levin has a great example, uh, with the Xenobots. Like that's one way to do it,
although it's very biological artificial. Um, but I think just designing boundaries
and sort of clearly explaining or accounting for the thermodynamic exchange and understanding like,
what are the resources that we have at hand, even in a very controlled environment might be the way
to design the Markov blanket, because then you get for free. If you have like, and I think we talked
last time about like a quadruped neuro robot, like spot or something and, you know, have it outside,
right? If you already choose your body and you put it in an environment, you've already now dealt with the
boundary and the niche. You just need to understand the properties of that, which is where we can leverage the,
the wonderful knowledge across domains like physics and biology and chemistry,
understand the properties of that body, right? Understand the properties of that niche.
And then all we have to work on is the internal state design. And how does that interact with
maintaining persistence, right? For example, battery level, power level, that's a homeostatic variable
or a metabolic variable. There you go. Now you can build your agent about keeping that variable,
uh, in within a certain range, right? Because homeostasis is about a set point.
So may have a target or actually the, we changed the word to something more powerful,
hormiohesis, which is homeostasis over time, right? Because set points might change like
in flux to the environment. Um, so that's, that's a kind of a cool concept as well. There's like a word for
everything I learned when writing this paper. So many concepts already exist. All we have to do
is just stitch them together. And this is one way to stitch them together into
a nice little framework. Um, so did that make sense?
Yeah. I'll, I'll make a note and then blue, I'll be curious to see what you think about this. I think
with what you've just described, you've, you've almost given some of the most specific ways to think
about what is offloadable. We've talked about extended cognition and about having passive artifacts
in the niche like paper and pen, and then having active artifacts in the niche like autonomous agents,
or whether they're material or, or just digitalized. So it's interesting that by putting certain
computation on the boundary or on the interface broadly conceived with both, uh, material thermodynamic
and a informational semantic component, then it's like, yeah, the nucleus doesn't decide about the
cell morphology. And so it's like, how many layers can you put in between in between so that the
computation goes out to the interfaces everywhere's an interface from somewhere. And that's where the work
is really done. And then there's just so many other great points, but what do you think about this
kind of conclusion to 2023 live streams after long arcs with thinking about embodied cognition and
cognitive architectures?
Um, so, wow, what is offloadable? Uh, I have a lot to say about that. Um, uh, so like in terms of what
the body does, um, and let me know if my internet cuts out and I'll shut my video off. Um, but in terms
of what the body does, like, it's like, you think about things that are automatic, right? Like the
heartbeat and the breath, um, and stuff that like we just ignore. And like, I mean, if you really, you
could do biofeedback and slow your heart heart rate and like breathing, you can definitely control.
I mean, it's very obvious that you can control it. Um, but, but like, I wonder about these things,
like what is offloaded to the body that we're ignoring, right? Like if you offload too much,
you know, like we have like gut reactions to things like, like, you know, these like sensations,
and there's like a lot of computation happening within our own morphological structure that maybe
we're not conscious of. Like, so a lot is, is unconscious, but then like, are we overlooking
stuff that we should then be paying attention to? Like, like, I wonder what is the price of, of offloading?
Hmm. I mean, that's a great question. Um, I mean, I don't know. To be fair, I can't say I know the
exact sweet spot, because that would also mean that I have, uh, the exact instantiation of the
mortal computer that I wish to build, right? Um, you know, the answer is we need to study that.
Uh, that's the short answer, the slightly longer answer. How do I say this without letting myself ramble?
Well, so maybe there is a point where we cross, where we have, let's say humans, uh, animals, even any,
any entity has failed to find the sweet spot. Like you just said, Blue, uh, even we humans,
humans, when we do something, you know, we have a gut reaction and we might tend to listen to that gut
reaction rather than doing some other type of processing, like thinking critically or logically
and counteracting it. We also have emotions, which I think is very important, which we don't really
quite have that, uh, in today's AI, but, uh, we do kind of have a little bit of some good work has been
done in cognitive science and cognitive architectures, but I think that we might have already
crossed the sweet spot because some of us listen more to our guts and our emotions than logical,
logic or reasoning, or, you know, planning things out more carefully or listing pros and cons.
Some of us might not listen enough to our gut feelings and we listen too much. So I think the
diversity, uh, in even within any entity such as a human is vast. And so maybe someone has the optimal
sweet spot. I don't know who does it varies, but it doesn't matter. So it's kind of interesting.
We it's, it's, it's an interesting question to quantify and worth looking at, but at the same time
in designing a mortal computer, let's say I failed to design the one that has the right balance. Let's
say I designed a computer that mortal computer that leaned more heavily towards gut reactions, uh, than
not. Well, I would still be thrilled that we built such a computer because while it would be great to
find and characterize these set points or sorry, these boundaries and regions, um, we would still have
the premise that look, life is built on these hierarchical or rather layers of complexity.
So homeostasis, homeo, sorry, homeorhesis and homeostasis, which sit at sort of the bottom of
what we talk about in the paper. Um, and then underneath that are like, you gotta be careful a little bit,
but they're like metabolic pathways or what we, or Carl and I call essential primitives or variables,
which are kind of like the materials and the, the very base constructs that maybe we, you know,
manipulate to survive with. But above that are things like allostasis and complex processing.
And of course we put at the top of our hierarchy, uh, auto pieces, but technically, uh, the idea is
that everything would be self-repairing and healing. But if we put the growth and dynamic change aside for
just a minute, our allostasis can be argued, and it has been argued to be all kinds of things. It can be,
uh, oh, we have little neural circuits that try to, uh, predict when homeostatic processes are going to
need resources. And so this is where you can see it in animals and, uh, insects and other types of, uh,
creatures that, oh, I know that, uh, the seasons are going to change. Like birds, they fly to another,
and they, so they have these kinds of instincts built in, or they have some sensors in circuit
processing and say, I should probably go somewhere else where I'm not going to die for the winter.
And so then they flock away, right. Or they fly away. So there's already some higher level
behavior built on there. The reason I bring up that, just to tie it back to that balance point
that you bring blue is that we would have the opportunity to design those neural processes
that could override, for example, your gut reaction or your more primitive instincts. And so this is
what's kind of nice about the mortal computer is we would want that ability to do planning,
to do higher level thinking. And this is again, what connects nicely to the cognitive architecture,
right? If we have a more developed, let's say brain region area, right? We have different types of
memory, like procedural declarative memory. Um, now we're able to start to think at a higher level.
That's not just purely driven by our instincts. And so the 5d cognitive theory, uh, in the paper,
elementary cognition, I don't think is the only thing you need. That would be like, I only rely on
my gut instincts. I am primitive in the sense primal. I only want to live and I will do whatever it takes
to live. But for example, if you live in a society of mortal computers, which is one way you could think
of humans, I'm not going to start calling my friends mortal computers, but we live in a, in a relationship.
We have a, we are a complex system in ourselves. Well, now we're not just only thinking about, uh,
exactly like I, I don't want to die right now. Right. Cause if that's how we live, then, you know,
we go back to, uh, kill or be killed law of the jungle, right? We are just sort of fighting amongst
each other. So I think while it's hard to answer what's the sweet spot or the balance point, I would
still think having a mortal computer that even has the ability to engender those primal gut instincts
would be very powerful. And then we could work on thinking, well, what are the right neural processes
to counteract that? Right. To add the critical logical thinking, what constructs would have
evolution evolved to allow us to counteract that? Um, does that make sense? Cause I think like,
it's almost like it's a good question to ask, but I don't think it's, uh, it's more like it would be,
it would be profound if we had something that leaned a little too heavily on its gut instinct. And we say,
okay, but now we have these allostatic processes. We're just missing more of that higher level
behavior to counteract that, uh, because we humans are able to, for example, ignore even sometimes
our primal needs, our desire, not maybe completely desire to persist because some of that's very deep,
low level. Um, but like we even have the act of like heroism, right? You know, like I'm going to go
save someone that I care about and that will end your persistence. You will thermodynamically
disintegrate when, you know, I go into the fire. Right. So we have these higher level cognitive processes.
We're going to need to design those two or let some evolutionary process, let those emerge. So,
um, I would still, we just don't have the low level either. And we, we might not have the full
picture of the higher level, but right now, a lot of artificial intelligence doesn't even have that,
that primal persistence. Right. So I think I would be thrilled to have that problem and say, oh,
we might make this real real real real real real real real real real real real real real real real

real real real real real real real real real real real real real real real real real real real real real
he talks about the entanglement of thought and emotion,
which I think like thinking about quantum computing and quantum entanglement,
like the entanglement between thought and emotion is just like a really
interesting concept to me,
or just an interesting way to think about like who wins or like,
can you have one without the other or one always knows what the other one is
doing or yeah.
And the problem we have in,
I agree we have that entanglement and it's fascinating the problem in
artificial systems or technological artifacts, which by the way,
another theme of this paper,
and we sort of wrap it up is it's like a path to,
it's going to sound a little odd,
artificial sentience.
And then that also opens up the whole moral issues and ethical dilemmas.
But, but to even get there,
I would argue we're missing the half of your entanglement, right?
We're missing more the emotional side,
which I think also stems from,
you know,
even the lower level processes that kind of give rise to the emotional states.
And, you know,
there's,
there's a lot of physiology and a lot of physiological connections between like
the chemicals and things in our body that also help drive those emotions.
And I think we need them.
And I think artificial,
technological artifacts are missing at least.
I'm not going to say if we've tackled sufficiently the higher level cognitive
behavior,
because,
you know,
there's still the work being done in cognitive architectures and cognitive modeling.
Although I also think that we're,
because we're missing half,
which is the emotional side of things and the biophysical drives and manipulations,
we're missing that entanglement.
So the design of our intelligence system is sort of like detached.
We're still in many ways in AI.
And we also mentioned this in that paper.
You might've heard of brain in a vat,
right?
Which is the idea of what you can think of intuitively.
It's an old cognitive,
it no one really ever said it.
It's more of like a criticism of old cognitive science,
which is to say that neural processing,
our mental representations,
our decisions and that we make and our plans that we make and our complex logical order processing
are completely divorced of the body,
right?
It's the extreme.
It's essentially mortal,
immortal computation,
which is kind of another fun thing we pointed out.
But in the cognitive sciences and philosophy of mind realm,
and because we've been designing things from that perspective for so long,
we're missing that entanglement.
And I think there's some of the roadblocks we will face in the future,
some of the things we can't necessarily build,
maybe the holy grails that still remain,
like,
you know,
higher order logical reasoning and complex planning that,
you know,
transformers and the big neural models can't really quite do today,
despite claims that are being made from the public relations of different companies.
I think that we're missing that other piece of the equation that could have helped inform and make those processes that we design better,
but we're also missing that relationship.
So that entanglement blue is inherently not there,
which is there in,
for example,
human entities and animals and,
or in living beings,
right?
We have that interplay,
and then we have the ability to decide if we want to override it,
but technological artifacts don't have that.
There's nothing to override,
right?
So,
um,
at least I'm going to make that claim.
I'm sure that there's probably,
there is this world called effective computing.
Um,
but I'm not a hundred percent clear if whether or not that has all the ingredients that I would say need to be in place to build that 50% of the entanglement of emotion to higher level cognition and reasoning and non-emotional reasoning.
Um,
so,
and we need that.
So I would love to have that.
And then we could then quantify that entanglement,
right?
And talk about the relationship or proportion of emotional processing,
or even low level biological processing to higher level or cognitive processing and planning and decision making.
I don't know if blue heard that,
but I see her thing green.
So,
okay.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Wow.
I brought up an image.
This is a figure 1.2 from the textbook with a high road and the low road.
So,
the low road,
how it's constructed and that's Bayesian,
but we could consider other ways that things are actually built like JF Cloud,
you're working on the symbolic active inference.
So programs from the bottom up,
or there could be different heterogeneous elements.
We talked about quantum and neuromorphic.
So,
we talked about quantum and neuromorphic.
So,
as many material substrates as there are material substrates to be inclusive of what ecosystems actually consist of.
And then first principles thinking.
First principles approaches,
including the free energy principle or unified through consideration with the free energy principle.
all of these terms that include complex systems,
phenomena,
self-organization,
autopoiesis,
like you mentioned,
and how the current narrow or whatever it is,
computer science that we continue to ride inertia and acceleration on from the kind of von Neumann architecture and scaling in materials with a lot of costs.
Like that is almost missing these two complements.
One of them is the top-down organizing principle,
though there are organizational principles within computer science.
Of course,
it's a formal field,
but unified principle.
And then almost like in a,
in a very interesting relation that,
that I hope people can explore later is this other complimentary relationship between,
I mean,
to put it coarsely,
like the heart and the brain and the integration with the hands and about pragmatic value and the affective,
value.
And blue,
you asked like,
what if we're,
what if we're like least aware of what we offloaded?
It's like,
that's,
we're,
we're only aware of what we're not offloaded.
So every,
every,
if we just take a,
a mental survey of what we know,
that's the remainder of what we don't know.
And that's a very different,
very integrated,
compressible perspective that then can unroll a lot of different ways.
That isn't just like,
we have to do what we're doing now,
but just more.
Well,
and just a quick point.
There's also this beautiful concept called,
and it's being embraced in cognitive science more recently,
because it was even the theme of COG-Sci,
I believe last year,
cognitive diversity,
you know?
And so,
and that's the beautiful part of embodiment,
the embodiment thesis in cognitive science,
which is,
it can give you an explanation of all the different ways in which we might
have something more offloaded than,
you know,
not into the different varying degrees.
And so even maybe the question sometimes isn't what's optimal,
but rather,
can we capture the wide array of different amounts of cognitive offloading?
Because if you change the body,
you change the cognition.
And that's like the embodiment thesis in its natural,
and this paper echoes that extreme kind of view a bit,
that if you change the body,
you're going to change the thinking and fundamentally,
and you,
we know this even,
even internally within the same body,
if you are feeling sick,
if you are feeling hungry,
or you have your,
even if you,
you can fight these things with a top-down approach to some degree,
but it will affect,
for example,
your focus.
If you're sick,
it's harder sometimes to write a paper.
You have something called brain fog,
right?
And so that's where the body is so intimately involved in our biophysics and our physiology,
so intimately involved in our everyday processing that,
and different people are affected to different degrees.
I mean,
I'm sure there's someone out there who's like,
no,
I'm maybe they had,
for example,
a really bad cold.
And they're like,
no,
I was able to get the same amount of work done as always.
Right.
I mean,
and that would also show you that it's going to be vastly different,
even within the same type of entity.
And so that,
that's something cognitive diversity,
I think gets captured by this type of thinking.
And it could be really interesting,
you know,
from using the premise of a mortal computer to sort of construct systems that are like that.
And by the way,
the mortal computer rests on that dice diagram that you have there,
you know,
with the active inference and the free energy,
it sort of tries to hit most of those main points and sort of like,
agglomerate them into,
well,
we even propose a definition,
right?
I mean,
is it a complete definition?
I'm sure there's extensions.
There's probably corollaries to add to the mortal computation thesis.
But I just wanted to throw that point in there because I think that that's where it's that,
that how much we offload will also change,
even if it's like,
maybe not optimal,
but you know,
that would be more dictated by an evolutionary process.
Um,
but you have different entities and different organisms that offload to different degrees.
And depending on your body and what affordances it gives you,
what,
what abilities it offers you to interact with affordances in the environment and tools and things like that.
Um,
if I had eight legs,
I'm going to be able to do drastically different things than,
you know,
with my bipedal body right now.
And morphological robotics usually explores some of that.
Um,
what can different bodies,
beyond the humanoid style,
uh,
provide in,
for example,
quadruped robots,
which they take,
you know,
another thing in nature,
like,
oh,
let's say animals like dogs and cats,
but they're wonderful for like search and rescue,
right?
Whereas a bipedal system might struggle to get into certain spots.
But if we had a quad,
and there we've changed the body and hence we've changed the cognition and the mental neural processing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
A lot,
a lot,
just even from the outside of robotics,
I hear about cognitive robotics.
So the adjective is saying,
well,
we're pulling back to consider cognitive architectures.
And then there's another layer,
which is like,
well,
how does it get there?
What's the developmental trajectory?
And then what is the ecology of similar or different minds and,
and bodies?
And then what's the evolutionary process?
You can keep the,
like you,
you,
you,
again,
in,
in,
in kind of distinction,
describe the immortal.
It's designed as if immortal,
but of course,
in reality,
the Linux operating system or any given language model is mortal.
You just unplug it because it's energy resources aren't accounted for.
So it's kept in this suspended bare life state where it's at the behest of something,
else.
And so then that like unsustainability propagates through a system causing externalities.
So ensuring that the externalities can be understood where they are,
it leads.
So we expect to scalable,
interpretable systems that don't just hide the semantic ambiguity and the material
components.
They're so abstractly considered.
And it's so unintegratable with emotive components that it feels like a dead end.
So,
I hate to keep talking about mortal computation,
but we're doing it.
Well,
it's your,
it's your guys podcast.
I'm happy to lab about anything.
I just want to make sure that if you wanted to talk about those papers,
by the way,
we did talk about those papers last time too,
and they're integrated,
right?
Maybe we can relate some of them.
Like I keep bringing the cog engine paper,
not because it of itself is mortal,
but I argue that it is a piece of that puzzle.
Like if I were to go,
yeah,
that architecture there,
that's not a mortal computer.
However,
it is a cognitive architecture.
And I think it plays a role in the design of systems,
right?
For example,
maybe blue,
it helps.
It would help us,
for example,
to design higher level processing to counteract some of the lower level emotive,
you know,
decisions that an agent would want to make.
So I just want to make a mention.
I'm fine with talking about whatever.
I'm the one that shamelessly plugged it.
I just actually wanted to plug it.
And then,
you know,
we could go from there.
If you,
but they're,
they're,
they're intertwined.
Right.
It's not like my thinking is,
Oh,
when I work on cog engine,
I turn off the mortal computer.
It's like,
no,
they're all,
they're all swirling around.
It's all part of the same thought.
So if you want to keep talking about it,
be my guest,
I'm your guest.
So I just,
I just have a question about like,
when we talk about scalability and interpretability,
I wonder how much interpretability is due to the fact that,
you know,
we're missing that emotive.
Setup.
Right.
Like,
so if we have some kind of interplay between like persistence,
emotion,
thought,
like if there's some kind of,
you know,
struggle,
like who's winning the war when we make a decision,
when we choose to act,
are we going to lose interpretability when we just start to design mortal computation?
Like,
or is there a way that we can keep interpretability?
I mean,
I guess we do all the programming.
So,
you know,
you keep there,
is,
is it going to end up being more black box?
If we have like,
I mean,
a human is way,
like,
I don't know what's good.
Like I just compute,
you know,
I don't know what's going on.
I mean,
I can try to check in and like,
where's this coming from?
Is this my logical brain?
Or is this from my heart?
Or is it just like,
you know,
a motor like kinesthetic memory or that's driving me to act in a certain way?
Like I can try to dissect it,
but even it's hard to know my own like computational process.
So when we're looking at like designing an artificial system,
are we going to lose that interpretability in,
in the design?
Is that like built in?
Well,
fascinating point or fascinating premise.
I think it depends not to bust up,
the famous,
it depends answer.
And any of my students listening will be like,
well,
there he goes under the shield of it depends,
but it really does.
And I think it depends on what interpretability you're looking for.
And I'm also going to mix,
and it is different to some degree,
explainability.
And I'm going to bring in that word here because there,
there's those that work in like interpretable AI versus explainable AI.
And they can get pretty mad if you like say,
oh,
it's the same thing.
And it's not quite.
So in designing,
let's say a mortal computer,
let's even say like a con.
So in the paper,
we also have sort of like the beginnings,
because by the way,
we are encouraging everyone to contribute.
We have sort of like a low level or what we call a homeoheetic or homeostatic
mortal computer.
And then things that have other processes are allostatic.
And things that are at the top level,
the complex computer would be autopetic.
And that would be like the ideal.
That would be like,
oh,
well,
there we have a human,
right?
We have an animal.
We have at least a sentient organoid.
Yeah.
If you're looking for Daniel,
it's like after it's in section five,
under the definition.
But if you wanted to see that little,
it's like it's sort of a taxonomy.
And then we use it to evaluate modern day mortal computers.
No,
scroll.
It's not a picture.
No,
no,
no.
It's under the definition.
It's,
it's a bullet point.
Scroll down.
You were close.
It's weird.
All right.
Yeah.
Go down.
That's the definition.
And then you scroll down right there.
So there,
yeah,
we,
you had it,
you had it right there.
Scroll up a little more.
No,
a little more.
Scroll a little more.
Homeostatic,
allostatic,
autopedic.
So we sort of give a little bit of a characterization of like mortal computers of varying complexity.
So I'm referring to this just in answering Blue's question.
If I designed the ideal MC,
mortal computer,
autopedic,
right?
So it has all the ingredients we want.
And then you're saying,
is it interpretable?
Do we lose some interpreting?
I would argue not completely.
You will from a,
so the,
the parts of interpretability you preserve,
and I think it's even better in some ways than your run of the mill transformers and large neural models that are in operation today,
is when,
is when,
for example,
chat GPT or GPT-5 or stable diffusion does something really interesting,
like,
oh,
it can do this downstream task that I never expected to do,
like zero shot learning,
which,
you know,
arguably is very interesting and promising that these models can do some elements of this type of adaptation.
We can't answer why that happens.
The best answer we have is,
well,
it's because we keep throwing more and more parameters at these models,
more neurons,
more synapses that connect them.
And so if I toss more Legos at this,
it'll just emerge,
you know,
through emergence,
create complex behavior,
and we get these nice little properties.
And it's interesting because that does relate to complex system,
complex adaptive systems theory,
like John Holland's work in the 90s and the Santa Fe Institute,
and other people that have worked on dynamical systems and complexity theory and how you get complex structures that emerge from these very simple structures.
And self-organization was actually on Daniel's hierarchy.
It was like a one piece of an organizing principle.
So that part is like the part where it might be hard to completely interpret.
Why does this behavior emerge?
Because it is this complex,
multi-level interaction of parts.
And you could at least say it comes from like,
and we do talk about it too in the paper,
because we do talk about self-organization.
You can't without,
if you're going to talk about any living system,
you have to go into self-organization.
Upward causation and downward causation.
So upward causation is like,
the little parts give rise to complex emergent parts,
and then their relationships to each other.
And then the top-down causation is,
you have these higher level parts that have now laws and physical relationships
and implicit relationships with each other that exert like a modulation,
modulatory effect on the lower level parts.
And so that's why you have top-down, bottom-up,
like causation,
arrows of causation and interaction and constraint.
So to give rise to a complex system.
And so you can point to those pieces and say,
well, that's the reason why certain behaviors probably emerged.
But then you get into non-linear systems,
and it's very, very hard to even, you know,
mathematically analyze them,
let alone, you know,
come up with intuitive qualitative pictures of what's going on.
But the part that you also get in designing a mortal computer
and like the cog engine architecture that Daniel has here on the slide
is you get interpretability in terms,
at least the structure and some roles,
especially if we're talking about like the internal states.
Like the reason I like the common model of cognition,
and there's other, you know,
theories and blueprints out there.
It's not to say it's the only one.
But the reason I really like it
is it sort of cuts up or cleaves the mind
up into these general blobs of responsibilities
and has some relationships.
It doesn't commit you to any implementation,
as we talked about at the podcast point one,
but it sort of tells you like,
oh, procedural memory,
it's going to be doing this very specific thing, right?
It's going to learn how to memorize sequences of actions,
kind of like a reactive, physiological, physical, reactive components.
And, you know, the way I interpret it
was the transition dynamics model of active inference,
or let me build a predictive coding little structure
that tries to guess latent states.
But then you have like declarative memory,
and it stores the facts of the world,
things that, you know,
I bind the name of a person to their face,
and, you know, I'm storing these little bits of knowledge
into my representations and declarative memory.
So you get the interpretability,
at least at the level of,
I know what these modules are doing.
I probably could investigate and probe,
in even a computational fashion,
the contents of memory,
cognitive architectures in general.
And so that's the part that I like.
They bring at least a level of interpretability
because you have this organizational principles,
you have responsibilities for different modules,
and even classical cognitive architectures
have things like production systems,
and you can encode knowledge into them.
There's good work on like, you know,
if-then statements,
and you can kind of break up knowledge
into at least bits and pieces of logic,
and we can very easily inspect that, right?
And so the,
while that might not be computational
in the most efficient way,
we could probably do mappings
between the neural representations,
since they're essentially mimicking
what like ACDR and SOAR
and very classic prominent cognitive architectures
are trying to do to these production systems.
There's been good work,
even from Yahshua's group.
He had a paper,
neural production systems,
which I kind of like that idea
about how do we emulate that piece of cognitive architectures
with, you know, just neural networks.
And so we can take advantage of that mapping,
and we could probably get some decoding going on
and interpret some pieces of our agent system,
mortal computer.
And also, by the way,
the very design of the mortal computer,
you actually would have a clear picture of like,
well, these are the essential variables
or the metabolic pathways.
Here are the homeostatic processes.
These are the things I defined
that define the life of this system,
or otherwise it will die, right?
And then the allostatic processes live above that.
And so that's what that like cool picture
that I really like in the middle of the paper,
the biophysics,
shows you like the hierarchy
of different types of processing
that would happen from biology.
And then the cybernetics tells you,
what is it going to do
from like an analysis point of view?
It's trying to find stable states.
It wants to be ultra stable,
to use Ashby's and the cyberneticist's old terms, right?
And that's, you know,
I'm able to very quickly satisfy my constraints
so I can keep living and not, you know, die.
And essentially preserve
or have enough internal variety
to counterbalance my external variety.
And that's the cybernetician's
kind of framing of what's going on
in organizing systems.
And so you get that interpretability
in terms of the design.
You know the parts,
the mechanisms behind it,
but you will lose the piece of,
like, why did that behavior
specifically come about?
It's going to be a nonlinear process.
So you will lose it.
And I don't think you can get all of that back.
Here's the last point.
I said at the very beginning, explainability.
Now this is different than interpretability.
And the way I,
it's going to be my digested version
of explainability.
So Blue, you were saying to me earlier,
I might be able to inspect
the contents of my mind
and come up with a reasoning
for why I did something.
And then you mentioned that,
well, it could be wrong
or, you know,
I might not completely capture it.
And I agree because we do this
in all the fields, right?
Like, especially anything about the mind.
I try to think about the contents
of why I did something
or what was going on in my brain
or break down my process
and then try to turn that
into a computational model
that then explains like the actual entity.
And it might be wrong.
It might be biased.
However, there's something cool
about what you doing that.
That's the explainable part.
You Blue might not know the true reason,
the real reason of the universe
or the biological reasoning
or the thermodynamic cognitive reasoning
of why you did something specifically.
However, you can provide an explanation
or a rationalization of why
why you did it.
And while it might not be perfect
and we shouldn't, you know,
take the account as wholesale
the exact truth,
you are able to communicate
the basis of your decision.
So you are able to use your construct,
your biology,
your neural processing
to formulate.
And then, of course,
we also have this thing
called communication.
You use the other parts of your body
to transmit those sound waves
to me and Daniel
across a tool, Zoom.
And we hear what you're saying
and you say,
oh, when I wanted to solve this problem,
I did X, Y, and Z.
And what we would find is then
if we did X, Y, and Z,
maybe that's not exactly
the true explanation why you did it,
but I would be able
to solve the problem now.
And we teach, right?
We pass on this knowledge.
And so the explainable part
might arise.
I think that might counterbalance
the lack of interpretability.
So while we might not be able
to say exactly 100%,
I still argue we have
more interpretability
than monolith structures
like transformers today
where we just say,
eh, it emerged.
And that's cool, right?
I mean, there is probably analysis.
I don't want to like
completely dismiss transformers.
There probably is interesting work
on maybe identifying
what parts of the network.
But from the design principles
or the inductive bias
that evolution gave us,
I think a cognitive architecture
gives you some interpretability
in a structural way.
But then you're going to get
a mortal computer
that would probably be able
to explain to you
why did it do this?
Because why?
The 5e cognition theory
that Carl and I have
doesn't, it absorbs
or expands 4e cognitive theory,
which includes embedded.
And the embedded cognition
is really important
because that's part of that
like other diagram I had
where I had the slices
of a pie of cognition
in a mortal computer.
And among there,
it's saying,
I have to interact with other,
well, I had other neural robots,
but I'm talking to you, Blue.
And that means that
I have to be able
to communicate
some approximation
of why I did something.
And there is an explainable,
you know, there's explainability.
And I communicate
this reasoning to you,
you give me feedback,
and, you know,
we kind of come up with
a solution to the problem
or a better understanding
of something.
And I think that's where
the mortal computer
in its full glory
would give you, right?
Because it would be able
to tell you why.
It would interact with you
because it also needs to.
Because you're part of its niche.
You affect its survival.
So it can't sort of like,
oh, okay,
I'm just going to ignore you
because actually
it might be really important.
You might be important
for it to achieve its goals,
which could be
to allow it to get more power
if we go back
to the primal connection.
There's a lot of jumping around
going on here.
But you are an essential part.
We, humans,
all of us,
are an essential part
of what a true
mortal computer would be.
This is what makes it
artificially sentient too, right?
And it has to live
in its niche
and the niche,
you know,
can get very complex.
It's not going to be
a laboratory
that I put it
in a little white-walled room
and, you know,
oh, okay,
I've emulated life.
No, ultimately,
you would want this
to integrate
with human society
and to interact with us
because there's things
that you get
that with a group,
with a collective,
with social norms,
that you don't get
living in pure isolation.
And so you're going
to get that.
It's not interpretability,
but it's explainability.
And I think that
that communication
and that part
might counterbalance
the fact that
we're dealing with,
as you rightly point out,
Blue,
an extremely nonlinear,
complex system
that it's going
to be very hard
to say exactly
why did it do
what it did
based on inspection
of its contents,
even if we designed it.
So the explainable part,
I think,
will counterbalance
that to some degree.
Wow.
Sounds like psychotherapy.
Psychotherapy
for the mortal computer.
There you go.
Yes, we need it.
There's so many pieces
to add in.
I barely know
where to go.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's a lot you brought out.
I think the connection
to complexity science
is very good
because that's where
we can ask
and have a laboratory
for like,
well,
what's the account
you can give
of this double pendulum?
What's the account
you can give
of Wolfram's Rule 30?
And by that,
we can contextualize,
yeah,
how many experiments
of what type
would we expect
before we could understand
a fruit flies decision
in a T-Maze?
What about a human
in this or that?
And then this tension,
but fundamental,
so we can quickly
come to adapt to it,
that there's things
we do and don't know about.
It's one of the quotes
beginning a chapter
in the 2022 textbook.
I think it's like
a Minsky quote.
We're aware of least
what our brains do best.
And so that whole
like searching
under the street light
with the light
of attention
that every agent
is only engaged in
as a fundamental constraint.
That's one constraint
is the attentional,
informational.
Another constraint
is the material,
physical niche,
which is always actual.
And that's,
that's connected
to the environment
totally fundamentally.
Like there can't be
a discussion of what
ant colony foraging
strategy works best.
Even for one field location,
there's going to be
different ant species
with different
total strategies
and different nest mates
with sub strategies
as modeled by.
So you've embarked
on a wildly
fundamental task
that combines
a lot of the
discussions happening
in active inference
with the broader
cognitive sciences,
broader complex systems.
and it's definitely
interesting and relevant.
So I really appreciate
that you share it this way.
I'm happy you guys
took to it so well.
And I certainly want
that idea out there.
So now,
now that there's a,
what do you call it?
A proper treatment,
an initial treatment
of moral computation,
please spread the word.
You know,
I want,
I want to hear other people
come back to me like,
oh yeah,
I heard about
the mortal computer
and I'd love to see
you guys
and everyone else
try to take a whack
at designing
even the most
primitive versions of it.
Because I think
this is like,
I don't know
if it's quite that,
but it almost feels like,
uh,
like a little baby step.
This paper is,
uh,
is,
uh,
intensive as it has been,
uh,
and informative
and so fun
working with Carl on it.
Um,
it is just a step
in a big direction,
as you just said,
Daniel,
and it's a wild,
wild place.
And it also goes
at odds with a lot of,
like,
maybe this group here,
you know,
we're a lot more,
uh,
what do you say,
receptive
and excited
by these prospects,
but it does go
even to challenge
a lot of
what we hold dear
and near and dear
to ourselves,
which is the,
we really do like
our immortal computers.
And,
you know,
there,
there's,
there's gonna be
trade-offs to that.
And the paper does
talk about that.
It even starts by
trying to address
the reader
by saying,
the reader might ask,
you know,
themselves,
you know,
why do I really want this?
Because it's also
very brittle.
I'm gonna just be
clear too.
But then again,
humans and animals
and organisms
are also brittle as well.
Um,
but why do I want
this?
Right.
And,
you know,
and then we had,
and we motivate this
with like,
uh,
three kind of stabs,
which is thermodynamic,
which is the most important.
And by the way,
the free energy principle,
um,
and physicists in the room
might say,
well,
wait a minute,
free energy,
that's thermodynamic.
Why?
This is not quite the same thing.
There's the mixture
of information theory
in here as well.
But,
you know,
the thermodynamic free energy
is a really important
piece to this puzzle.
And the,
the way that computers
are organized
is sort of what
this challenge is.
And,
you know,
it also,
we have tools
to attack this,
like neuromorphic chips.
Wonderful,
wonderful platform,
uh,
for,
uh,
you know,
a mortal computer.
Uh,
and we do talk about it
in the supplement.
It got moved to the supplement
because,
again,
it was already
a little bit too long.
Um,
so I talk about,
uh,
neuromorphic architectures
and the,
also neuromimetic algorithms,
which kind of connect
to the papers too,
like predictive coding.
It isn't like front
and center.
I don't,
we don't try to like
throw it in your face,
uh,
even though it is a,
uh,
one way of thinking,
uh,
a consequence
of free energy minimization.
But,
um,
and so we talk about
these things,
but I think
it challenged,
we also talk,
it also challenges
and gets us to think
about existentialism,
uh,
and life and philosophy
of life and death
because,
uh,
we,
there was even citations
to Heidegger,
uh,
and,
uh,
and all kinds,
and Sorin,
and all,
all kinds of wonderful thinkers
too that have just thought
about philosophy of mind
and how,
uh,
our identities
and our,
our thought processes
are just naturally
influenced by the fact
that we know,
uh,
that,
you know,
things are going
to possibly end,
um,
and wonderful thinkers
and there's also been
this concept of like,
and again,
and this is a little
Heideggerian,
but,
uh,
you know,
your,
your being,
there's,
you know,
this famous book
being in time
and you think about,
well,
you know,
at the end of time
you,
you have to understand
when you live,
you're projecting
your being to there
and then going backwards
and so there's a quote
that kind of starts
the paper from
Sorin Kaikago
about,
uh,
you know,
we,
we look at life
backwards,
but we must live it forwards
and there's that interaction
with knowing
that this,
this rodeo is,
this play
is not going to last forever,
um,
which is a motivator
for why we do a lot of things,
including teaching
and passing on,
uh,
to the next generation.
And the other part
was again,
cognitive science.
I think cognitive science
got a little bit
of a spotlight,
uh,
because it needed to.
I think the embodiment thesis
inactive cognition
and then Kirchhoff's
and,
and,
and,
and his,
and his collaborators
life,
mind,
continuity thesis
needed to sort of
be foregrounded
a little bit,
um,
because I think that's
another piece of this puzzle.
Uh,
and it kind of ties
everything together
about how to think
about minds and brains,
but it all challenges
what things we're,
we're very used to.
We're very used to
when we design,
especially artificial intelligence.
Okay.
I,
I trust this hardware is good.
I'm going to try
to build some software
and I believe that I can
design all my processes,
uh,
from,
you know,
from scratch
without even accounting
for maybe what,
you know,
evolution might've given us,
uh,
we are seeing some of that,
especially Bayesian,
uh,
framings have some of that
in there,
right?
The idea of a prior,
uh,
I think is important,
but a lot of modern day
neural systems
don't 100%,
I think,
foreground that,
uh,
and play how important
these priors are
to sort of like
driving your behavior.
And so that's,
what's going to be interesting
is that this is truly
a weird place to be.
And it also really says
you gotta have a body.
You gotta have an environment.
So you're not done.
If you say,
I have this wonderful algorithm
that I think emulates
some piece of intelligence,
that's wonderful,
but that's not going to be
the end of the story.
In fact,
you're far from the end
of the story.
You need to be integrating
that into a brittle body
where that process
that you've designed
is also going to be shaped
now by the substrate,
right?
And it's interactions,
it's thermodynamic exchange
with the environment.
and the environment itself
is going to change
how it works.
And so you sort of get
this malleable,
flexible kind of framing
of AI as well
that intelligence is,
you just no longer
can divorce it
from the mechanics
of interaction
with interacting
with the world.
You cannot divorce it
from the thermodynamic exchange.
That's how we're going
to get energy efficient AI.
I think that's like
the other main message,
but it's challenging,
right?
And others will say,
well,
I have quantum computing
and it is very promising.
It's not any dismissal of it.
I'm just going to do
the same AI
I've always done,
but faster.
And do I really need
to look at,
you know,
how life emerges?
Do I really need to look
at how neurons
really do things?
You know,
it'll be interesting.
If nothing else,
it might be a little bit
of a race going forward.
Maybe it'll be
the mortal computing
still,
you know,
on its pedestal
being the dominant paradigm
and mortal computing
being rather niche
for a while.
I mean,
it's kind of the same thing
with the free energy principle
and active inference.
I like to think of
the mortal computation
as,
you know,
another,
a big expansion
of free energy
and active inference
because,
you know,
active inference
is a corollary
of the free energy principle
and at its,
mortal computer's heart
is the free energy principle,
right?
It talks about
the non-equilibrium
steady state,
the mess
and that's kind of
like at the core
and we cast,
there's the other parts
of the paper,
there's a lot of parts
of the paper
about inference,
learning,
and structure
and you cannot ignore
any of those pieces
if you're going
to build a proper
and that's actually
part of our definition.
There's an entanglement
there.
That's a whole
another conversation
but,
you know,
it's like an expansion
of the free energy principle.
It says,
you know,
what would,
where does this go next?
And it's really like
how free energy
often is used
in the literature
to explain
other phenomenon
and like,
for example,
Carl and many others
try to use that
to do things
in neuroscience
and neurophysiology
and computational psychiatry.
This is what would happen
if you take
the free energy principle
and you merge it
with hardware considerations
and morphology
and place it
in the world of AI
and,
you know,
say,
what if our goal
is for in silico
artificial sentience,
not sentience,
artificial sentience
and our artifacts,
well,
this is where
it's like natural consequence.
So,
I like to think of it
as like an extension
in like placing a pathway
if you come from
that line of thinking.
So,
all of you guys,
the Active Inference Institute
is like,
perfect candidates,
right?
Because you're,
you're studying deeply
the free energy principle.
So,
I think mortal computation
is just like
the next step,
right?
It's like,
okay,
well,
that's another piece
to this puzzle.
It's where you go
if you want to build
technological artifacts
with what we would
consider sentience,
if that makes sense.
Lou,
want to add anything?
Sure.
I mean,
I have millions
of questions,
but nothing pressing.
But this one,
I think,
maybe goes back
to you talking
about cognitive diversity
and then Daniel
mentioning like shining
the light of attention.
And just as we're,
as we're thinking
about like attention
as maybe like
the foundation
for cognitive diversity,
because like,
while we are all
fundamentally have
the same programming,
the same like voluntary
and involuntary consciousness,
right?
I guess we'll say it like that,
like my heartbeat
and kind of the,
my self-sustaining system.
we can kind of make that conscious.
Like I've mentioned the breathing,
but also like just through
like motor control,
like you can activate
motor circuits.
Like we all have different,
like some people
can spread their toes out
and some people cannot.
Like if you've never tried
to do that,
like it's hard
and you have to like
practice,
practice,
practice.
But then like
through constantly
paying attention
to those like neural connections,
neuromuscular connections,
you,
you gain like a different
perspective
than others.
And so just
in terms of cognitive diversity
for humans,
it's going to look
really different,
like within
like intraspecies
and interspecies
diversity
is going to be crazy,
right?
Like,
you know,
a tardigrade
doesn't even have a toe
to spread.
Maybe they do.
I don't know.
I don't think they have toes,
but,
but just across
the different species,
maybe we,
this is the time
to kind of look
a little closer
at like procedural memory,
long-term memory,
like at what,
like what is long-term memory,
right?
Like if,
you know,
when you're looking
at something like an insect
that doesn't really have a brain,
definitely doesn't have
like a hippocampus
to store the long-term memory,
do you get
long-term memory?
Does it go into
the generative model?
Like,
or where does it go?
Like,
I mean,
you think about it,
they just have like
the working buffer memory,
or if you were to try
to design
one of these
cognitive kernels
for a non-human,
like maybe
you don't have to go
to a plant,
but like,
where would you
start to kind of
add or subtract
things like long-term memory?
Because we know
that that's really different
just even in the animal kingdom.
Mm-hmm.
Well,
I,
first of all,
I agreed with most
of what you were saying
at the beginning.
That just resonated
with cognitive diversity.
If,
talking about like,
how would I design like,
or begin to think
about something
like a fruit fly
as opposed to,
you know,
a human,
again,
the mortal computation
definition
and like the general framing.
And let's,
just again,
for the audience members
that might join in
and say,
wait,
what are they talking about?
That's not in any
of the four papers
we're mentioning.
Let's just think
of the mortal computation
thesis as subsuming
all of these
because I think
of all those,
just as a quick point too,
all of that work,
I think,
is in service of this.
Even though this was written
far more recently
and I know,
Blue,
you were going to ask
at one time,
what was the history
of the ordering
of these papers?
But obviously,
they're not in a
strict sequence.
So it's like,
mortal computation
is like,
one way to do
a synthesis
of all these ideas.
Now,
to build like something
like a fruit fly,
mortal computation
just says
you need
at least at its heart
a generative model,
right?
Everything's a generative model,
but the form
of that generative model
is not,
you know,
it's not specified
because there's
the principles
like,
for example,
in that paper
brings up
the cybernetic ideas
of like
the good regulator theorem.
I'm sure you guys
have encountered this too
because the Utena,
Arl,
especially in any discussion
with those
with free energy,
they always borrow
from cybernetics.
It's impossible.
So law of requisite variety
and the good regulator theorem
are like kind of like
the most well-known.
That paper talks about
a lot of other ones
that I don't think
get enough attention.
So all the axioms
of cybernetics
are kind of in that paper.
But the good regulator theorem
and the principle
of model internal control,
which is not as popular
as good regulator,
but you sort of need those
at the formation
of any of these entities.
And so as long
as you're able
to design
the body
of that fly
and you are,
I'm assuming
you're going to study
the object in reality,
right?
So you're going to study
the actual fruit fly
and hopefully extract principles
because again,
this is biomimetic.
So the title
of the paper says
we are mimicking
or performing mimicry
of biology
or the things
that we perceive
in our real world,
the physiological organisms.
And so if you're able
to study the fruit fly,
I would imagine
you're constructing a body
that's very similar to it,
tries to adhere
to as many of its physics
and physical principles
that govern how it moves
and interacts
and its exchange
with materials.
If you have all that part,
I think you're almost there.
Believe it or not,
that's the kind of
the fun part
of the mortal computer
is designing
that Markov blanket
and implicitly,
explicitly,
however you want
to go about it
and placing in a niche
gets you really close
because again,
embodiment offloads
a lot of that cognition
because that fruit fly
does a lot of what it does
based on reactions
and its interactions
with its niche.
And that is where
in like the 5e cognitive theory
of the paper,
the bottom,
the most,
let's say,
you need this
because it influences
everything else
is called,
well,
Carl and I did introduce
it's a rewrapping
of basal cognition.
You need elementary cognition,
which you could just,
if you want to call it
basal cognition,
that's also fine.
We cite the heck
out of that
in Michael Evans' group
and many other biologists.
So you would be
implementing that level.
So you'd say,
if I'm going to build
the fruit fly,
I'm not going to be building,
you know,
you know,
embodied,
well,
you're going to get
embodied cognition
from that,
but you're not going to be
building these complex processes.
You're going to focus
on that slice.
That's what's kind of nice
about 5e theory
is you can slice it up
and say,
I'm going to design
at this level.
Obviously,
the bottom level
affects the upper level,
so you sort of do
have to account for that.
And so you would be saying,
well,
what are the basal
cognitive functions
that define
something like
a fruit fly?
What does it do?
What would evolution
have given it?
Because if you're not
going to simulate evolution,
which would give you
those things,
if, you know,
properly done
and with enough compute,
you're going to design
those inductive biases,
you're going to hopefully
study the fruit fly
and then its internal
cognitive model
will not be
the common model
of cognition
because the common model
of cognition
is sort of like,
okay,
that was the product
of the human evolutionary track,
right?
And that's what evolution
gave us
is like our organizing
principle of the brain.
But other animals
don't necessarily have
that to the same degree.
And creatures,
as you get smaller
and smaller
and simple,
let's say,
different on the spectrum,
especially as you move
towards things
that are a little bit simpler
like single cell organisms,
they're going to have
a lot less of that functionality.
But still under the hood
is that generative model.
It just might not be
a generative model
as in like,
oh, I have a neural circuit
that's trying to predict
the next state
of the environment
like a fantasy
or a dream sequence
that I unroll out.
Like we humans
can sort of like,
oh, let me think about
what's going to happen
if I close my eyes
and I knock over the computer.
We can use our
internal physics simulation
to figure out
what it's going to do
and say,
nah, I'm not going to do that.
Whereas a flute fly
might have some sense of physics,
but it might not be like,
oh, I'm rolling out
over a long-term trajectory.
So I'm not going to be building,
for example,
a procedural memory
or an episodic memory
quite like what I do
in the common model
of cognition.
And I might only need
very simple
little neural circuits
because again,
the number of neurons
and for example,
like insects
is really, really, really small.
And that's why
we can study them better too.
That's also why
people study that.
Or even like,
it's not necessarily
the same as a fruit fly.
It's a lot simpler,
but still fascinating
is C. elegans, right?
It's been studied a lot
because we can map out
every single bit
of its neural circuits
and that in and of itself
is rather complex.
So I would argue
that the fruit fly
cognitive model
will be simpler.
And it will be dictated
by what we decide
are the elementary
cognitive functions
that make
its mortal computer
it a mortal computer.
And we won't need,
you know,
these complex modules
interacting in the way
we do
in, for example,
you know,
a human model
or let's say
an animal model.
I think that's,
but again,
that's grounded
in something like
you understand
your mimicking.
So if you go
with the route
of biomimicry,
you should probably
be studying the fruit fly
or at least understand
what we understand
about it
and dissect that
and bring back
what are its base functions
and then how am I
emulating that?
And then,
you know,
you build your little
cognitive internal states,
right,
inside the Markov blanket
that maintain,
for example,
what are the essential variables
that the fruit fly
needs to maintain?
It's not going to be
the same biochemical
processes
that dictate a human,
right?
Like, for example,
when we have blood,
we're looking at like
pH level
and temperature.
The fruit fly
might be looking
at a little bit
different essential variables,
right?
Certain chemical concentrations
matter to it more.
You'd want to model that.
And I think that that,
by the way,
when you talk about
the basal cognition
in designing it,
my thought on this
is that you are
approaching it
from what are those
life-sustaining variables
that characterize that?
Start from there
and then you say,
okay,
well,
does that explain
some of the things
that I observe,
you know,
let's say,
again,
we're modeling
at this point,
but, you know,
what the fruit fly does,
like, for example,
flying around,
why does it fly around?
Well,
maybe it's because
it needs to,
you know,
reach this particular nutrient
and so it knows
if I go to this region,
I am more likely
to achieve it.
That might be
an allostatic process,
right?
And you'd say,
oh, okay,
there's something
that I need.
And this could also be
like a bottom-up design,
right?
If you don't think
that you need,
like,
the inductive bias
that's provided
by the common model,
you sort of build
your little functions
as needed
and now you build
your little internal
generative model,
your good regulator,
right,
into the fruit fly
based on the key functions
it needs to satisfy
so that it does not die,
right?
And ultimately,
the best way
to probably do this
is then you simulate evolution,
right,
and maybe you let
some natural selection happen
because if you don't want
to design those processes,
then you'd want to simulate,
you know,
the origins of it.
And by the way,
mortal computation
doesn't ignore evolution here.
It doesn't talk about designing it
because, you know,
that's a whole realm
in and of itself,
but even the life-mind
continuity thesis
from Kirchhoff's group,
they talk about
you need a selection history
and I think the only way
to get around
the selection history
is then you say,
well, okay,
if I'm not going to simulate
the selection history
and let, you know,
these primitives emerge
into the structures
that make, for example,
fruit fly work,
you need to figure out,
well, what was those,
what was the product
of our current
non-selection history, right?
What did evolution do
to give the fruit fly as is?
So you've got, like,
two choices.
Study the real thing
and try to emulate
some of those
very basic principles,
like identifying
its essential variables,
identifying allostatic processes
that might service
those essential variables
and the homeostasis
of them
or the homeohesis
of them
or talk about
some very basic primitives
and then say,
I'm going to simulate
a population of these
and that might be
more difficult
because if you're
dealing with the actual,
like, let's say
you have a little
fruit fly robot
since we're talking
about substrates,
that might be
not very cheap to do
where it might be easier
to do it in simulation
and doing it
with a digital morphology
and that's another
can of worms.
So I don't know
if that kind of
gives you something blue.
No, it definitely does.
And, like, yeah,
so, sorry,
my brain works
faster than my tongue.
Sometimes insects
definitely have brains,
just nothing like our brains.
They just definitely
don't have brains
like ours, right?
Like, so nothing
that we can map
analogously over,
although some
of the neurotransmitters
and things still work,
but just in a different
functional way
to my knowledge.
Also, Andrew Barron
is building, like,
a tremendous model
of the honeybee brain
that is just so super cool,
I think,
if you don't know his work.
It's really, really neat.
Oh, give me a link to that.
I'd love to see that.
That sounds awesome.
Yeah, it's way cool.
Has him running around
in mazes
and doing all kinds
of learning, like,
how to tell a Van Gogh
apart from a Monet.
I mean, they're really doing
some pretty complex stuff,
and that's why, like,
it, you know,
it always makes me wonder,
like, where does this stuff go?
Like, where is the memory there?
And it's just such a
fascinating process to me
how memories are created
and stored
and, like,
how they map into the brain
and, like, sometimes
I can pull something up
right away
and, like, sometimes
it'll take me four days
to remember someone's name.
Like, what was the name of that?
And, like, I'll remember it.
I'll be just driving
down the road.
Like, it was whatever.
And, like, it's just, like,
how many layers
of circuitry
did I have to, like,
transgress
to get from A to B,
you know?
And, like, yeah,
how do different kinds
of animals do that
is always really fascinating
to me.
I think a piece of that, too,
is evolution
also has a memory, right?
And I think that selection history
is what goes into things
like, for example,
the fruit fly, right?
So there's
its predecessors,
you know,
you know,
maybe they did
certain other behaviors
that were not conducive
to their survival.
I think there's that, too,
that implicit kind of memory.
And then that gets encoded
in the morphology, right?
And this is where
it goes back to
where I just said
if you want it,
like, your collaborator
or your friend
that you mentioned
about designing,
like, the honeybees,
it's kind of the same principles.
You say, well, okay,
what did evolution give it?
Let me design that.
You're just skipping
the evolutionary phase.
And I think there's some memory
in the structure, too.
So this is where
the body...
Now, of course,
with your example
about you retrieving it,
there's layers
of intricacy there.
I'm not complaining about that.
But even, like,
the fruit fly,
why does it remember
to do certain things?
Or why does it seem
to have certain patterns?
And that's also
what the moral computation thesis
does account for,
or at least tries to,
by saying that
it is because
that body changes
and it's, you know,
subject to a selection history,
because it's constantly
in this eternal change
of repair and maintenance
in the face of disintegration,
because it's always
the threat of disintegration.
Your identity will cease
when you die.
And so because of that
things get encoded
in that memory,
and that's also
this beautiful piece
of, like,
the interplay
of physics and cybernetics.
This is without ever
getting into
the probably wonderful
quantum interpretations
I'm sure Chris Fields
could enlighten us all about.
But, you know,
the idea that
information or variety
gets encoded
into these interact...
through its interactions,
gets encoded
into the morphology.
The very organization
and structural manifestation
of that organization
because organization
is not structure.
It is the relationships
of the parts
and it can exist
independent of the manifestation
and the manifestation
is like,
oh, okay,
here's the body
that embodies
those principles.
That also encodes.
That is a memory.
Because, for example,
an organism that understands
a particular chemical interaction
might say,
well, look,
I need to filter out
this toxin
or I'm going to die
and I need to pump
in these nutrients.
That's a memory.
It's just not
a retrievable memory.
It's just like
an implicit memory.
But that's why,
for example,
it's able to conduct
the actions that it does.
And this is why
mortal computation
really tries to...
And this is where
I think it's very
forward-thinking
or very far ahead
of what we can
probably even do easily,
which is,
it really says
you do need
to understand the body.
The substrate
is so important
and understanding
how that will then
affect the internal states
and how you do
this processing.
That has to be
at the front and center
of your story,
of whatever you build.
And then the niche,
you can't escape the niche.
You're kind of,
by having a body,
you're like,
well, okay,
but the body only existed
because it was in response
to the environment
and it was,
you know,
it has evolved
or it has adapted
because of the perturbations
the environment
has subjected it to.
And so I think
that that's why
I like the thesis so much
is it's kind of say
we need to flip
our thinking a bit.
Not, okay,
we're going to design
the brain
and someday in the future
we'll have good bodies
for it.
I think that
that was valuable
and it has produced
some interesting things,
but it can only get you so far.
And then you miss
at least 50% of the puzzle
that could also inform
that design
where we talked earlier
about like emotions
and, you know,
I don't,
I wouldn't argue
that the systems
that we have today
despite the media claims
and, you know,
there's the stuff
with OpenAI
and I saw some comments
about, oh, well,
you know,
Alten and others,
they have some secret
AGI program,
but I've heard conspiracies
about that stuff
all the time.
So I don't,
I put too much credence
to it.
I don't think
that they've cracked
the emotional nut,
the biophysical nut.
I think it's more like
we've had lots of people
either argue,
study very specific
slices of it,
but those voices
need to be echoed,
right?
And so that's what I think
the moral computation
is an echo as well
of at least
like a century of thought
and it's saying
this is how we can approach
artificial general intelligence.
And then it can account
for things
like the fruit fly.
Actually,
you said Andrew
was his name
on the work
on like honeys.
That to me
is an example
of if,
you know,
he's got a learning component
and an inferential component
and there is some organizing,
he has a body,
he has a niche,
you know,
that's very close
to an in silico version
of a mortal computer,
right?
You know,
the only other components
that it might be more
like an allostatic MC.
So,
and again,
in the paper,
we have a table
and Carl did want that
to stay,
I was going to move it
to the appendix again,
length.
So,
we made a compressed table
of different types
of mortal computers
and we kind of characterize them.
There's a few
that are autopedic.
They actually do have very,
like,
organoids
really,
really close
to what you would want,
right?
But they're all biophysical.
So,
there's not like a,
oh,
I designed something
on a neuromorphic chip
with predictive coding,
like what I would do.
This is,
you know,
oh,
look,
we're using stem cells
to construct
this microphysiological
architectures.
I do think
that has a place,
a super important role
going forward
and I would only hope
that there's some
democratization
of an exchange
of ideas
between this wonderful,
really new world
and machine intelligence
to learn
and study
organoids
but also fungal
and mold-based computing.
Really interesting
place to be as well
and to think about
how does that
biophysical organization
give rise
to community
and those are examples
of mortal computers.
Ashby's homeostat
deserves a lot of love
and attention
because it's the oldest
and really the most
prominent example
of what I would argue
is a true in silico
mortal computer
but it's homeostatic.
A little bit allostatic
depending on what you've done.
There's variations to it
but like
the xenobots
really interesting.
I think the xenobots
are an example
of something
that they use
frog cells
like cells
and pieces of frogs
to actually
instantiate
these little tiny
robots
that can self-heal
and repair
and I think
that's going to be
the part where
we have
autopedic computers
already in front of us
like organoids
and xenobots
are some of the most
interesting
I think
profound examples
of how you get
this computer
and then for example
Andrew's work
would have
you know
maybe the missing
component
so his would be
more allostatic
so mid-level
kind of mortal computers
and I'd have to read
more about them
but just from your
explanation
but the structural
selection
the evolution
of the morphology
the self-replication
part of the story
which we also
talk about as well
is more
in like the xenobots
and so I think
it's interesting
how do those
two worlds interact
and how do you get
those properties
of self-repair
self-replication
which by the way
if you add a mutation
to self-replication
you get reproduction
because now
that creates
a new system
that's now subject
to natural selection
and now you've
you know
essentially done reproduction
and now we have
an account
your computer
has all the pieces
that you know
complex organisms
do to also
ensure their persistence
which is
we have offspring
right
you know
that's another way
we project ourselves
into the future
in an indirect way
so it'd be kind of cool
to take like
the honeybee model
and think about
what are the ways
in which we can have
its morphology
be damaged
and conduct self-repair
and that gets into
the real nitty-gritty
and even
it might be difficult
to do right
and that's where
I think
this is where
the grand challenge
right
it's got
an open
pathway
that I don't think
like any one of us
has an exact candidate
you know
for okay
it already exists
because then
there'd be really
no point in writing
the paper
I do think
the xenobots
and organoids
can teach us
a tremendous amount
about
structural selection
morphogenesis
and self-repair
and then
maybe
build like
you know
a synthetic
you know
honeybee
mortal computer
that also
is autopetic
right
it's able to
constantly
repair itself
to some degree
I mean
that would be
very interesting
so
the fact that
you brought that up
was kind of like
oh that's
probably another
example of
an in silico
mortal computer
versus a biophysical
we have
some good examples
of biophysical
not as many
in silico
to my knowledge
even like robots
today
they're not
mortal
right
they
there might be
some interesting
things I'm not
aware of
but
largely
they're like
they have
all the parts
they have
the ingredients
I think
for
mortal computers
but
they're not
they're not
completely there yet
and so
I think
that
making a robot
inherently
whatever the robot
system
it could be
the honeybee
it could be
a creature
that we come up
with
it could be
humanoid
making it
inherently
driven
by just
this fundamental
process of
persistence
is the starting
point
and then thinking
about what are
those essential
variables
and like we
talked about
the fruit fly
designing all
of those
principles
from the ground
up
and then at one
point you've
got to say
is this supposed
to be human
like
am I going to
be able to
evolve
you know
a population
of these
or am I
going to
need to
employ
inductive
biases
like a
common
model of
cognition
and I like
to think
of cognitive
architectures
as a
possible bias
and say
well okay
I'm going to
design a
brain based
on these
principles
it could be
the wrong
bias
but you know
what
we
it's probably
capturing a lot
in you know
cognitive architectures
are fit to a
lot of human
data so
they do
explain a lot
of different
effects
so I
would say
it's a
pretty good
bet
and you
bring in
those biases
and now you
design the
internal states
and now you
have a
very complicated
mortal computer
but you know
the future
will be a
very interesting
place and
hopefully
more interesting
mortal computers
will emerge
in the future
thank you
Alex these
are really
great points
in closing
blue first
as much as
you'd like to
add and
then Alex
any closing
thoughts that
you want to
kind of leave
it with
um just I
don't know
that Andrew
Baron is
building a
robot
B that
would be
super cool
um he's
just modeling
the real
actual biological
honeybee brain
which does
some level
of mortal
computing
I guess
it is a
mortal computer
right like
the the
but it's
not it's
in vivo
not in
silico
um but
Alex thank
you so much
for um
entertaining
all of my
fun questions
and for you
know trancing
us down
this like
super fun
path toward
mortal computing
I'm super
excited to
read your
paper um
and appreciate
your time
on the
stream
yeah
thank you
uh
thank you
blue
and thank
you
daniel
for inviting
me
this was
a really
thrilling
discussion
I really
like your
your guys
podcast
series
and uh
and I
think it's
it's great
that you guys
are pushing
for the
narrative of
free energy
and active
inference
and trying
to educate
the the
greater public
on it
so my
students as
I already
told you
are fans
of your
channel
so I
was uh
it was
my pleasure
to be
on here
um
I hope
you guys
enjoy the
paper
um
and I
guess
as a
one final
comment
I guess
it's now
sort of
our own
private
running
joke
uh
again for
those that
tuned in
hoping to
like have
a deep
dive into
I think
you guys
did a good
job on
point zero
going through
all four of
those papers
to be fair
I think
that captured
their essence
and then
last time
uh
at the
end of
point one
I gave
like a crash
course on
the NGC
predictive
coding
um
so just
to make
a final
comment
to sort
of like
tie
everything
together
to today's
I didn't
actually expect
I
it's my
fault
for introducing
the paper
but it
may it
was a
welcome
uh
derailment
uh
going down
mortal
computer
but I
think
those
four
papers
um
you
could
argue
are like
building
blocks
as well
there are
other pieces
to the
puzzle
of mortal
computation
for example
my
my
preference
or my
thoughts
are
predictive
coding
which is
a
manifestation
of
free
energy
or
variational
free
energy
minimization
that's
going to
be an
important
piece
your
neural
circuitry
should
probably
adhere
to that
because I
think
it's
very
friendly
to a
lot
of
hardware
like
neuromorphic
chips
so that's
kind of
like
where all
the
predictive
coding
stuff
just
to
think
about
my
papers
they're
like
oh
okay
that's
how
that
relates
it's
probably
building
circuits
there
and
building
little
modules
like
we
do
in
cog
engine
the
cog
engine
paper
is
we
have
talked
about
it
even
if
it's
not
about
it
specifically
the
common
model
of
cognition
is
a
wonderful
bias
if you
want
to
skip
ahead
rather
than
evolve
from
the
ground
up
to
human
cognition
and
if
we
want
to
build
a
moral
computer
that
has
aspects
of
human
behavior
we
should
maybe
appeal
to
that
type
of
bias
there's
a lot
more
in the
world
and I
encourage
viewers
to go
into the
world
of
cognitive
science
and
computational
neuroscience
and
dig
into
the
eternal
well
that
is
of
the
knowledge
there
so
I
recommend
that
and
that's
how
that
paper
relates
the
spiking
predictive
coding
and
the
convolutional
which
we
only
touched
on
them
briefly
I'll
just
comment
that
the
convolutional
predictive
coding
paper
which
was
the
second
one
that
you
guys
talked
about
is
like
an
extension
of
the
nature
paper
in
NGC
and
it
just
says
how
do
we
do
vision
processing
I
consider
that
as
another
version
of
the
same
building
block
that
would
go
into
a
mortal
computer
and
the
spiking
predictive
coding
I
think
is
really
interesting
it
says
well
if
I'm
going
to
try
to
get
as
close
as
I
can
to
biophysical
real
neurons
do
so
it's
kind
of
like
we're
building
the
neuron
as
a
little
mortal
computer
and
of
itself
and
we
know
that
they
communicate
with
spikes
and
so
the
spiking
predictive
coding
is
like
one
way
there's
other
ways
to
emulate
predictive
coding
at
a
very
fine
coarse
fine
grained
dynamics
level
and
I
would
imagine
that
would
probably
be
a
great
way
to
build
a
neuromorphic
chip
based
mortal
computer
so
the
idea
is
if
you
get
into
neuromorphics
and
the
mortal
computing
paper
does
talk
about
it
not
in
great
detail
it
talks
about
even
my
other
work
that's
beyond
predictive
coding
like
forward
forward
predictive
forward
forward
only
learning
and
other
variants
and
also
spike
timing
dependent
plasticity
and
how
did
all
those
relate
to
the
mortal
computer
and
that's
in
a
supplement
so
if
you
are
really
a
glutton
for
punishment
and
you
can't
get
enough
there's
an
appendix
with
a
couple
sections
and
it's
talked
about
there
and
so
I
think
that
you
can
just
for
the
viewers
of
this
podcast
this
closing
podcast
you
can
be
like
well
that's
how
it
all
relates
really
it
was
all
parts
of
a
mortal
computer
and
we
can
all
pretend
that
from
the

beginning
I
had
envisioned
a
mortal
just
like
Daniel
brought
up
the
whole
framework
of
active
inference
and
the
free
energy
principle
Bayesianism
they're
all
tools
that
might
help
you
build
you
know
very
powerful
and
interesting
mortal
computers
whether
they are
simulated
or
whether
they're
real
world
and
then
as
we
brought
up
in
this
one
you
guys
have
and
I
think
it's
a
compliment
to
some
of
Chris
Field's
teachings
and
some
of
his
work
there's
also
the
whole
quantum
interpretation
not
quantum
computing
as a
solution
but
rather
a
mortal
computer
and
a
neuromorphic
system
which
that's
what
Carl
and
Chris
did
and
Carl
and
I
did
in
mortal
computation
the
interpretation
from
the
quantum
information
theoretic
could
be
a
very
promising
way
of
formulating
it
and
that
might
open
up
the
doors
to
an
extremely
powerful
form
like
quantum
computing
so
I think
there's
a lot
of
wonderful
wild
out
there
places
to
go
but
they're
not
too
out
there
that's
my
last
point
that
I
want
to
make
they're
out
there
they go
against
a lot
of
our
like
I
said
earlier
held
beliefs
especially
those tied
to
immortal
computation
but I
also
think
that
they
kind
of
build
on
intuitions
and
ideas
that
have
existed
in
other
places
like
if
we
take
biology
and
biochemistry
and
biophysics
seriously
and we
know
that
these
things
work
so
it's
not
like
oh
I'm
going
to
do
something
drastically
strange
and
controversial
it's
just
saying
let's
take
a little
bit
deeper
inspiration
from
the
world
around
us
and
living
entities
to
build
what
could
arguably
be
one
way
to
do
artificial
general
intelligence
and
ultimately
artificial
sentience
which I
think
is
kind
of
the
final
end
goal
right
and
then
yeah
and
we
end
up
there
so
thank
you
guys
again
it
was
so
much
fun
talking
thank
you
for
letting
me
at
some
points
ramble
I hope
my rambling
was useful
but
you know
thank you
I'll give a short
closing remark
so first
thank you
blue for
working on
the dot
zero
diligently
and
thank you
Alex
for like
suggesting
to take
on the
challenge
and
reading
between
and among
the
citations
is like
always
what it's
about
and the
engagement
and the
developments
in the
real
world
so
it's
just
epic
it's
fun
and
it's
lived
the
research
program
is
lived
forward
but
experienced
backwards
or
however
it
was
definitely
very
excited
for
everything
you've
described
and on
all these
topics
I hope
we can
continue
to discuss
and that
people
will be
excited
to
step
up
and
do
like
a
56.3
and we
can just
continue
working
together
in
1790
Immanuel Kant
makes the
famous statement
in his
critique of
judgment
there will
never be
a
Newton
of
the
blade
of
grass
because
human
science
will
never
be
able
to
explain
how
a
living
being
can
originate
from
inanimate
matter
the
German
naturalist
Ernst
Hegel
about
70
years
later
celebrates
Charles
Darwin
to be
such
a
Newton
of
the
grass
blade
Hegel's
enthusiasm
about
Darwin
was not
shared
among
his
contemporaries
and is
not too
widespread
today
although
the
path-breaking
role of
Darwin's
scholarly
work
is not
the least
doubted
or questioned

The American
philosopher,
physicist,
and molecular
biologist
Evelyn Fox

Keller
says that
considering
Darwin
as the
Newton
of
biology
is
simply
wrong
Darwin
himself
has
systematically
avoided
!
natural
selection
begins
with a
living
cell
and I
think it's
actually
this
nexus
that you're
addressing
with the
1900s and
early 2000s
in mind
that is
a big
one
so
thank you
again for
undertaking
the project
and for
joining these
streams
and talk to
you next
time
yeah
thank you
for having
me again
looking forward
to the next
time
bye
bye
to