## GoXtkxLGkjQ

All right, hello and welcome. It's May 24th, 2024. We're in ACTIMF livestream number 57.0,
doing background and context video for the Active Data Selection and Information Seeking
paper and series. So welcome to the ACTIMF Institute. We're a participatory online
institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.
This is a recorded and archived live stream. Please provide feedback so we can improve our work.
All backgrounds perspectives are welcome and will follow video etiquette for live streams.
Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about any of the projects including the live streams.
So today we're going to do together a background first pass on a very interesting
paper from Thomas Parr, Carl Friston, and Peter Zeidman, Active Data Selection and Information
Seeking from 2024. In this video we're going to introduce ourselves, talk about big questions,
go through the keywords of the paper, then most of the sections section by section,
and as always with the dot zero it's just like a first pass and we'll look forward to speaking with
hopefully some of the authors in the coming weeks and also looking what people ask about.
So Christopher, let's introduce herself and go from there. Thanks a lot also for helping in the dot zero preparation.
Happily. Yeah, so I'm Christopher Bennett. I'm a bioinformatics scientist. I do a lot of data
mangling, data analysis, and that sort of thing. This paper was of great interest to me as we kind of go into
this more data driven era in making sure that with such large data sets that we have, making sure that we
can actually select relevant data for any of our applications going forward, be it machine learning
more, whatever we're trying to do. And I'm Daniel. I'm a researcher in California and also was drawn to this
on one hand on the applied side, the idea of more efficient and effective data sampling, and then on the
more theory side, the connection with epistemic value information game. So here are some of the big
questions. Why don't you add some detail to this? Absolutely. So there's five major big questions that
I had after reading this. For the most part, it boils down to doing our sampling. You can do sampling over
time and sampling of different data sets in different ways. Is there a way that we can intelligently
select the data that we're going for the time that we're trying to select? Is there a way that we can
understand how the time aspect of sample through time instead of just doing a like a dynamic or more
dynamic instead of doing a static like we're going to do time zero, time seven, time 14, time 21? Can we
say, hey, the differences between time one and time two are very, time point one, time point two are very
interesting. It's a lot of data in there alone. So we'll sample one and two or and then maybe sample 10.
Is there a way that we can intelligently select the time points that we are sampling from when we get
into the time series aspect? There's a number, the paper mentioned a number of different time dimension
models that you can add to the core model that they're utilizing, one of which was a hidden Markov model.
Another was, they mentioned a differential equation in the actual
model itself in the equation itself. Is there one, is there other situations that one performs better
over than the other? Or is what they have selected to use in the paper the optimal solution in most cases,
if not all cases? You know that it, when it comes to clinical trials, that was a section in this,
that they discussed. There's a lot of FDA regulations of the clinical trials and it's very heavy red tape
right now. Is there a way that, there's minimum ends that you need in many clinical trials to actually
be considered passing? Is there a way that you can bound this model that they're, they've developed in
to something that you can guarantee a minimum number, a minimum sampling that the FDA requires,
or any regulatory body?
Another point is the next step of how are we going to integrate this in with other machine learning models,
or any downstream applications that you're going with? Is there a selection method that we can,
or how do you see these, this method kind of pre, kind of before machine learning? How are we going to
attach these things together so that we feed the right data into machine learning?
Be an LLM. And then scalability and computation demands. That's going to be a big one if this is going
to be something that is used routinely in industry. You need to make sure that this is something that is
as in as scalable as you can get. You know, go from small scale, which is a lot of what they show in
this paper, and then all the way up to the very large scale data sets that we use to train LLMs and
other models. Those are kind of the five major points that I have.
ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
data that's there, but even there, as this paper will kind of get into, there's still subsampling
and all these other factors to consider. The clinical trial example brings a very serious
and very real plot twist into the paper, which moves through several levels of adding theoretical
generalization and incorporating like the time dimension and other features. And then the plot
twist is when the preferences for certain kinds of observations is specified, then there's all this
interesting behavior and decisions that come into play. So I'm sure that'll be a great discussion.
And then also in section four, they mentioned the streetlight effect, which is, quote,
the tendency to search where data are generated in a minimally ambiguous way, i.e. under a street
lamp compared to searching elsewhere on a darkened street. And so there it's an interesting scenario
and there'll be some fun art coming up and also how they distinguish the sampling method with the full
information seeking from the maximum entropy sampling is a very subtle but very important point that I
look forward to hearing more from the authors about.
Okay. So just to summarize, the paper is Active Data Selection and Information Seeking, 2024, Thomas Parr,
Carl Friston, Peter Zeidman, and just a few of the aims and claims of the paper. And then Christopher will read
the abstract. This paper aims to unpack the principles of active sampling of data by drawing from neurobiological
research on animal exploration and from the theory of optimal experimental design. Our overall aim is to
provide an intuitive overview of the principles that underwrite active data selection and to illustrate
this with some simple examples. Our interest is in the selection of data, either through sampling subsets
of data from a large data set or through optimizing experimental design based upon the models we have of how those
data are generated. Optimizing data selection ensures we can achieve good inference with fewer data, saving on
computational and experimental costs. So if you could read the abstract.
Absolutely. So the main points in the abstract are that Bayesian inference is typically focused on two major issues. The first one is that you have to estimate the parameters of the model of the data. And the second is that you need to quantify the evidence.
for alternative hypotheses and formulate an alternative model. But this paper is actually looking at a third issue, which is in how you're going to select the data for your models. And either through sampling subsets of large data is typically used or
optimized in experiments of design based upon the models we have used or optimized in experiments of design based upon the models we have.
These of how these data are generated. Optimizing data selection, what's going into the models can achieve a very good inference with fewer data points. So you're saving on computational time costs, that sort of thing by actually reducing the amount of information that you're putting into the model.
So what they're doing here is trying to unpack how you're going to actively select data. And I mean actively select data to a machine optimization protocol by drawing from some of these neurobiology concepts and trying to optimize the maximum information that a, that the information can provide maximum information gain.
So they offer an overview of some basic points from these from the field and illustrates the application in some of the toy examples that they have.
We'll go through ranging from different approximations with basis sets to inference about how the process can evolve over time.
And finally, they'll go through and consider how the approach to the data selection could be applied to design of clinical trials in this case. And specifically phase adapted clinical trials. Something that is more and more seeing headlines and kind of it's more and more useful.
And now that we have the technology to do with it.
Great. Okay. For the roadmap, the paper begins with introduction section, goes into Bayesian inference, generative models and expected information gain.
They go through a simplest worked example, and then consider a few more ways to level up that model with function approximation, consideration of the time dimension with dynamic processes, and then bring in the preference for certain observations in the clinical trials.
Then there's a discussion and conclusion. And they also have a paragraph explaining their kind of logic there.
The keywords for the paper were experimental design, active sampling, information gain, and Bayesian inference.
So the next slides are going to go into those four background topics.
After the four background topics, we'll speed through the sections and just plant a few seeds for what we want to explore more.
So first, experimental design. Here's two kind of classical views of experimental design in the active inference and free energy principle eras.
So on the left is the statistical parametric mapping, textbook, toolbox, documentation, etc.
has multiple chapters and kinds of analysis included in the package to specify and simulate and also to recognize data according to different experimental designs.
And one very hallmark or common visualization of these kinds of patterns of experimental design are these design matrices.
So here's the example of the black to white grayscale.
And it summarizes different kinds of measurements across different experimental settings.
Like here might be six settings in the larger white blocks.
And then there was variability within each of those trials.
And those are the smaller row levels.
So that's like where the data are collected.
And a lot of this has to do with the linear operations that can occur on this kind of matrix in a general linear modeling framework.
And then on the right is the experimental design experimenters perspective, where the experimental stimuli they output as actions are the observations going into the subjective model, like of the rat in the T-Maze.
And then the action output of the rat is the observations of the experiment of the experimenter.
So these are kind of two different perspectives.
SPM with more of a matrix multiplication, fMRI, optimal design, and then active inference with a more general graphical Bayesian modeling, starting to broaden the consideration of what optimal foraging and what information gain epistemic value mean.
These are kind of the experimental design themes and how they connect a little bit with other experimental design factors.
Want to add anything?
Yeah, and keep in mind that a lot of these experiments, experimental design is a very big and very important consideration when you're actually running any sort of science or analytics of any variety.
And these experiments can actually get very large with huge, huge amounts of data.
And not all of that data is relevant for every application that you want.
So you want to be able to design your experiment in a way that you can collect information in a intelligent way rather than trying to go through and just collect every data point that you can.
Because humans in many cases are running some of these experiments and they have limited time.
I certainly do when I'm running these things.
So I have to be very intelligent in how I set things up and how I actually collect data and what data I collect.
Because you only get, in many of these cases, you only get one shot to collect the data.
You miss it, it's over.
You won't have that data point.
So it's very critical that you actually take the experimental design seriously when you're setting these things up.
Great.
So connecting that kind of experimental design, experimenter on a budget perspective with a more statistical and biologically statistical based perspective, active sampling.
So they wrote, when we look at the world around us, we are implicitly engaging in a form of active data sampling, also known as active sensing or active inference.
So this is referencing the visual saccades.
And just to kind of highlight how extreme the relative acuity difference is between the center of the eye, where the gaze is focused on, and the off center, among other visual changes.
And vision is just being taken as one sensory example here.
It could also be thought of as like looking for books within a library or any other kind of selection of what data are going to come in.
Even if it seems like all of it is coming in, that still is going to be perhaps addressed with different sensors that have different variability profiles or like there's different RNA sequencing kits that you could buy.
And so how do you balance the kind of more samples or which samples, especially as those spaces grow massive.
And then just to contrast that, whereas digit recognition in a saccade based paradigm would focus on the motor patterns and the small centrally focused visual acuity and then the motor patterns that relate to circading around a digit.
Whereas in the kind of machine learning, taken all at once approach, a matrix corresponding to like the pixels in the MNIST dataset are simply taken in all at equivariance level.
So that's just kind of taking in the data.
There's still another higher order data selection question of like, which digits do you take?
If there was a large number of digits in that library.
So this is active data sampling on multiple scales, which records you pull at all, and then how the resolution and all the trade offs that are associated with using the data processing or making the experiment.
So that's a great thing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Add more though.
And, you know, keep in mind that in the, when you're talking about something like the visual system, you know, our visual system has access to untold amounts of information, but our brain can't take advantage of all of that at once.
It's a low energy usage of the brain that needs to optimize the relevant information.
Think, you know, your nose is right at the end of your face.
Your eyes are always seeing your nose, but your brain is filtering it out.
And this is happening all the time at all points in time.
There are literal blind spots in what you are actually capable of intaking and processing all at once.
And then additionally, when you're moving away from something like the eye or biological systems and into the experiment design itself, you know, you oftentimes can't run a full factorial design.
And there are other methods like a fractional factorial design, but those are random base.
And this is trying to actually talk about actively selecting how you're going to set up that design.
So it's kind of a, you can think of it multiple different ways.
Awesome.
The factor that's going to come into play as driving the active sampling is going to be the information gain.
And there are some quotes here and equation two is shown.
They write, we have conditioned our model upon the variable pi, which represents a choice we can make in selecting our data.
So data recognition, interpretation analysis, and so on.
It's often framed as kind of like an observation type or a sense making type activity here.
Pi for policy, as with usual is being framed as a control or an active data selection policy.
We're applying to some data set.
So it adds a action element into this sequential epistemic foraging rather than just taking a large data set and just munching it like all at once.
It brings in this sequential question of where to sample and potentially updating where is informative to sample through time.
And the I of pi is the functional on that policy distribution or specific choice that can be decomposed all these interesting ways that we can explore more in the coming discussions.
What else would you add though about information gain?
I think this is one of the biggest points in this whole paper is you're measuring how much information you are gaining in your model by adding these different variables in here and selecting different variables.
You're effectively automatically taking out or trying to remove things that have high mutual information that don't add as much.
So if you have parameter A and parameter B that are effectively just transformations of the same data, then you can easily remove one of those and still have all the information that you need.
So it's a really, really powerful way of saying I'm trying to optimize and maximize the amount of information that I'm adding into the model by selecting data that actually has the information that is going to improve them.
Awesome. One other interesting angle here is often in the control literature, utility, reinforcement learning, etc.
The epistemic value component is added in.
Whereas in the structure of this paper, they start with the pure information gain perspective.
And then in the clinical trial, they bring the preference in.
So the pragmatic value comes in secondary to the information gain in how they build it up step by step.
Bayesian inference is the last keyword.
A lot of places to go.
Here's what they showed for equation one.
And they wrote Bayesian inference is the process of inverting a model of how data y are generated to obtain two things, the marginal likelihood and the posterior probability.
So anything you want to say about Bayesian inference or do you want to say something about Bayesian networks and graphs?
I think that you've kind of covered it here.
It's, I think, fairly textbook on this part.
Yeah. How about graphs?
On the Bayesian graph side of it, there's multiple different ways that these Bayesian statistics is done nowadays.
And the Bayesian networks and graphs is a really powerful method going forward.
I know that right now in the Institute, we have an RxInfer group working right now, which is a Julia package for actually building these network graphs, these Bayesian graphs and doing message passing between the different factors and the different nodes of the graph.
So this is a very big up and coming area right now.
It's very early in the timeframe that this is going to become big.
It's kind of on the upswing right now.
And it's kind of, at least I would predict, going to be kind of the next big thing going forward in the next five years or so.
Yeah, we've been having a great epistemic time and Livestream 55 explores some of this in more detail.
Okay. That was the background. Now onto the paper.
So first, just to get the last part of the paper out of the way, they have a GitHub, Thomas Parr's GitHub with the active data selection repo.
And maybe in one of the upcoming discussions or somebody in the time between can explore and transform and play with the code.
And also all these different ways that we have fun discussions around the language of the active inference model and how building it in different languages or using different styles like is or isn't plausible.
These have been very fun discussions that help us get at what the core of the math really is and how that's independent of whether it's written in MATLAB or any other language.
And then also as it is simulated, it's written here in MATLAB.
And so that's kind of interesting.
Any thoughts on that or just like coding in RxInfer or?
Yeah, I think that with RxInfer being, I think, relatively new on the scene, you have some of these other traditional approaches with MATLAB and PyMD and that sort of thing.
It'll be very interesting to see how these techniques evolve over time with packages like RxInfer really, I think, changing how we approach building these models and designing them.
And I think that it's going to be even more critical now in this current environment to select the data intelligently going in so that you're not muddying up your models or having to build too big of models that might have information that's not as useful to the application at hand.
Yeah, great. All right. Section one introduction.
So we'll try to hit on some of the key points.
I'll say something briefly and then feel free to add something if you want.
Section one situates that inference and action cycle or loop or partition in terms of a statisticians job or process in modeling observations data as sampled and latent variables as models.
And the process by which there's kind of snapshot or bulk summarization or generativity or and how it's possible to have a continuous resampling of informative data or how you even evaluate how data are informative in which way.
Want to add anything?
I think you've captured that very well. I'm going to actually pull out my notes so that I can actually remember all the symbols.
I think that's a good point.
Y are going to be used for data and data for the latent variables.
So distributions of data distributions of latent variables conditioned upon data coming in.
So that could be seen as just one data point sequentially or a big bulk vector coming in like all at once.
Just continuing to move through this section, they wrote,
Careful data selection is especially important when we consider the problems associated with very large data sets of the sort that are now ubiquitous in machine learning and artificial intelligence settings.
So just to summarize a little bit or add a few notes that came up in the paper.
So other than this topic being very fascinating and very integrative in terms of a unifying approach for information and behavior, etc.
Also, this is definitely one of the active inference questions that has a lot of pragmatic relevance.
So this is a lot of the things that we have to do with data sets of different kinds.
And especially the way that even the examples specify important settings is very clear, very direct, though also the mathematics are very general about epistemics.
And this motivation that they lay out in the first section about how if this challenge could be addressed, then there would be all these kinds of benefits that could be realized with current systems and data sets.
And then they provide the approach to at least getting there or towards it to optimize data selection.
We first need to identify an appropriate optimality criterion.
And so they're going to kind of go through several stages of with different generative models, how that optimality criterion is defined.
Anything else, Ted?
And keep in mind that this is the expected information gain that they're talking about.
It's effectively how much do we think we're going to gain by adding this information in there.
And then you can, of course, train your model by looking at the actual information gain if necessary and go through kind of a learning cycle.
But we're basing this all off of what do we expect to gain from this information?
All right. Section two, Bayesian inference, generative models and expected information gain.
In this equation three, I won't read it all.
It models the Markov blanket formalism in terms of upstream and downstream causal relationships in terms of messages that are passed along edges of a factor graph.
They introduced in this paper the lambda operator to indicate either summation or integration.
So this is across continuous variables or discrete variables.
And we'll explore this more with the authors, hopefully.
Anything you want to add on equation three?
More that, you know, the information gain is a function of the data that you sample.
So depending on how you sample that data, you're going to get different information gain out of it as you would expect.
And then you start to get into the message passing, which is that Bayes graph and factor graph, I guess, challenge going forward that that construct when you build it in a factor graph model.
You have to be able to pass the messages between the nodes effectively.
Yeah. And to kind of ground that in the data science situation, if you have a latent state estimate and you're generating data, generative AI, synthetic data, then the latent variable is upstream causally statistically from the data pseudo observation.
But that might be the actual real observation if you're interested in the computer model.
Whereas the data recognition case where the data are upstream of the estimate of a parameter, like a risk score or something like that, then the parents of the latent state estimate is the data.
So that's the recognition direction.
So this kind of covers the whole Bayesian update possibility spectrum in this essentially Markov blanket, but it could be in phase space or time or a few other situations that explore.
All right. Three, a worked example.
So this section lays out the overall pipeline for how you get from the graphical notation of the Bayesian network, whether it's viewed visually graphically, like with a variable dependency structure, or whether it's just written out in terms of the plain text with the analytical.
So the Bayesian network is transformed into a factor graph, probably a constraint factor graph discussion for another day on that graph.
Certain messages are passed at inference runtime.
Conditional and predictive entropies are calculated as part of the way that this system outputs or is described by different probability distributions understand in a kind of statistical way.
In terms of entropy.
In terms of entropy.
In terms of entropy.
And then that is going to come together into calculation of the objective function, which is the expected information gain, which is basically conditioned upon the cognitive model of the sampler.
So just because the sampling is active data sampling doesn't mean that it's going to lead to like an adaptive behavior.
It just means that where the learning rate is perceived to be highest informationally iteratively.
There is a ranking by which those can be, which this, the space of experiments can be ranked by.
And it can connect to pragmatic value in terms of epistemic and pragmatic coming together for the full expected free energy, like in the clinical trial.
Anything to add?
And you'll notice in this story example, they are discussing here the factors that they have in their graph in each of their nodes is actually a cosine.
So that's why you get that kind of oscillation in that bottom plot there.
So you'll have areas of maximal information and then areas of minimal information just based on the toy example they have.
And this doesn't always have to be cosine, but in this example it is.
And so it just kind of gives you a really good graphical understanding of how your information gain can be viewed over a sinusoidal sort of oscillation.
So, yeah, just to kind of double down on that, if you sample right here on the number line or right here, the lines are indistinguishable.
So the information gain is expected to be low under understanding the parameter family that is being generated and sampled from, which in this first example is the same, same type of equations.
Whereas where the functions are maximally distinct, the information gain associated with reducing uncertainty about which one of those five the data point is coming from.
So, those are the informative points at the zero on the number line and far out.
That's where just perceiving one point uncolored would give you the most ability to even perfectly resolve which one of the five situations it was.
So, oh, they write, in effect, this model amplifies or attenuates the amplitude of the predicted data depending upon a periodic function of our data sampling policy pi.
So, here the policy distribution is like that kind of around the clock direction, which is not a common setting, but the general idea of sampling amongst a finite set of alternatives where a control variable is going to result in the most informative data point is a theme that is going to be expanded upon.
So, here's one interesting mathematical move.
Once all terms that are constant with respect to pi are eliminated, we are left with equation six.
So, equation five comes down to equation six, or maybe not exactly only five to six, but six has removed all the variables that don't change as policy changes.
So, if the question of policy selection is taken alone, like gradients on policy updating, then everything that's constant with respect to it doesn't come into like the delta pi delta something.
So, it just simplifies it down to only a function of policy, and that just kind of reflects how like the sense making and belief updating component is partitioned off from the policy selection component here.
Yeah, you're looking for change in your belief based on the observations that you're gaining.
So, if it's not changing, it's not as informative in your information model.
Yeah.
Continuing on equation six there, which is modeling the policy dependent components of information gain as an objective function that ranks decisions about where to sample.
Equation six is a special case of the third row of table one, which highlights analytical expressions for expected information gain for a few common model structures.
So, as we might intuit, the most informative places to sample data align with those in which differences in data lead to large differences in the predicted data, in which our choice of pi maximizes the sensitivity with which y depends on data.
So, here are the categorical, the Dirichlet, and other functions in terms of how they'd be written out in the probabilistic, like specifying a distribution way.
And then how there's this relationship analytically to a related distribution, which is an objective function that ranks the information content of sampling the likelihood distribution in a certain way.
Okay.
And that's closed form in certain situations.
And then also the explorer where it's intractable formally.
And so then that's where the variational approximation comes into play.
Anything to add?
No, I think that summarizes this slide.
Okay.
Section four function approximation.
We next turn to a generic supervised learning problem, that of trying to approximate some function based upon known inputs and the observable outcomes they stochastically cause.
Pretty general neural network or latent state observation setup.
That information is composed and concatenated so that there's a common variable that's describing the statistical object that's going to be describing the inputs and the relationship with the observable outcomes.
And then that function approximation from sequential data in figure 3 is simulated with random, but potentially you could call all of them random.
But this one is a flatter or a less informed and iterated model of data sampling.
Just going to show that samples of random data with even this minimal non-information gain driven model has a certain baseline prediction that's associated with certain choices about sampling sequentially from this generative model.
Want to add anything?
Yeah, I like that they highlighted in this, that choice diagram there that you can actually get the inefficient sampling just by random that you start to run.
You can randomly select two things very close together and you've effectively maybe not wasted a choice, but, you know, not gotten the maximum gain from that choice that you could have.
Yeah.
Yeah.
They write a little bit more about figure 3.
Figure 3 illustrates a depiction of this model as a Bayesian network and a visual representation of the data generating process.
Now they're going to bring in information gain.
So they write, this is where information gain becomes relevant into designing a more informed way to sample data than from a flat or a non-updating prior data sampling distribution.
It's like equivalent to having a policy prior that's fixed, which might be a heuristic in a certain space.
So they write, substituting equation 7 into equation 3.
So here's that Markov blanket parent-child concept.
And here equation 3 is describing the policy dependence on the joint distribution of the observed and the unobserved.
And this is combined into equation 10.
To show what equation 10 does in terms of now that we're sampling from this distribution or like statistical distributions that this describes,
they'll differentiate figure 3 from figure 4, kind of like bring in this model change between those two figures.
Now samples are drawn from a distribution whose log is proportional to the information gain in equation 10.
So it takes the flat policy prior and in a fixed way has remapped it to be proportional to the information gain.
So here's 3 on the right and then 4 on the right.
And the figure uses the same format as figure 3.
But now each choice is sampled to maximize anticipated information gain.
And they point to some specific quantitative patterns, but also like qualitative patterns.
So want to add anything on figure 4?
Just that now if you focus on those choices, because I really did, I think, like that choice plot there,
you can see that the walks around, kind of choices around your data space are a little bit more distributed,
evenly distributed, a little bit less random.
But you start to get, I think, a more cohesive sampling of the data without entire randomness,
putting things too close together, putting selections too close together.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Continuing on.
Well, they set up the question as, this raises the question as to how many samples should we collect?
So within a foraging bout, where should one look?
And then at the kind of like pulling a layer back in the strategy, when should you halt looking?
Like if you have already sampled all three records from a data set, then unless you had some other reason, you could fully stop sampling there.
But you also might want to have a softer stopping criterion that would relate to how much information you're gaining from continuing to sample in that way before like halting.
And so they include that by having like an exit policy in the state space of foraging possibilities.
So how do you resolve that?
An answer to this question can be drawn from behavioral neuroscience and the so-called exploitation exploration dilemma.
And they introduced the notion of sampling costs to help decide that.
So this method is still going to require parameterization and situation-specific modeling of the relative costs versus the relative information gain.
However, at least there's an accounting that includes costs into the sampling equation to give any possibility of exiting.
Because if no costs are provided for sampling, then the model might just converge and continue to eke out very small amounts of variance explained.
If it doesn't explicitly have that stop option.
So they take the policy vector, the list of locations that can be sampled from, and adds a zero element, which reflects the information gained if we were to stop sampling.
And then there's a preference over those observations expressed in the C vector preferences.
And this brings in the information seeking and the cost aversive imperatives into the same objective function in 11.
Anything to add on 11?
Yeah, eventually the idea is that it just gets to a point where you're no longer, whatever you set your kind of stopping energy to be, kind of breaking energy.
Eventually it's just going to get to a point where the model just says, hey, I've reached what I can.
You've set this.
You're not gaining anything beyond this point.
We can just stop at this point, which is nice, since in the random selection case, there's not necessarily a stopping parameter.
As Daniel mentioned, you can continue to get eke out very, very small marginal changes.
But you're not going to gain anything else.
And so you're just spinning your wheels for no reason.
So this is a very elegant way of saying, hey, I've reached kind of an inflection point of data gain.
I'm done.
So figure five, they're continuing in this genre of three, four, five.
And now they've added in to the policy decision, which has an upstream dependency on the data.
That's the active policy edge.
So we can explore more.
However, it now includes not just the information gain driven choices within a trial, but it includes a specific probabilistic, but decisive stopping point for that trial.
As parameterized by how sensitive it is to information gain and preference.
So this is one of the most interesting parts and discussions in the paper.
They ask it out loud.
A reasonable question to ask at this stage is why bother with the full information seeking objective?
And basically, how does this differ from maximum entropy sampling?
And let's look forward to the authors or other guests.
But here's just a few notes on this, because I think it'll be a great place to explore what it really means to do statistical and physical modeling on cognitive systems.
They directly contrast maximum entropy sampling and their whole information gain family against each other.
And then the rebuttal is in figure six.
So just to show figure six for a second.
The measurement noise increases in variance from the center of the function domain.
So the variability profile of the function is non-uniform.
This means the amount of unresolvable uncertainty is heterogeneous through the domain of potential sampling.
So in some kind of ways of thinking about what they're really getting at and just putting this out as a speculation or starting point for this key technical point.
So if there were a case where the latent states were equivariant, they had IID variability profiles, then sampling the most variable sensory data is the most informative.
Like if you're taking a picture of a solid black image, then sampling from the noisy pixels is going to potentially provide more information gain.
You're reducing uncertainty more about something.
It might be overfitting, but you can select as a heuristic wanting to sample from where variability is high at just kind of a first pass layer.
However, as we start to think about richer or more specified statistical patterns, generative models, there become dependencies that are sparse but important amongst all different kinds of things.
So things that are variable from a sensory perspective provide high information gain potentially to one part of a generative model, like a screen and static.
But then other events might be less variable from a sensory perspective, but smaller differences even in that variable relate to some other component of uncertainty resolution from some other component of the model.
Like those are going to be the cases where cognitive modeling does differ from just dispersed decision making.
However, they're both going to result in dispersed decision making profiles, like looking at the choices in the figures.
But the choices to sample from the less ambiguous parts of the actual distribution, that leads to a much narrower policy path in this cognitive control setting versus in a variability sampling.
Where it would go for the areas that were just more variable, but not necessarily providing more information.
Question mark.
And you can add on this with the maximum entropy or anything.
And I would even highlight on the next slide, effectively what it is doing is accepting that you're not going to gain a lot of resolution in these highly variable regions.
And so you don't really have to sample into those deeply because you've accepted that it is variable.
It is not something it is inherently variable in the data.
We're not going to gain a lot of information from these regions.
And it's highlighted in blue down there.
And I think that's one of the big highlight notes of this figure is there's less information gain available in these highly variable regions.
And that's something that makes this method more robust and powerful when you're dealing with some of these non-uniform variable data.
Yeah, awesome.
And then the streetlight effect is brought in there.
So the avoidance of sampling in ambiguous locations is sometimes referred to as a streetlight effect.
The tendency to search where data are generated in a minimally ambiguous way, i.e. under a street lamp compared to searching elsewhere on a darkened street.
So I made some GPT-4-0 images, some fun streetlight.
And on one hand, there's kind of this sense of like, is it constraining to look under only the streetlight?
Isn't that kind of absurd?
And then there's the joke about how what the person's looking for is elsewhere, but they're still searching under the streetlight.
But they're looking for something they know is elsewhere.
So that's the kind of tragic element of it.
Then there's this limited element.
However, there's also this realistic element, which is like, well, are you supposed to search where you can't sense or outside of where you are at that moment?
So how could you say that that wasn't just...
And then this paper is more framing it as just a general condition of perception.
Like you're in your tactile streetlight.
That is the part you can see at all.
You can have latent modeling of any and other things.
But if it's not grounded in some way to a measurement made in a streetlight under the metaphor where the light allows for observation, then you're not connected to data unless you're connected to that streetlight.
So that's just a very interesting kind of topic and reference that the authors use.
What do you think?
Absolutely.
Absolutely.
I mean, it kind of boils down to you can't know what you don't know or you can't observe.
You know, if you can only observe what's underneath the streetlight, then you can't really know what else is outside of there.
And so your inference necessarily should be constrained to what you're able to actually observe.
You can't observe the unknown.
And so not necessarily in this case, because you don't even know if it even exists.
You have no data to confirm or refute it.
All right.
Section five, dynamic processes.
So in that previous example, there was a data selection challenge, whether it was approached from the flat, fixed prior, or all these other kind of subsequent variants with adaptivity and or with the cost.
Now there's going to be a time element brought into the underlying generative model.
We'll just go quickly here because that's the big point.
They take the static distribution that was sampled from and now give the underlying process also variability through time.
So this is like a very SPM brain latent state causal modeling type set.
Yeah.
Anything you want to say on that before we go in?
Oh, no.
Go ahead.
Okay.
Okay.
So they consider processes that evolve in time.
Equation 12 can be interpreted similarly to equation eight in which the expectation of the data is treated as a function approximation, which now includes a time argument.
So here was eight.
Expectation of the data given latent state parameterization and policy equals so on.
And then here there is data also being a function of parameterization and policy, and then also bringing in an element with a subscript tau for time.
Then you mentioned in your big questions, the different approaches that they raise here with the three ways to bring temporalities into a model.
So let's definitely talk about that.
But just to show their images, seven and eight are the pair for this dynamical section.
So figure seven shows a graphical representation of the matrices involved in generating our data and the inferences obtained after sampling.
So here it is sampling from a time variance function.
And then figure eight goes into more detail and notes predictions based upon current data can be used to inform predictions about nearby spatial locations and to predict and postdict the values of the function at different points in time.
So just like you could have a 2D plane grayscale and infer the location of the streetlight by pursuing like a gradient up the light.
And then there would be this optimal sampling.
Like if you just got one observation, you would want to sample on a line that was orthogonal to the one that you couldn't resolve.
Lots of ways to think about this sequential prediction.
But now the underlying landscape also changes.
So there's some temporal dynamics and then that can be fit with all these different time series models and autocorrelation and so on.
However, that's specified statistically in the generative model.
But this section just shows however you do make a statistical model for time.
It's basically going to be the same thing where information is going to be drawn from a distribution and now time is a variable in that distribution.
They write,
the key formalisms that they're working with in that kind of background section or setup section.
They kept one thing constant, which was that the generative model, the generative process, or however it's considered with the family of equations that the agent is inferring and tracking hidden states with,
and that being the same as the actual family of observations that the actual function of observations.
And here, that is relaxed.
So that opens it up to all empirical settings where you can just say right off the bat,
we do not have access to the generative model of those data.
So we're making a map, statistical map, with all the associated trade-offs and statuses of like that genetic data or that transcriptomic data,
all those different kinds of data sets,
starting from a position where it's going to have to be statistically approximated,
and it isn't going to be based, unless explicitly otherwise,
on actual knowledge about the causal elements of the system.
Any thoughts on that?
Well, in something else that they noted in the paper,
by adding this time element,
when they're actually going through the time series,
the model itself will preferentially select different data beyond what it just recently selected.
So time point one, it selects X and Y data.
Time point two, it might select L and M data.
So it actually will go through and select different types of data,
and it'll take a little bit of time.
What the time is can be variable,
but it takes a little bit of time before it revisits some of that previous data at a previous time.
So by this, you kind of have a sliding window of data that you're selecting over different time periods.
Yeah.
All right.
That's all going to come to play in this clinical trial,
which is the big final contribution section of the paper.
In our final example,
we demonstrate the potential utility of the ideas outlined above in the context of a more concrete example.
So they model the statistical setting here
as an adaptive Bayesian clinical intervention methodology experiment.
For example, the kind that was done during the 2014 West African Ebola outbreak.
The active sampling approach advocated in this paper offers two main opportunities to augment adaptive trial designs.
First, it allows us to adapt the design to maximize the information we obtain about treatment efficacy.
So that's the pure sense-making information gain learning sampling from where it's informative,
not from where like we habitually or prefer to look.
And then second, to balance and bring together that information gain with costs.
And that was brought in with the cost of the sampling section,
which was done in this paper by adding the stop policy option,
which can be probabilistically selected.
And then as other sampling locations become less informative,
or if somebody was just sampled and you know that there's a slow decay through time,
then on that subject, the stop policy cost would outweigh the information gain from an experiment.
And this is also, I think, will be a very interesting discussion.
This blows the line between clinical trial and public health intervention
and can be seen as analogous to animal behavior that is never fully exploitive or explorative,
but is a balance between the two.
So how do we think about that in terms of biomedical and health security and all these different topics?
And any thoughts on this before we go into the formalism of the clinical trial,
just like about clinical trials or anything?
Yeah, and I think that that's going to be, like that last point there is going to be a big one going forward.
It's like, how do you balance benefits to the patient, benefits to your trial,
benefits to essentially the company?
Like there's a lot of different benefits and costs that you have to weigh into this.
And so these models are going to get very complicated when you start to distill this into something,
especially with health related.
So it'll be very interesting to see how this evolves.
Okay, so here's how they do it.
Our setup is as follows.
For each new cohort of participants, we decide upon the randomization ratio to adopt.
That's the orange subscript R of policy.
So this is policy on a randomization ratio.
There's three options.
So this is a discrete but linearly ranked, not fully categorical policy decision,
where one half would be the 50-50 sampling between the two groups.
Whereas you know a priori that sampling in a skewed ratio is going to be less informative.
Like if you sampled only from one, you would obviously be maximally uninformed about the other.
However, what's going to end up being reflected in the policy decision to shift to a one-third or a two-third,
which is focusing observations on one branch of the study more than the other,
is going to focus on the explicit quantitative preference for observations of survival.
So that's going to be very interesting to see how the time variable,
which relates to the experimental design,
but by way of modeling the death curves of the participants
and how different preferences for complementary processes of reducing uncertainty about the treatment-specific death curves
and not preferring to see death observations
because that would introduce the pragmatic imperative to measure low survival experiments.
So there's a lot of complexity in there from the public health side,
also in this very simple and interpretable way that like,
this is like a Bayesian light switch with 50-50 information-seeking mode
or tilt it one way or the other to bias observations.
Whereas if no information had to be resolved,
then the policy selection would orient towards observing long survival.
Whereas if that was somehow changed,
then it would have to be adaptively sampled on the fly
and changing these ratios and all that.
What do you think about this?
Yeah, and what we're going to kind of get into is,
especially with these sorts of health decisions,
you want people to survive.
Like that's your primary goal in a lot of these.
You want to see an effect,
you want to see a positive effect of your treatment one way or the other.
You know, if it's the placebo that's the positive
or if it's the actual treatment that's the positive,
you want people to survive.
So this is kind of getting into that ethics of making sure that
when you design these things,
that you're doing the maximum good to your participants
who, you know, may not have, you know,
much hope to stand on during some of these crises or epidemics
or whatever they are experiencing at the time.
So you want to design this in such a way that, you know,
you keep them, the patients in mind.
That is the whole point of this.
And so by having a Bayesian kind of preference and bias
to keeping the patient alive and the best outcome,
you are maximizing how the patient's outcome
and the patient's life.
Thanks for adding that.
Another point to make, this is from figure nine,
that's going to come up,
but it really highlights how sparse and few
and interpretable the Bayesian graphical formalism is.
And message passing, which a lot of the equations describe
and the discussion about Rx and Fur touched upon,
message passing gives procedural ways
to implement this in computational systems
because it's sometimes hard to go from the simplicity
of like this graphical model
to fitting it iteratively on complex data sets.
But it's pretty clear to see how different variables
are upstream or downstream of other variables
and also how the time sampling can be shown to be,
which is upstream of data sampled,
as these other factors are.
But it has a separable, interpretable,
calculable epistemic value
that doesn't have a certain kind of connection
to randomization ratio, for example.
So being able to have explicit statistical calculations
and directednesses where the follow-up time
doesn't influence the treatment group ratio
or the randomization ratio
or other processes gives a type of interpretability
that the generative model gives us the equations for.
And then the pragmatic challenges
are about actually implementing that.
And then even if the computational component
were totally addressed and abstracted away,
that would basically center these broader questions,
which I think the health examples are great,
like jumping off point four.
Yeah.
And you have probably recalled
from all the other different figures,
despite how simple this figure is,
the other figures,
the plots were very basic,
the models themselves,
like you just had the three nodes,
you know, converging on the Y.
So despite how simple this looks,
you are adding more complexity to these systems.
And the more complexity that you add,
the harder it is,
the more computationally intensive it is.
And so this is that question of how big can you go?
You know, how many nodes can you add?
How many parameters can you add?
How much complexity can you add to the system
before it starts to break down
or not perform as well as you would hope?
Yeah.
So other than bringing in that randomization ratio
kind of expression of preference,
this model differs from a prior one
in that it's defined that the kind of cognitive map
is not the territory.
They're different families.
So that's what motivates this approximation approach.
So this is a simple displacement
where still it's a trackable problem
as they'll unfold.
However,
the simulation family chosen
for the,
for like the approximation,
basically the approximation could apply to any data set,
but it might be woefully inadequate.
Like it might fit only one component of it.
So that's,
again,
part of the interesting question is like,
how similar
does the statistical model have to be
or what information does it really bring in
and how
to,
to model or work with an empirical side?
Um,
but just on a more general statistical level,
uh,
equations 15,
16,
17,
describe some of the technical details
of the incremental optimization
gradient scheme,
the Newton optimization variational Laplace.
We'll talk to Thomas et al.
Figure nine
is
displaying the
kind of before picture
for the randomized control trial.
So
here's where that graphical model
is
that was shown earlier.
And then here are these two
groups
and their survival through time
and different sampling,
uh,
choices that are made.
Then just to,
to jump to figure 10
has the same layout as figure nine,
but now using the expected information gain
from equation 18
to guide sampling of data.
So this is just to show
the impact of that active data sampling
and then we'll drop back to the equation.
Uh,
there are some notable differences
between the choices made in figure 10
compared with nine.
Nine
choices
10.
Uh,
the most obvious of these
is that the follow-up times selected
have been moved later
once optimal sampling is employed.
This makes intuitive sense
as a later follow-up time
is informative
about the survival probabilities
at all prior times,
whereas an earlier follow-up time
is not informative
about survival probabilities
at later time.
Um,
where it gets
in the final,
uh,
simulation
brings in
the random sampling
plus the preference
element.
Here's where the symmetry
is broken
to also want
the measurement
of survival
as more likely
than death,
which is how the preferences
are specified
in active inference.
Um,
and then
the policy switch
is reflected
in this,
like,
um,
part
where
the observations
are shifted
later
because there's
less than a threshold
of information to gain
by having them earlier
and then
they,
uh,
even if there is
equal variance,
I'm not exactly sure
we can ask,
between the two branches,
there's,
uh,
an over-sampling
for the group
with the higher survival,
which in this case
was the placebo group.
So,
anything to add on this?
Yeah,
I think this is,
this is the,
the,
like,
the crux
of the whole
making sure
that you optimize,
you know,
the patient's outcome
on this
because the treatments
in this scenario
were not,
um,
were not beneficial,
they're actually harmful.
And so,
throughout the course
of the study,
this,
by utilizing this model,
you actually randomized
more people
into the placebo group,
which caused
a greater survival
of these,
uh,
individuals.
And so,
you're,
you can already see
the effect
that this sort of
methodology has
on clinical trials
because you're optimizing
the outcome.
And I think
that is exactly
what you want to do
in these health decisions,
in these trials,
in these things
that impact human health,
uh,
or humanity in general.
You want to optimize
the outcome,
uh,
and,
you know,
in this way,
you're actually reducing
the overall harm
to patients.
Yeah,
interesting.
Um,
here's the specification
for the information gain.
So,
uh,
bringing in
the,
the,
the,
the form of the messages
required for equation three.
Now,
with all these extra components
that have been added in
with,
uh,
time variability,
demographic,
and the sampling,
they write out
some of the
technical details
for the approximations
in the variational Laplace,
and then
some aspects
about those models,
which we can ask about.
But,
figure 11
basically shows
the big
change,
which is that,
uh,
as you go from
having a,
uh,
flat sampling distribution
across time
and across treatment groups,
you can actually
do better than that,
basically,
by choosing
a sampling regime
that
makes sense
given the costs
of sampling.
So,
that's just very interesting
because it,
it really does look like
given the,
the possibility
for these two lines
to diverge,
their divergence
would be largest
later on.
whereas if you could only
schedule like one
check
for every person,
if it was something
that was expected
to happen later in life,
then sampling
all the
young
wouldn't even make sense.
So then,
one approach
is like
flat sampling,
but that is kind of
sometimes erroneously
called,
uh,
like unbiased
or,
or uninformative,
but it is very informative,
and then this is
pointing towards
how there can be
better sampling
than just
trying to
go flat
across the entire
latent state
estimate.
If there are
priors relating
to something,
they can be leveraged
as part of
the probabilistic
sampling
and adapted
to the
data set
at the,
in the end.
however,
for picking
prior families
for the
active data
selection,
that's a
big question
about how
much it will
change
how the
algorithms
work.
So I guess
that kind of
takes us to
the,
uh,
discussion.
The paper's
focus has been
on illustrating
how we might
make use of
information-seeking
objectives
augmented with
costs,
which gave
kind of the
exit criterion
or preferences,
which gives
the biased
pragmatic
part of
data selection
to choose
the best
data to
optimize
our
inferences.
And they
highlight
that the
maximum
entropy
would yield
identical
results
in several
of our
examples.
So that'll
be interesting,
like what
were the
examples
where
maximum
entropy
and the
information
gain
are
identical?
And then
what are
the real
world
or the
statistical
settings
when the
variance
around
predicted
outcomes
is
inhomogeneous,
how does
the full
cognitive
epistemic
model-based
objective
do differently
than the
max-ent
distribution
dispersal
kind of
null
hypothesis?
Any
thoughts on
this?
I think
you've
captured it
very well.
there are
several
technical
points
worth
considering
for how
we might
advance
the
concepts
reviewed
in this
paper.
So let's
talk about
each of
these.
One,
refinement
of the
active
selection
process.
Two,
empirical
evaluation
of active
versus
alternative
sampling
methods.
And three,
identifying
the appropriate
cost
functions.
So we'll
talk about
those
coming up.
Conclusion.
Here's the
entire
conclusion.
The key
ideas
involved
an appeal
to
foveal-like
sampling
of small
portions
of the
total
available
data
to
minimize
computational
cost.
That's a
very cool
way to
put it.
And it
highlights
that kind
of like
sequential
scanning,
but also
opens up
some very
exciting
directions
about how
efficient
that could
be
for some
but not
other
kinds
of
problems
and how
those
problems
could be
identified
or those
patterns
could be
filtered
for to
where
different
kinds
of
circadian
models
would be
adaptive
or not.
So like
these are
all fun
discussions
we'll have.
And then
they kind
of brought
all the
theoretical
components
together
at the
end
with the
Bayes
adaptive
clinical
trial
with the
costs
of
sampling
constraints
on
sampling
and also
the
preference
for survival.
So what
are your
overall
thoughts
or what
are you
excited
about
for the
ones
to come?
I'm
excited to
kind of
see,
I mean,
this is a
fairly recent
paper.
I'm excited
to see
kind of
where they
have gone
since this
paper was
published.
You know,
they had a
number of
kind of
next directions.
I would love
to see what
of those
directions
have they've
taken,
what they've
compared it
to,
other
sampling
techniques.
This
shows a
lot of
promise
going forward
for very
complex
and,
you know,
ethical
situations
or situations
where ethics
are going
to be a
huge
component.
So
kind of
where that
is,
what they're
going into
and kind
of where
they see
further
improvements.
I still
kind of
want to
know
what would
happen
or what
of these
other time
metrics
or what
other
situations
these time
metrics
would
or alternative
time
models
would be
applicable
to or
if this
really is
like the
de facto
just the
way it
needs to
be done.
Totally
fair.
I think
that could
very well
be the
case.
I would
just love
to hear
exactly
if you
did a
hidden
Markov
model,
how would
that look?
Is there
a benefit
of that
over the
selection
that they
have?
Does it
provide
more or
less
versatility
in the
models?
These are
things that
are going
to be
very
interesting
going
forward
and
then
how do
we
like
you
noted
in the
discussion
how do
you optimize
those cost
functions?
What's
a cost?
You're dealing
with clinical
trials,
it's a human
life,
that's a
cost.
Time,
it's a
cost.
There's also
just
computer
time.
How much
you can
actually
get,
how much
compute you
can get
and give
them over
time.
Some of
these
machine learning
models that
you might
want to apply
this to
or select
data going
into,
sometimes takes
a long time
to try.
how are
you going
to sample
data that's
going into
those models?
How are
you going
to continually
feed those
models
appropriate
data going
forward?
So this
is a huge
broad category
of directions
that you can
go.
Clinical
trials was
a very
wonderful
example of
a complex
situation that
is right
there applicable
to human
life.
data science
in general.
How are
you going
to utilize
this to
going more
broad?
How are you
going to
utilize this
going forward
in any
data sense?
Data is
growing,
it will
continue to
grow,
it will
never really
stop growing.
It's going
to be more
and more
important going
forward to
have these
methods more
broadly used.
Random is
nice,
Random is
really,
really good,
complicated.
But this
holds a lot
of promise
to being,
I would love
to just hear
their thoughts
on where
that's going,
where they
see that.
Yeah.
A lot
of interesting
directions.
A few things
that made me
think of,
one was about
search and
about relational
search concepts,
page rank and
everything,
syntactic,
semantic,
new kinds of
search algorithms
and personalization
for search
and learning
and updating
and to what
extent explicit
cognitive modeling
would change
the way that
different
recommendation
algorithms or
different kinds
of computer
systems would
work.
I'll read a
question.
And then,
any other
questions?
Otherwise,
this is our
last slide,
so thank you,
Christopher.
Okay.
Glea
Maximalist
wrote,
interesting point
about biased
and unbiased
sampling schemes.
Perhaps this
points out the
fact that
unbiased
approaches are
the wrong
thing to
strive for
in research
study design.
What do you
think about
that?
Unbiased
research in
study design?
I think
there's a time
and place
for unbiased
and I think
there's a time
and place
for bias.
I think
that when
you accept
bias into
your model
or take
bias out
of your
model,
you need
to understand
why you're
doing that.
Certain bias
you don't
want to
have,
you know,
researcher
bias is
something that's
a huge bias
that you want
to not have,
for example.
But in
certain cases,
like in this
paper,
where you
actually do
want to
have a
bias,
you want
to make
an intelligent
decision,
note why
you're making
that decision,
call it out,
and then build
it into your
model.
That would be
my problem.
Yeah,
that's
interesting.
There are
certain
statistical
distributions,
the bias
or the
constraints
on which
define the
research
study,
whereas other
ones that
can have
an explicitly
strictly
negative
data loss
or something.
But then
the trade-offs
of how that
distribution
actually interacts
with others
can enter
into this
more complex
experimental
calculus
that relates
to all
these
different
experimental
factors.
And so
the optimal
experiment
for
different
labs
or different
moments for
the lab
could look
extremely
different.
And that's
going to be
the case.
There's going
to be dispersed
behavior either
way, but then
the question
is how is
that actually
driven in
a way that
is doing
better than
drawing from
distributions?
However,
even that
does interestingly
well.
for the
right
variables.
And you
can mine
bias all
over the
place.
Bias in
data design
in experiments
can be
very useful.
So it'll
just be
interesting.
I think it'll
be case by
case.
That's the
way I
see it.
Okay.
Well,
do you have
any last
comments?
I think
that the
main thing
here is
I'm just
very excited
to see
this paper
come out.
I would
love to
see how
this is
going to
evolve over
time,
see if
this can
be applied
to
different
technologies,
different
areas.
I'm really
excited just
to see
where this
is going
because I
think this
is just
right on
the cusp
of what's
needed.
Awesome.
Thank you.
We will
look forward
to it.
Thank you.
See you.
All right.
Thanks,
guys.
Thanks,

to
see you
Thank you.

## N0ozoxTgWD0

Hello and welcome. It's May 28th, 2024. We're in ACTIMF livestream 57.1. Welcome to the
Active Inference Institute. We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning,
and practicing applied active inference. This is a recorded and archived livestream. Please
provide feedback so we can improve our work. All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome
and will follow video etiquette for livestreams. Check out activeinference.org to learn more about
livestreams and other projects. Okay, today in 57.1, we're continuing the discussion of the paper on
active data selection and information seeking with Carl Friston and Thomas Parr joining. So,
thank you both. We did 57.0 covering some of the background and to begin the 57.1,
whoever would like to go first, how about Thomas? Lead us into the active data selection
setting slash challenge and introduce yourself however you would like. Thank you and go for it.
Okay, so I just introduced myself. I'm Thomas. I've been working in active inference for a few years and
I split my time between research and clinical practice, which I think is part of the motivation
for some of the later parts of this paper that relate to some of the clinical type problems that
you might face with. I guess the background of this particular paper is that a couple of years ago,
I was in Australia to present at the Australasian Basin Network Modelling Society, if I've got that right,
I was in Australia to present at the University of Canada, who ran a really fascinating conference using
Bayesian networks to model everything from volcanoes to coastal erosion and various other things.
And there were quite a few clinicians involved in that conference as well in interest in things like
respiratory diseases and diagnostics. And one of the organizers of that conference happened to be
running a special issue on basic networks and invited us to take part in it. And so this was our contribution to
labs. And the idea is to take some of the same principles that we use in active inference and
some of the long-standing principles from people like our students like Lindley to apply to the problem
of experimental design and to think about how active inference like principles can be applied outside of biology.
Sorry, I'm talking too fast for you to time.
Thank you. Okay. Karl, do you want to add anything to that or as we kind of begin?
No, no, no. I repeat, I'm an admiring spectator. This is
Okay. Okay. Okay.
Enjoy Thomas's lucid account of this very pertinent application of some basic principles of
optimal Bayesian design and epistemic foraging. Okay, then no heckling. Okay, let's go to some of
Chris's questions and also as people ask questions in the live chat, we'll go in there. Okay, so
let's just start with time sampling. How did you or in what equations or in what conceptual ways did you
bring in time and the kind of time sampling that was explored in this paper?
So time is a really interesting issue in terms of how you model a lot of these sorts of processes,
partly because a lot of interesting processes evolve in time, but it also brings in some really
interesting issues in terms of how you sample and how you gather information about things. And the most
obvious problem there is that some things change and some things don't. So that brings you into the
world of a lot of what psychologists often deal with, things like inhibition of return, the idea that
when you look at something, you learn something about it. The time it takes for it to be worth looking
back there will depend on how unexpectedly things might change in that location. So that's a really
important part of a lot of the sorts of generative models that we deal with both in biology and out of
out of that area because you need to be able to deal with with worlds that change.
And that sort of calls into question, how do you actually approach time in generative models?
There are a whole range of different approaches that one can take to start. So I think a lot of
a lot of early work in active inference was formulated in terms of continuous time models,
working with differential equations, generalised coordinates of motion, which is a way of
representing trajectories in terms of positions, velocities, accelerations, as if you're doing
a Taylor's expansion and taking the coefficients of that. And that would be one very good way of
representing a temporal progression. A lot of the more recent work we do in active inference is based
upon discrete time models, where you see things as being a sequence of events and you just represent what
happens at a sequence of different time points. In this particular paper, we ended up using a slightly
different approach and that was to essentially use a basis set or a set of basis functions to
allow there to be some smooth progressions in time rather than dealing with specific time steps
steps themselves. So it sort of blurs the gap between using discrete time steps where there's a clear
boundary on the side of it and continuous progressions where there's no boundaries. By using a series of
basis functions placed at different points in time, you end up getting this sort of smooth progression from
one sort of blurry time step to the next. So I think time is sort of incredibly important in how we
how we think about these sorts of things, again in terms of thinking about how things change,
but also in terms of thinking what's the right way even of representing time in a generative model.
Awesome. Welcome, Chris, as well. This definitely is reminiscent of figure 4.3 from the textbook, which I'll
bring up. How would you contrast it or which figure should we look at to explore which variables are
continuous or discrete? This figure is the one here. So this paper won't have anything specific, but you're
right, there probably is one from the textbook that deals with exactly this distinction. So here, I think
one of the later figures does use a sort of basis set type representation to look at temporal progressions.
I can't remember which figure that is, I'm afraid.
Okay.
Um, did you, did you want to talk through this figure that's up?
Yeah, maybe summarize this figure.
And so this figure was trying to, trying to demonstrate in a sort of relatively simple, um,
analytic case, what it might mean, and sort of taking time out of it for the moment, what it might mean to
select those data points that are going to be most informative about, um, some underlying model.
And the way it's been set up here is to start with, um, uh, so in the sort of upper left plot here,
which is showing a function, um, with a whole series of different possible parameters that might exist.
So you can imagine these theta parameters that are sort of shown as one being bigger than the next,
um, each represent which function might be used here.
Um, and, uh, and you can see that in some of those, there's a lot of variation in certain parts of the
function. So, uh, the green one, you can see there's a sort of very big peak around zero,
but slightly smaller peak for the purple one, slightly smaller for the yellow.
Um, but actually there is also certain points where, where it's not so obvious and you wouldn't
really be able to distinguish it. So they all more or less cross the x-axis at the same point.
Um, and, and on both sides of zero. So if you were to choose somewhere on this plot to work out
which function you were sampling from, you're much better off choosing from somewhere around zero,
um, then you are choosing at the points where, where it's actually crossing the x-axis where the,
where all look very, very similar. And so this is just to get across the intuition behind this process
of selecting your data efficiently to be able to resolve between alternative hypotheses as best you can,
or even to estimate along some continuous parameter value as it would be here. Um, so following the
the sort of sequence round this, um, this graphic, um, the idea is that we can represent these things
into several different kinds of generative models. So here we're representing either a Bayesian network
where you say my explanatory variable is this theta that's generating some data y. Um, and then we have
this pi variable which like in a lot of active influence imitation represents our policy or our choice
of where we want to sample. So here this is choosing somewhere along the x-axis that we might want to,
um, work out what the corresponding y might be. Um, the, the factor graph representation deals with
exactly the same model, but, but now expressed by putting the factors in explicitly. And by factors,
I mean that our probability distribution, which is made up of our prior beliefs about theta and our
likelihood, which maps from theta to our data y, um, are now sort of explicitly put in as squares that
represent the different bits of that generative model. And the next step is to, to use a normal or a
for a Forney factor graph, which essentially just omits the circles. So now the variables are represented
by the edges, the points that connect the different factors. So you can imagine if we take our probability
distributions, the probability of our latent states, our parameters, uh, and the probability of the data
given that, and we separate those out into factors. And we draw a square for each of the factors of that
probability distribution and connect those up whenever they share a variable. So the edges or the connections
between the factors are the random variables you might want to estimate. And then I'm trying to see
behind the, um, cameras across. So the, um, the next step is, is to use the Forney factor graph because it's, it's
often quite a nice notation to use when trying to understand, um, message passing and the different things that
contribute to, um, to the way we estimate these, these variables. So here for each different square,
we can see there being messages being passed between the neighboring edges. And when we combine those
edges, we can, we can arrive at a posterior estimate of the marginal of the variable we're dealing.
So this would be how we might go about estimating the theta there. But the key twist here is that we're
now not just interested in message passing for the process of inference, but we can also now start
to interpret those messages, um, in terms of how they contribute to various different entropies that
together make our information gain. So here we have, um, both the conditional entropy, which we sometimes
refer to as an ambiguity. And that conditional entropy essentially says, um, if I were to sample over
here in a more biological setting, if I were to look over here, um, how confident am I in, in terms
of what I would see or what, how confident am I that these parameters will back to something meaningful
and informative? Um, the predictive entropy is another form of entropy or uncertainty that essentially says,
before I've looked anywhere, regardless of these parameters, even if I've marginalized them out,
how uncertain am I about the data I'm going to get? So the conditional entropy is how precise is the
mapping or how imprecise is the mapping between parameters and data? Predictive entropy is just my
uncertainty a priori about what I'd see if I, if I looked over there. Those things are quite
interpretable when you start thinking in terms of experimental designs, because a, um, predictive entropy,
if I'm already very certain about what I'd see or what, what would happen if I, uh, performed a particular
experiment, there's almost no, no point in doing that experiment. There's only a point, uh, acting to
find something out if I don't already know what I'm going to observe. So this predictive entropy, um,
is a positive thing that if, if I'm uncertain about what I'd see, then I should go out and seek that
after I should get those data points because there's something potentially to learn.
However, there are certain circumstances where, where all you get is noise and you may be completely
uncertain about what you're going to get. You know, if you, if you just keep running a random number
generator over and over again, you're never going to become much more certain about what you're going
to see next. Uh, and so that's not a terribly useful thing to seek out. And that's where this conditional
entropy or ambiguity comes in, in that it penalizes those things that are not going to resolve any
uncertainty. So the way I often think about it is if you take predictive entropy, you have the total
amount of uncertainty about what I'm going to observe. If you then subtract the conditional
entropy from that, then you, you, you let with the amount of uncertainty that you might be able to
resolve. And I think this comes back in a, in a bit more detail and we can discuss that a little bit
more in some of the later figures if we get to those. Um, but essentially the difference between
these two things is, uh, our expected information gain, uh, which is also a mutual information,
which can often be expressed as the difference between those two entropy. How much am I going to
update my beliefs? How much am I going to change what I, I believe as a consequence of making a particular
observation? Thank you, Thomas. That was a great summary. I think we'll return to this. I wanted to
bring up figure 4.3 from the textbook. Ah, yes. Yeah. So this is, and yes, anything on this and to kind of
juxtapose the conditional entropy with the A matrix and the sense making and the mapping and then the
predictive entropy to the B matrix and the transition among latent states.
Yes, that's right. So, um, for those who haven't, haven't seen these before, these are again, sort of
factor graph type representations where we're now dealing with, um, temporal progressions. Um, and so the, the
graph at the top represents a series of states as they transition from one to the next over time.
There may be more or less uncertainty in those transitions. So I might be very confident as to how
a sequence progresses, if there's very low volatility dynamics are very precise. Um, and then, and so
those are the, the factors labeled three. Um, the factors labeled two represent the way in which my data
are generated given some states of the world. So I might not be able to directly observe the S's, but they will
give rise to the O's or the observable outcomes. Um, and exactly as Daniel says, there's a link between the, um,
the two different terms in, um, in this expected information game. So the conditional entropy will
depend almost entirely upon this mapping from states to outcomes upon this, um, conditional entropy, um,
will, will depend upon this likelihood distribution. Um, and so it will say that if I'm in this state,
then there's a very precise mapping to the data. Whereas in, in alternative states, there might not be.
And so that allows me to select between, between these things based upon, um, policy pi I choose.
Um, the, the, sorry, the predictive entropy will actually be a function of both forms of uncertainty.
So uncertainty in the transitions. So if things change a lot since I last looked there, then my
predictive entropy might be very high and I might want to look back there sooner. Um, again, in
psychological terms, that's a, sorry, the lights have gone off. I'll see if I can turn those back on.
Um, the, um, so the, the, um, predictive entropy deals with that sort of inhibition of return. Um,
if it's due to the transition uncertainty, however, if it's due to the uncertainty in the, um, in the
likelihood, then that will remain relatively fixed over time. And I won't be able to resolve that.
Sorry, let me see if I can sort out those lines.
Okay.
It's better.
So the, the, the, the, the, the, sort of lower part of the screen, so the, the, the lower graph
is actually a similar representation, but now in continuous time. So here, when we're dealing with
the, the states x might be continuous variables, the x prime is the, um,
rate of change of my, um, my state x, the x double prime is the acceleration.
And if you know all of these things and further coordinates of motion,
you can start to construct a trajectory or, or predict, anticipate both the future
or the near future based upon these variables and the recent past as well.
Um, and exactly as Dan has written there, it's, it's effectively Taylor series expansion where
these are the coefficients of that Taylor series.
So these would be sort of the two ends of the spectrum dealing with sort of a purely discrete
time process and a continuous time process. And there are various ways of either blurring
those boundaries or even if, um, even combining the two.
So maybe now having brought this out, could you return to the basis sets and comment on how it's
similar or different to the time handling in the discrete time or the continuous time setting?
Yeah. So, um, so the use of basis sets will often imply that you're dealing with a continuous function,
but rather than have variables that represent either positions and velocities and those things,
I mean, one could argue that actually a generalized coordinates of motion system
is a form of basis set in itself. It's just a polynomial basis set. So you're, you're just
wasting sums of different, um, orders in a polynomial series. Um, but there are other basis sets that,
that one could use. And those include things like, um, uh, Fourier basis sets or cosine basis sets,
where it'd be difficult to sort of localize things in a specific point in time, but as much frequency based,
um, or as, as happens to be done in a particular paper, um, it, it's a series of Gaussian basis functions.
Um, and those are centered on different points in time, but because they're Gaussian shaped,
the boundaries between them are a little bit blurred. So the value at any particular point,
how much you weight that particular function localized around a specific time point will also have an effect
on the neighboring time points. And that's effectively a way of putting in a prior belief that, that,
that although there's a temporal progression and perhaps a series of discrete steps, there's actually
a smoothness to that as well. There are no discrete jumps in this that actually I'm just adding, subtracting
functions that vary smoothly, um, to construct that overall picture. And that gives you quite a flexible
way of representing a lot of, a lot of often quite non-linear functions. I think from memory that, um,
I'll actually use a sort of basis set type functions, um, in some of the COVID models as well,
and some of the later papers to model things like seasonal fluctuations, um, and changes in, um,
transmissibility at the time. So they have quite a, there's quite a broad, um, way of using them.
The, the downside of using a lot of those functions that they're, they're often less mechanistically
interpretable. So that's something that, that are often quite convenient in terms of getting a
flexible function representation, but wouldn't necessarily speak to a specific mechanism.
Yeah, thank you, Thomas. Yeah, also basis sets are brought up in SPM, and I think one advantage that's
raised there is how it allows the pre-specification of all of the oscillatory patterns of a given
frequency, range, and then filtering the data with that pre-specified seeve in a way, um,
interesting and compressing information about the hypothesis of what structure the data could have,
like nearby things being more related, events in time being more related if they're close and so on.
Yes, and compression is a good point there, that actually as soon as you start using a basis set,
you've now got the option to stop after a certain number of functions. So in generalized coordinates
of motion, there's a limit to how many additional coordinates it's normally useful to put in,
because the degree of accumulation of the uncertainty means that once you're beyond a certain point,
it becomes so uncertain that it doesn't necessarily contribute to the earlier terms of the sequence.
And that sort of arises as a function of autocorrelations over time. And you're right to
say that using things like frequency-based or Fourier-type basis sets also gives you that
opportunity for compression. And I think a lot of image processing does use things like the discrete
cosine transform, which is based upon a series of cosine basis sets where you can throw away certain
orders of that or certain frequency bands without losing too much information.
Awesome. Okay, let's go to a second question by Chris, but Carl or Chris, just raise your hand or totally
go for it. Let's go to the second one. Let's ask this question by Upcycle Club. Do you think that there
might be any algorithmic modifications, meta heuristics or hybrid approaches that could potentially lead to
even better data selection optimization?
Probably. I suppose it's a matter of thinking about what hybrid approaches is. It's a question of what
what it's being hybrid with. And I imagine we may come on to some of those questions later on as well.
So, meta heuristics. Well, I suppose a heuristic from a basic perspective is just a prior. And so I think
it's exactly right to say that with the right priors in place for the right sorts of models and the right
right sorts of settings, this process can be made much more efficient. So if you know a reasonable amount
about the structure of your problem, then you don't necessarily need to rely on basis sets and that sort
of thing. But actually, often you can write down something with a good deal of information into already.
And then your model doesn't necessarily need to learn all of that. It's just able to then use the
resulting predictive entropy and conditional entropy to pin down the more specific things that you want
it to now find out. So, yes, I'm sure that it's probably not going to be a one size fits all in
many ways. The priors are going to be those that are most appropriate to the particular problem you're
dealing with, the particular agent you have. But ultimately, they all, I think, come under the same
underlying problem and the same underlying principle, which is that if you select things in order to
optimize your model of the world, then it's about finding the best fit with your model of the world.
And that fit would normally be quantified using something like a free energy or a marginal
likelihood. So I think it all comes from the same principle, but if you're a different sort of creature
or a different sort of agent, then the implicit model you have, the way in which that directs your
exploration to find out more to improve your model fit can be very different.
Chris or Carl want to ask anything or bring up anything?
Carl Schaafnick, Ph.D.: Not quite yet. I'm kind of thinking through, you know, talking about the
time series and that sort of thing. So I think we can kind of keep going on.
Chris or Carl Schaafnick, Ph.D.: Yeah, Carl?
Carl Schaafnick, Ph.D.: Sorry, I was just thinking about heuristics and what it means to
people in a certain kind of economics, I think about gigarensa and the like, which I just read as
priors, the right kind of priors that have a minimal complexity. But I was just toying my head,
what is a meta heuristic? It's a heuristic next door to a heuristic. So Daniel or Thomas,
can somebody define for me a hyper prior perhaps? Yes, that's what it must be. It must be a hyper prior.
That's what I'd assume. Chris or Carl Schaafnick, Ph.D.: Okay, thank you.
Chris or Carl Schaafnick, Ph.D.: Although, you know, what even is a hyper prior? It's effectively just a prior, isn't it?
Chris or Carl Schaafnick, Ph.D.: Yeah, I suppose it's a prior in the context of a certain kind of hierarchical generative model, absolutely.
Also, there's a very practical element, I think, about chapter six of the textbook
and the recipe for modeling. So maybe to kind of bring in this practical element in the modeling of
these adaptive data sampling, what is the recipe for active inference generative modeling? Maybe even
as you've learned or updated in the two years since chapter six?
Daniel Schaafnick, Ph.D.: I mean, I think the basic recipe is still the same. So,
I think what we do is think about what sort of model that we're interested in and what sort of question
that's supposed to address. And ultimately, when you're using modeling in the context of
data, sorts of questions you might want to ask are things like,
which of several alternative models is the best explanation? So, doing a sort of discrete hypothesis
test or trying to actually recover particular parameter estimates. So, coming up with posterior
distributions over in active inference context, that will be over particular kinds of beliefs
that then determine behavior. And that's particularly important in the context of things like
computational phenotyping in clinical populations. So, trying to understand which beliefs might be
important. And by beliefs, I mean sort of implicit Bayesian beliefs, not necessarily something
explicit that you might be able to articulate. But what sort of beliefs might vary between different
populations that then lead to particular kinds of what we might think of as pathological behavior.
And so, you can start then ask questions in terms of, if you can phenotype different people,
you can start to use those beliefs almost as if they were data that you can then ask other questions
of. So, how does this vary with a particular diagnosis of therapeutic intervention?
So, there was a figure in the book, which I can't remember the sequence of now, setting out the sort
of sequence that you might follow if you were trying to develop a model and then use that to actually
answer a question based upon some empirical data. But I think the key idea is, you're going to bring that up.
I think the key idea was, if you have your model to predict some behavior from it, you can then use that model of
that is effectively someone's brain's model of the world. But then you're modeling someone else modeling the world.
And here we are. So, I think in the...
I think this one.
9.1.
Well, so the figure you've sort of copied into the lower left there is quite a nice way of thinking about
this process and active inference of modeling other people or things doing modeling.
So, someone's brain that you're trying to explain is itself modeling the world. So, from that brain's
perspective, the data that needs to be explained are sensory data. So, visual data, somatosensory data,
auditory data, whatever. And then, as a scientist, you're trying to explain the way in which that brain
is behaving and generating behavioral outputs or electrophysiological signals or whatever you might
be measuring as a neuroscientist. And so, my model of this brain's model ends up becoming the key thing.
And that's sort of sketched out in this particular figure.
And the other figure that you had up for a moment, sort of talking through the sequence that one might
adopt in terms of how you might construct this. And it's not necessarily linear, I think, as the arrows show.
But essentially, you need to think about what sort of task you want to form or what experiment you want to form.
You need to think about what model that's optimizing. And here it's showing the partially observed mark of
decision process model, which might, in this case, be the internal model of, as shown here, a rat in a maze.
From that, you then need to construct a likelihood function, which says, given that the rat had this
sort of model and these parameters in it, what's the likelihood that it would behave in a particular way?
So that P of U is the probability that they would have behaved in a particular way, given that model.
And then we might equip that likelihood of some prior beliefs about parameters in that rat's model.
And combining the prior and the likelihood, we can then invert that model in much the same way we do any other sort of Bayesian inference.
And there are further analyses we could then do on that.
So this is what I was sort of sketching out earlier on, that if you have parameter estimates and you know the posteriors for a number of different rats in a maze or patient populations or even artificial systems of some sort,
you can then perform other analyses on that almost as if those posteriors were data points themselves.
And you can start to ask, how do these beliefs vary as a function of diagnosis or experimental condition or whatever else?
Thank you.
Okay.
Let's...
In the...
In these beginning parts,
let's focus on what the model is and then as we kind of move towards the end and the second time talking,
we'll look more at the clinical trial and maybe the questions with...
that are more open for the future.
How about connection with machine learning?
So...
Chris wrote...
Um...
Your examples...
Primarily focus on statistical modeling.
How do you see active data selection methods integrating with other machine learning models, especially deep learning architectures that typically require large data sets?
Are there specific challenges or considerations in this context?
I mean, I would argue that almost in a sense, the answers in the question that these large data sets that they often seem to require is exactly the opposite sort of principle as to what we'd be working with in this sort of paper.
So the idea is, how do I work with more efficient data sets?
How do I design not just models, but also the selection of data to make sure that even with a smaller data set, it can be more informative?
So I think there's a bit of a difference in the underlying philosophy, but I would also say that most machine learning models are forms of statistical modeling in some sense, whether or not they explicitly represent the uncertainty that they get out of them.
I mean, I think it is also where, you know, the comment about hybrid approaches that was discussed in one of the previous questions as well.
One way of thinking about that might be in terms of using things like neural network architectures and function approximators as part of the, as part of a basing or statistical model.
And that's sometimes referred to as a process of amortization.
You can fix certain parts of your function approximation.
And in the sense, using the basis sets is also a form of function approximation that then simplifies, or in some ways makes it cheaper to do the process.
Next time you need to do that inference that you can sort of save a function that says, given this input, this is the outcome I should end up with, or this is the inference I should arrive at.
One of the challenges there is being able to go in the other direction and to be able to say, if I'm going to actively select data, then I need to be in a position where I can predict or generate the outcomes I might get.
And that might be something that is possible to do in the context of generative approaches in gene learning.
And I suppose all of the approaches we've been discussing really are generative approaches.
But because I can now generate not just the outcome itself, but I can generate a distribution over the outcome conditioned upon what I might do.
That's one of the key things in being able to, being able to select those data appropriately.
And if you're using a model where it's very difficult to project that into that space and to ask, what are these conditional entropies?
Then it does become very difficult to select data appropriately. So using something that's sort of very highly nonlinear and difficult to be able to work with those things, it does become more challenging to do that.
Sometimes people might sort of approach it using sort of sampling based methods to come up with an empirical distribution.
But by the time you start doing that, you end up with something that is much more costly.
So if you're if the problem you're working with is one way you want to try and bring it down to choose fewer data points and select your data more intelligently, then often that does require particular kinds of model that let you do that in a very efficient way.
There's an interesting area and it'd be interesting to see how, how, how you might attract these sorts of approaches.
One thing you might imagine is that actually if you've got a very clear, unambiguous mapping that you can learn with the deep learning type model, it might be that you could actually just treat the outcome or the labels that they should produce by that deep learning model as data from the perspective of another model might go about selecting the right sorts of labels that are going to be helpful in terms of learning and how things.
So there may be that you might have to look at the right sorts of methods.
So there may be levels of the model that can be when they're sufficiently unambiguous, sufficiently precise mapping, where you might not need to go to level of detail and select things in that way.
But it may be that the outputs of that are things that need to be combined to form interesting mechanistic hypotheses about what happens next.
That's very interesting, like thinking about different kinds of communications and reliabilities of different kinds of analyses or computer systems.
And then it's actually the active data sampling conditional entropy in practice, which is that reliable sources are pursued as part of the information foraging adaptive playout that every agent has to be involved in.
Like reliability is its own suitability for an information resource.
And then the other side of it is actually resolving the variability of the latent states.
However, those may have extremely high fundamental variability.
So often pursuing the conditional entropy, the agent has more control over because they can resolve something more.
At least they can resolve that.
Yes, it's knowing what is and isn't resolve.
I think that that's key because if you were to just seek out things that were very uncertain, you might be sat there pressing a random number generator over and over again without being able to learn anything from it.
And it's an attractive state that you end up being stuck in unless you can contextualize that with how resolveable it is.
I think one of the simulations we put together in this particular paper explicitly varied the uncertainty as a function of where you are along a particular number line.
And that was just to illustrate the point that actually there is a...
So it was before this section.
Yes, it would have been this one.
That's right.
So here you can see that we're dealing with a function where the variance grows as you move away from about X is zero.
And if you know that, then you know that actually the informativeness of the data at the peripheries is much less because you're not going to be able to resolve a lot of that uncertainty no matter how much you look there.
So if you see the choices plot in the lower right here, the solution it arrives at looks like a very sensible deliberate solution, which is to start in the middle where things are most precise, then fan outwards, moving left and right to resolve as much uncertainty as it can before it's then resolved enough that the cost of sampling further data is more than the amount of uncertainty that might be resolved before.
Whereas if the ambiguity of the conditional entropy were consistent across the entire line, then you might expect a much more even pattern of sampling and something that in practice might not be very different from random sampling, except for the sort of sequential effects.
I'd love to hear a first pass on how this figure addresses some of the similarities and differences between active data sampling and maximum entropy sampling.
Yes.
Yes.
So I don't know whether you have one of the graphics of one of the previous figures where it doesn't have this ambiguity to happen.
But so perfect.
Perfect.
Yeah.
So this figure shows an example where the ambiguity is actually the same everywhere.
So the way in which the data are generated, and you can see that because you can see that in the sample data plot, there is a sort of well-defined function.
But the amount of variance around that function is more or less constant throughout that entire line throughout that function.
So in this circumstance, the conditional entropy or ambiguity is the same everywhere.
That means that the only thing that really differs when you're deciding where to look next and where to sample next is actually the predictive entropy.
And so here it will just choose locations about which it's most uncertain.
And that's quite a sensible thing to do because there's nowhere that's limited any more than anywhere else in terms of the amount of resolvable uncertainty.
And so you can see that the prediction it arrives at after making a series of choices and you also see the series of choices it makes are fairly well distributed.
They're quite evenly spaced and cover a lot of that ground.
And so the prediction it comes to actually matches that uncertainty quite well in a maximum entropy.
So this is this is the identical in this particular setting, the maximum entropy approach is selecting those locations that have the maximum predictive entropy.
That's very different to what we were seeing on the previous figure that Daniel was showing, the one where where it starts in the center and fans outwards.
Because if you were to adopt a maximum entropy approach here, then then you can see that you'd spend much more time sampling in the far peripheries, which is actually not a terribly useful thing to do here because because you're going to just get a lot of uncertain data.
You're not going to be able to resolve it very effectively.
And so here, the big difference is that ambiguity version forces you to start in the least ambiguous places.
And only once you've got the most information you can after that, do you start planning outwards and going to the more uncertain regions either side, where there's actually less information overall you can gain because most of the uncertainty is now unresolved.
The other thing that we've done with this plot and I think the other one as well is specify a cost to sampling cost to choosing the next data point.
And this is very much like we do in active inference simulations where we might trade off exploration and exploitation, so trade off having preferences for one thing over another.
And this is just to get across that idea that there often are going to be energetic or computational or even financial costs to going out and getting more data.
And those costs are specified just as prior beliefs about what I will tend to do in the absence of any potential information that I might gain.
So being a prior belief that can just be added to the log probability of me stopping sampling can just be added to the mutual information or expected information gained, which then gives you an automatic trade off between
exploitation and exploration.
And effectively means that if I keep exploring, here we are exactly, so this C here.
So once the expected information gained, once the amount of uncertainty I can resolve drops below the probability that I would stop sampling, then I will effectively just stop sampling.
So you get an automatic cutoff as to when you want to stop doing your experiments.
That's a very interesting piece.
This was kind of a cool aspect of it.
And thank you for that connection to the maximum entry.
Chris, want to ask anything or we can ask a question from live chat or one of your prior questions?
Not sure it's necessarily a question, but more I appreciate your answer for that.
That last question that we were just discussing because it makes a lot of sense and it almost seems like at some point in more complex models that you can't really necessarily know exactly what you're feeding.
Some sort of machine learning or neural net, you might want to take a hybrid approach where you have something that you select a small amount, select down your sample, your data down to a certain size, and then you can kind of tweak and optimize your model a little bit more by throwing a couple of random things in there.
But at least you have a smaller set that you're starting from.
I mean, is that something that you can kind of see doing is like instead of trying to sample down to something that's most informative sample out what is the least informative?
Yes, I suppose that's the same sort of approach, isn't it?
I mean, you can't see this starting in the least ambiguous place, but the low hanging fruit and then moving out from there until you feel you're not really gaining anything further.
And I think you're absolutely right.
This is as long as you're able to specify the cost of carrying on sampling and seeking out new data, that gives you quite a principled way of working out when you stop doing that.
Because a pure maximum entry approach will carry on going because there's lots more entry, there's lots more uncertainty.
And so you might want to resolve that unless there is cost to doing so.
And it's a perfectly reasonable thing to do it. There is no cost to doing so.
You can just keep looking.
But as soon as you're dealing in a realistic setting where actually by doing this, you're not doing something else or you're investing some resource, be that energetic, computational, financially, then taking account of that can be quite a useful way of doing that.
I mean, it's an interesting point about more complex and large models.
And I suppose one of the key points there is that the best models are always going to be the simplest models you can get away with.
So if you have very large models with lots of parameters, the advantage is they're very expressive.
You can fit across lots and lots of functions or different patterns of data.
The downside is, first of all, that they become less interpretable.
But second of all, that you expose yourself to problems of overfitting.
And one of the key things in the active inference approach is that by minimizing free energy or marginal likelihoods, you're implicitly minimizing complexity.
So the best models will always be the simplest you can get away with.
And by get away with, I mean as simple as you can get without compromising the accuracy.
Right.
And that makes sense.
But that's the key point.
So sometimes actually there is quite a complex process generating data and you do need a relatively complex model to be able to capture that without compromising the accuracy.
So in that setting, you know, it's a really good question as to how would you go about actually selecting data in a model that is sufficiently expressive, that it's fit for purpose in a particular domain.
And I think a large part of that is being able to actually quantify the likelihoods and the uncertainties in terms of how that model works.
And that is a challenge in a lot of deep learning based models and neural network based models, but not all of them.
Some of them will explicitly account for these sorts of things as well.
ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
described by people like David McKay, where the objective was to try and find the right data
features that will resolve the uncertainty in exactly the way that we've been talking about,
because we've been talking about it largely in the context of inference, inferring latent
states of affairs out there given some data, and clearly the original notion of active learning
pertains to learning the parameters of a generative model, you can also apply the same notion to
model selection or structure learning, and that resonates very much with the conversation
with Christopher. One can either look at
seeking out those informative data, the data features that are good and good simply in the
sense that they inform your generative model in terms of ultimately maximizing the evidence or
the marginal likelihood of your generative model, or you can look at it as triaging bad data that's
uninformative. You can imagine that process a little bit like Maxwell's demon, so the data that you don't
go and actively seek out, or if you're in a big data setting and you're trying to ingest or simulate large
data, what this notion of active learning and active selection brings to the table is that you don't just
blindly ingest all the data as current deep learning does, you carefully assess should I ingest this data
data point or not? Implicit in what Thomas was saying, possibly explicit but I'll have to ask him,
what's that kind of objective function, what is the, if you like, another way of talking about the
information gain that I would get if I accepted as Maxwell's demon this next bit of data, and that
information gain is just a mutual information, so what you're saying is that you want to only take
those data that are literally good because they are informative, that will technically or operationally
increase the mutual information of inherent in your model between cause and consequence, so I think that
you know there's something really quite fundamental about this sort of whole notion of being active in the
way that you deal with data and gather information that you know that underwrites active inference as
you know with its special focus on active sensing and active vision and active inference and active
learning that you can actually go right through to active natural selection you know and one has to
wonder now whether there's a homologue in evolutionary thinking of this kind of active learning
that you know. Thanks for those points, those are great. Yeah, Thomas, go for it.
I don't think I had anything really to add to that, it's exactly the, it's being able to decide also
upon your model space, isn't it? I think it's part of the point that Carl's making there that it's actually
it's the selecting your model but it's also knowing which models even to select between is another key part of it.
And that's certainly been an interesting area in terms of structure learning, is that to interest literature.
Absolutely. I really like the call to evolutionary biology, I think that there may be an analog there,
you can kind of wrap your mind around some of the things that you're doing if you frame it kind of
from an evolutionary standpoint too. It's alternative way of looking at it but I think it's quite valid.
Yeah, also, those two points there, they speak to a key issue in structure learning,
read as basic model selection, do you take a top-down approach or do you take a bottom-up? Do you grow your
models carefully by accepting this mutation or this extra state in the factor or indeed an extra level in a
deep generative model in the face of this data or this evidence for how good this model is, you know,
almost in the sense of adaptive fitness in an evolutionary context or do you use good old Bayesian
model reduction and start with something that can do everything and then prune away in the bits that you
don't want. And just thinking from a biomimetic point of view or an evolutionary slash developmental,
at least neurodevelopmental perspective, sort of evo-devo, it looks as though biology does both,
doesn't it? So we start off with a brain which is over-parameterized, over-wired, over-connected
and then carefully prune away using Bayesian model reduction what we don't want. And yet,
of course, at the level of exploring that model hypothesis space, I would imagine we rely a lot on
carefully crafted mutations split and merge like operators that, you know, gently feel out into
different, you know, from that perspective each of us is a data point for evolution. That's quite
chilling, isn't it?
A lot to say on this. One really practical note with the cost of sampling and the opportunity to stop
is to have different information foraging locations that have different costs, like different APIs you
could call or different costs associated with taking on or holding a record. So it's really true,
what multiple of you have alluded to, like it does reframe the question into creating this semantic
kernel of understanding, for example, the clinical trial setting, something that can be shown up on a
graphical representation and then being able to use that purely in the generative forward direction to
generate synthetic data with whatever other evaluative criteria applied to that or just to learn active inference.
And then also to use that generativity, not just to make more data, which is often of limited utility for retraining,
but actually includes that adjacency of being able to ask how much another piece of information or evaluating the last incoming piece of information or rank the informativeness.
However, in a way it moves all the challenge into how you define the generative model, surprise, surprise,
because you could have a model of information in the world that would lead to various attractor states, repetitive looking, fixed looking, and so on.
So it's pretty interesting how I guess that's the high road and the low road kind of coming to meet each other in the information foraging setting.
Because the fundamental constraints and trade-offs associated with sampling, they do come into play and it does not solve the question.
It just sets up some of the objective functions that can be used and have interpretability for these uncertainty situations.
Okay, I'll ask another question from the live chat.
All right.

All right.
Dimitrios asks, what is the nature of the precision weighting mechanism in this process?
Is it possible that high precision of the prior blocks the prediction error to convey the newsworthy information?
So precision and the balance between priors likely to do
and what determines which precision we might use.
And I suppose relating that explicitly back to this question of information seeking.
So precision can be applied to any probability distribution essentially.
So you could have a precise trial, you could have a precise likelihood
or imprecise versions of either of those.
And this gets particularly interesting and sometimes quite confusing in the context of hierarchical models
where the prior from one level is effectively the likelihood or conditional distribution
from the perspective of the level above.
And so you end up with questions, am I increasing prior or am I decreasing the effect of the likelihood?
And it often depends upon exactly where you are in these models.
But taken to its simplest level, you imagine you have a prior and likelihood
and the data that you are evaluating right to it in relation to.
The relative precision, and it is the relative precision that's important between the prior and likelihood
will determine which one of those has more of an important final beliefs on your posterior.
In a very precise prior it says, I'm so confident about this that no matter what I see,
I'm not going to shift my beliefs.
And relating this back to the concept of information seeking, that would be the situation where
where we're in a dynamic setting.
I think there's been so little change from the last time I saw something that even if I saw something new
it wouldn't make any difference.
The likelihood, if that is very precise, leads to very low ambiguity.
So if I believe there are very precise regions of space from the perspective of my likelihood
or regions of whatever process I'm selecting between the different policies I could adopt,
then I'm more likely to select those locations compared to others.
And this is often in the context of neurobiology and psychology,
these are often how people talk about processes like attention.
So being able to say that my likelihood is very precise in the context of spatial attention
associated with these particular spatial channels or this area of space,
then that means I'm going to update my beliefs much more based upon this thing
that I'm paying attention to.
The link back to information seeking is that because I might update my beliefs much more
based upon this location in space, I might act in such a way that I get more information from it.
I might move my eyes to look over there or take whichever action is relevant to whichever data set I'm dealing with.
And we can think of that as essentially saying this region of space, this region of policy space
is more salient than others because when I choose to do something that leads to that outcome,
I'm going to update my beliefs much more as a consequence.
So I think that sort of gives you a brief summary of how priors and likelihoods interact with one another.
The notion of prediction error came up as well, which I think is an important one to think about,
particularly when you're dealing with continuous states based models and perhaps most simply when it's a simple linear Gaussian model.
Because the degree of update that you might make is effectively going to be a linear error function,
where that error is the difference between what I predicted and what actually happened.
And that weighting is going to be weighted by the precision of the likelihood.
So the degree of update I'm going to make to my beliefs depends both on the precision,
how unambiguous I think it is, and on the degree of, on the amount of discrepancy from what I'd originally predicted.
And that's the same idea that then underwrites a lot of predictive coding and a lot of neurobiological models.
Of course, even that needs to be weighted very carefully by the prior precision and the equivalent errors that you get once you deviate from your priors.
And that probably brings us back to this notion of complexity and the need to keep things simple.
Because one reading of keeping your model simple is that you keep things as close as possible to your priors.
If you have lots of parameters and they're all deviating from their priors quite a lot in order to come up with an explanation,
then that's effectively a very complex model, one that I think would be penalized relative to a simpler model,
where everything stays much closer to the priors you have.
Thanks. Let's go a different direction.
There was a very interesting and ambiguous use of the streetlight effect.
So what is the streetlight effect and how is it kind of a representative setting?
And what do we do?
I love the graphics.
Oh, there were so many fun, fun representations.
And so what, what, what is it?
Is it, is it, is it a joke?
How did you find, how did you find one with a pie?
Oh, just typing in different symbols to see underneath the spotlight.
Very good.
Yeah, GPT-4O.
So the, the idea of the streetlight effect comes back to this idea of ambiguity, aversion.
And it's an idea that, I can't remember where it first came from,
but I first came across it in psychology literature.
I think possibly a reviewer mentioned it in a paper at some stage.
But the, the streetlight effect is originally set up to be something to describe an unhelpful bias.
And the idea was that if you're sort of coming home late at night and it's a dark street and you drop your keys,
the first place you might look is underneath the streetlight.
And that's unhelpful in the original reading because your keys are not more likely to go under the streetlight than they are anywhere else.
And so it's a metaphor for seeking out those sources of information that are most easy to, to, to acquire and, and that you can learn the most from very quickly.
Of course, from an active inference perspective, that's actually a completely optimal thing to do.
That if you have some uncertainty to resolve, the very first thing you should do is look under the streetlight,
because then you'll, you'll quickly establish that your car keys or your house keys are not there.
And then you might start looking elsewhere.
So another way of putting that is that the least ambiguous place, the place where there's the clearest mapping between the location of my keys and the visual data I would get is under that streetlight.
So if I'm ambiguity averse, if I choose those places where that conditional entropy is lowest, then I'll start at the space under the streetlight.
And maybe I'll then fan out from there, just as we saw in the simulation results that you put up earlier on.
Yes, what a, what a comical plot twist.
That it's like, it's a joke because it brings us to the point of laughing at the person looking under the streetlight.
And then it leaves it open like, but what should they have done?
And then this isn't exactly what they should have done in this paper.
But just like you said, it's a reasonable starting location, especially if it's where one finds one to be.
So it's kind of interesting.
Um, Carl or Chris?
No, I love that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And I haven't heard it phrased like that before.
It's very annoying.
Chris?
Yeah.
Nothing really.
I do like that analogy though.
Let's.
How was equation three and this seemingly very general.
usage of, of information gain on, uh, base graphs.
How did that come into play?
And maybe if you could just define how that was used.
So the idea here was that, that just as in, um, a lot of Bayesian inference problems, where you're dealing with relatively complex generation models, um,
appropriately complicated,
appropriately complicated,
to help accurately explain data.
Um,
there, there's often quite a lot of sparsity in those models.
There might be multiple different, different nodes and edges, uh, that one might need to take advantage of, uh, or sorry, that, that represent variables one might want to draw inferences about.
Um, and so there's a long, um, and so there's a long, um, and so there's a long, um, sort of series of, uh, papers and advances that have been looking at ways to do that efficiently from an inference perspective.
Uh, and that, that has led to many, many forms of message passing algorithm, um, relying upon different, um, approximations to, to posterior probabilities.
Those include, um, sort of, um, trying to remember what the very early ones, or I think the Baum-Welchard, uh, algorithm and things like that were sort of early versions of, of what then ended up becoming fully Bayesian type approaches.
And the more general forms would be things like variational message passing, which relies upon field approximation.
So the idea that I can factorize all my variables or the posterior probability over all the different variables I'm dealing with.
And by not having to deal with all the posterior covariances and conditional dependencies, I can come up with a much more efficient, but still relatively good and useful, uh, set of beliefs about, um, about the causes of my data.
Um, then there are more, um, more accurate algorithms that were then, uh, developed as well.
So things like belief propagation, some, uh, some product type algorithms, um, which implicitly do take account of pairwise dependencies, uh, between different variables, um, but still allow you to come up with good marginal inferences.
Uh, often these rely upon subtly different free energy functionals.
So for instance, belief propagation implicitly comes from something known as the bette free energy, um, which is B-E-T-H-E.
Um, and that, that effectively assumes that the posterior factorizes in such a way that, that I can take account of all the pairwise, uh, dependencies and then renormalize by all the singleton.
So the distributions of each single margin in my system.
And that allows you to, to achieve exact inference from the perspective of the marginal distributions you get out of the end.
The point of doing all of these sorts of things, uh, and, you know, there are many others, expectation propagation and various others sort of based upon other free energy approximations.
Um, and, um, one of the general is, is, uh, a Kikuchi free energy that can be factorized again in different ways.
But the, the purpose and the advantage of doing all of these things is that it allows us to, um, to make use of the conditional dependency structures, the sparsity structures, um, and,
um, and, listen, the mark off blankets in a, um, in a network and, um, ask questions about specific variables.
Solve that in quite an efficient way to be able to say what are the beliefs we have about.
The idea behind the way this equation was phrased is that you can actually use those same messages in the same person structures where, um,
beliefs depend upon the other beliefs in the network and the message passing the results of that.
So, um, to work out the information gain about specific variables.
So you can, you can make use of exactly the same, um, technology that was used in things like belief propagation schemes,
and which underwrite a lot of neurobiological message passing schemes.
So this message, sorry, this, uh, equation, um, uses the notation CH to mean children.
So the things upon which, um, the things that depend upon the variable we're interested in,
uh, the parents, um, which are the things that it depends upon.
Um, and those things and, and, and the parents of the children, which you'll see also in a, in a couple of locations here,
which, um, together, so the children, the parents, and the parent, the co-parents of the same children,
together make up the Markov blanket, which is all the things that, um, that if I knew about,
would give me all the information I needed about the thing I'm trying to infer.
So I only need to know about local blanket surrounding a particular node and not the rest of the network,
because if I know about those things, that tells me everything I need to know.
And so this is just a simple way then of, of, um, taking advantage of, again, that sparsity,
and to be able to come up with an efficient way of estimating not just the posteriors,
but the information gain I could potentially achieve about those posteriors given a particular policy.
Or the information I could gain about those variables with posterior relative to the prior rate.
So the, in the textbook, there's an example where the generative process and the generative model have the same form.
Like if they're both generating from a Gaussian, then those distributions can truly lock.
But also it's possible to have the form of the generative process and the generative model differ.
So like the generative model is doing some categorical, too cold, just right, too hot,
and then actually temperature is a continuous variable and so on.
So how, how does the selection of family of distribution that's even used relate to the information gain like in table one?
Okay, I think, um, I'll just try and unpick what I think, but possibly two different things there.
So what one was this notion of whether the generative model that we might use our prior and like could actually match the way in which the world around us generates those data.
And I think that's a really important thing to consider.
And that exactly, as you say, there are often situations where the best model is in a sort of lay sense, the wrong model,
in that it doesn't match how data are actually generated, but is of simpler explanation that it complies with Occup's razor.
And the reason for that is you can always generate the same data in a more complex way.
So if you can get down to the simplest way of generating it, that's often the best way.
One of my favorite examples of this was something I found out a while back when we were doing some work on modeling of eye movements.
And one of the things I found is that it's much simpler to model your eyes moving together as if you just had one eye,
and then make predictions from the perspective of both eyes, because both eyes move together.
Excluding sort of subtle things like convergence.
Most of the time when you want to decide upon a gaze direction, you don't need to decide on separate gaze directions for each eye.
You might if you're a chameleon or another sort of creature that can move their eyes independently.
But from our perspective, actually, you can make do with a generative model that's much simpler than the physics of your eyes,
where actually there's nothing to say that they couldn't rotate two different spheres in completely different directions.
So by doing that, you actually end up with a model that is wrong, but is also a much better model than one that includes lots of additional parametrization and degrees of freedom that are just never used in reality.
So I think that sort of is quite a nice intuitive example of where your model might differ from that in the world.
And then perhaps related to that is the other point you're making about whether the particular distributions in your model are consistent with the distributions in the world.
Or even how do the particular kinds of distributions, forgetting whether or not they're accurate models of the world, how do they affect how you then seek information?
And it's of course there is.
So one of the reasons for including the table that you showed is that the form for the information gain will be different depending upon which kind of model you have.
And that's just useful to know in the sense that if you're writing down a model, to know an efficient way of sampling from it.
It's going to depend upon what form that model has.
So one of the big distinctions that we often see and often make use of is this distinction between categorical models and continuous models.
So the two middle rows here are dealing with categorical or driestlay priors.
And they have a particular form in terms of information gained and the way in which you do that updating.
Pull out of that the ambiguity bits and the predicted entropy bits.
The lowest row, the third row here, shows the form of a Gaussian model.
And one of the key things you can see in the Gaussian model is that the covariance predicted, so this sigma subscript y, is the predicted variance for the data.
And so that is going to scale with the ambiguity.
So you can immediately pull out from that how much ambiguity there's going to be just by looking at this term here, exactly what you're highlighting.
Now, if that depends upon pi, then the ambiguity really matters.
If that's constant, as we saw in some of the earlier ones, and it doesn't depend upon pi, then the only thing you need to take account of is actually the first bit, which is the maximum entropy bit of these equations.
So the form that you choose for your model is absolutely key in terms of how you then go about sampling the world.
And how you optimize your model is then absolutely dependent upon how you've sampled the world.
So you get this sort of nice circularity that then determines how you build your model based upon what you see.
But based upon how your model currently is, and what's uncertain about it and what there is to resolve, you're going to considerably change how you go about sampling it.
That's a really fascinating point.
And it makes me think about learning.
Like in a given situation, one could over or under learn or however it comes to be that their policies do matter for resolving uncertainty.
And then that could set up the balance between continuing to sample from distributions and or stopping them.
Yes, that's an interesting thought, because you could start with a model in which you don't know about how your policy affects, for example, this covariance.
But it may be that over time you realize that when I do this and end up in this sort of state, actually it does affect it.
Or when I take a particular action.
And so if you were then optimizing your model and then you go one step further and you say, well, how do I how do I learn which or how do I infer which parts of my model will be affected by the actions I take?
And how do I choose the right actions so that I can best learn about which bits of my model will be affected?
And I think that's a really interesting question as to how you might approach that.
So we could have parameterized here or we could have included additional parameters that are how it does the covariance depend upon policy.
And it might be that if those parameters will be zero, there's no dependence at all.
But as you learn more about it, you might then learn actually there is a function that affects the ambiguity.
And if that's the case, then I will change my behavior quite considerably once I've learned where the least ambiguous places are going to sample.
So we could make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this to make this
prompt this looking into the how much learning would be expected from a distribution of what
responses are being generated from the chatbot so like the distribution that the chatbot actually
fleshes out is its irresolvable uncertainty and then the question of which prompt to enter next
or which prompt to provide could be guided by wanting to select the single best or from among
the best next policy selections to reduce some uncertainty and so understand if it were a
deterministic api on the other side like a chess game then there would be only the it would be a
simplified decision of what to prompt like a calculator whereas with the probabilistic model
there's sometimes small sometimes very large uncertainties on what it actually is out there
so sometimes it dwarfs what can be resolved but we don't necessarily have an awareness or ability to
estimate in these different situations what that balance might be however these these methods whether
the models generating process is like an active inference model or whatever happens to be a sensor
this can help interoperate the different information resources and patterns by putting them in a common
epistemic plus pragmatic plus cost setting
yes i think that's right if you if you've got if you've got a sufficiently expressive model
and a reasonable degree of uncertainty about that model space you can actually start to
exactly learn how you even go about doing these things that as your model becomes more sophisticated
of the world learn how to interact with it better in all three of those domains epistemic
right sorry two domains that you you mentioned three what's the third one epistemic pragmatic and
cost
ah okay so i normally think of the pragmatic as effectively yeah accomplishing the cost but yes
yeah absolutely but the cost playing a special clear role in this paper with a finite stopping
threshold for sampling yeah but but but but in a sense it it it's not a so the cost is affecting
the sampling but it's not sort of just putting a clear time threshold on i'm going to stop at this
stage it it's something that sort of automatically reweights itself relative to the amount of information
that might be left to result
is that we could make this is known to make this is known to make this is known to make this
known to make this is known to make this known to make this known to make this known to make this

example if there is a value that can be placed on a given piece of information and that could be
how much it influences some trade or it could take into account like the cost of
paying the employee for that much time or using the computational resources
then it's possible to allocate fixed or variable costs and stopping times
completely separated from the epistemic and pragmatic generative model itself
but with a cost as purely an exit boundary and not be not directly consuming the output of
the free energy calculations
yes and that made me think of a couple of things so what what one is that
that one of the advantages of that sort of cost is that in a dynamic environment
it may be appropriate at some points to rest and then as uncertainty accumulates beyond a certain
point you might want to go back to sampling so if you have a sort of time or cut off after which
you just stop then then it's no good for anything that might have changed
but if you if you've stopped for a little while and decided not to put in those costs you can then
decide when's the appropriate place to start so again not just to stop
the other thing i thought was interesting about about what you said is is again this notion that
that to some extent although from an active interest perspective and certainly from the perspective of
this paper information in itself is valuable and so the the value of information is in terms of how
informative it is regardless of how it affects really what what might gain in the future however
then how much you might gain in the future may also be relevant in terms of that pragmatic
map and this brings in some of the ideas that have come through sophisticated inference like schemes
um where where you start to evaluate these things recursively so in in in a lot of reinforcement
learning um in probably most of it where there is information gain it's often um seen as the
information that will lead me to the uh the result i want it will lead me to more reward
uh and so creatures may learn a path through their environment that um that is the one that more
reliably leads them to reward because it tells them where to go earlier on something those lines um
however that one could say that that and that is important one one could also say that it's important
to learn about your environment for its own sake as well and one of the things active inference does is
it doesn't put any special um focus on either the fulfillment of your preferences or the seeking of
information but the interesting connection between the two is that often seeking out information will
help you fulfill your preferences in the future and so if you're able to recursively evaluate if i knew this
what would i do uh and if i did that what would i learn and if i knew that and keep going into the future
you can also select uh things that will give you information that will help you satisfy your
your pragmatic value as well so information ends up having a dual purpose first of all in being valuable
in its own sake but also being valuable in terms of what else you can gain from it in the future
both in terms of information but also in terms of in terms of the um pragmatic value to be able to achieve
i think we'll we'll come to that with the um pragmatics of epistemic value but just one note on the
message passing uh you mentioned how with the stopping criterion it's possible to think about the
information foraging setting not just as like where to look every time a metronome clicks but about
scheduling bouts like batching emails or something like that and that reminded me of our recent
discussion with some of the rx infer team about the rx environment package which uses the reactive message
passing to uncouple the timing of for example the nestmate and the niche in a generative model so that
they can be on different timings and the computations occur on demand like in a node local way
and can have uncoupled timings so it's just very interesting how this pathway that is laid out in the
paper about how on one hand we have the graphical semantic layout of what these variables are and then how many
preparation stages before it all gets played out as the relationship of the equations that we get from the
entropies
so in a sense this is sort of setting out the process that someone might go through if they were trying to
unpack this this sort of modeling in practice you might assume that actually a lot of it just starts from
this message passing stage and the interaction directly with message passing and what you sample
and a lot of the graphics along the top really to set out the equivalence between different sorts of
formulas in which some people are very familiar with using one sort in principle you could tell this
story without referring to the story without referring to a factograph and one of the big focuses really
here was just trying to point out the way in which they're very related
to the competition
Carl or Christopher, we can go any direction.
I go in two directions because there are two really interesting issues there.
I can't resist, perhaps in reverse order, the notion of reactive message passing, I
think is not only crucial and again very biomimetic but also very relevant in terms of computer
science and efficiency in terms of implementing any kind of active inference or learning scheme.
It actually inherits from something called the ACTOR model in computer science which is a big thing which led to the development of a whole suite of different programming languages.
One of the most popular nowadays is Rust that is predicated very much on this notion of responding to queries and requests for computation and the products of that computation which fits very comfortably with the maths of message passing on factor graphs.
I think the Rx infer reactive message passing is exactly the right way to go, not only in terms of understanding biomimetic dynamics and belief updating, but also in engineering the next generation of deep learning or artificial intelligence of a more generalized sort.
But the other direction I want to do is come back to this, I think, really important discussion about
is the value of information intrinsic to the information gain or is it always conditioned upon your ultimate goal?
I think that's a really quite a profound point.
And I have a very specific take on that that inherits from the physics you get from the free energy principle.
So if you just write down what is the probability distribution over paths into the future,
and then you take the logarithm of that probability to create a potential that is expected free energy.
So the expected free energy that can be carved into the expected information gain and the expected log prior preference or expected value falls out of the physics of self-organization.
And that decomposition tells you that these things are linearly separable.
It means that there is no value information about the reward that does not exist because about the reward suggests you can't linearly separate the expected information gain from the expected value.
So this notion, I think that you only have to learn about that which you need to know in order to get your reward.
I think it's fundamentally wrong.
And one has to ask, where did it come from?
And I think it's by putting a certain kind of teleology and semantics on the physics of sentience and sentient behavior that leads to that false conclusion.
Because now what does value mean?
Oh, well, everything has to be in relation to the reward or the goal.
But of course, the value of information is not.
Another way of looking or if you like, dissolving that sort of disconnect between the intrinsic value of resolving uncertainty about the world as opposed to the extrinsic value of avoiding expected surprise.
Where surprise is read as a sort of negative log of your prior preferences.
It's just to think about, to acknowledge that we're talking about effectively Lagrangians or potential functions because they're log probabilities.
So when I say you can linearly separate them, what we are separating in a linear non-interacting way are the log probabilities.
When you actually combine the two probabilities, what that actually means is that I will only go for information gain if it satisfies my goals or equivalently and symmetrically.
I am only going to satisfy my goals if I get a sufficiently high information gain.
So they do contextualize each other in probability space, even though they don't interact in terms of information or in terms of potentials or log probabilities.
The final point is that you know this non-teleological conflation of the value of information and the value of conforming to the constraints supplied by the prior preferences.
Is that that is exactly what you get when acknowledging that the free energy principle is dual to James's principle of constrained maximum entropy.
So in this instance, you can just rewrite or reinterpret the free energy principle as an instance of constrained maximum entropy principle.
And you were talking before about the benefits of maximum entropy.
And this is one very simple instantiation of it where the entropy in question is the entropy of your posterior or your measurement, but it's constrained.
So now rewards are just ways of writing down constraints on an information maximizing system or a maximum entropy system.
And where do those constraints come from? They come from the generative model.
Where does the generative model, what constitutes generative model?
It's just the prior preferences in your generative model from the point of view of the free energy principle.
So by, if you like, appealing not just the free energy principle, but James's constraint maximum entropy principle, mathematically, that speaks to a very, very clear picture that the intrinsic value of information has got nothing to do with rewards or goals or constraints.
It's just a way of writing down a constraint.
And you can actually articulate this in terms of Lagrange multipliers where you can either look at the information seeking as constraint by reward, or you can look at rewards seeking as constraint by information.
But in log space, they're completely independent.
That's, that's what came to mind.
I think it's a really interesting point, which is, you know, confused me for years and, you know, also is a recurrent question when you talk to people in reinforcement learning, who have this, if you like, gamblers fallacy about the relationship between the two kinds of value.
That's what we make is known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to make known to
from generalized free energy or expected free energy considerations.
And in practice, there's the parameterization of what the actual values are.
However, you have given a very full-throated defense of the pure value of information gain.
And that was something in the approach of this paper that Christopher and I had explored a little bit
how it starts with the information gain, and then the end of the paper brings in the pragmatic value,
as opposed to looking to expand the epistemic scope of reward and reinforcement
and introduce some kind of variability or learning or intelligence layer.
Other than that, starting with the information gain and then tuning the regimes of attention and action from there.
So that's very interesting.
Interesting.
Chris, do you have any other thoughts or directions?
No, I think that really everything's kind of been captured here very nicely,
and I'm still trying to process through some of the things that we've discussed now.
I just really appreciate how the paper's written, how well it has it, you know,
mentioning what Daniel said, how it builds from a single kernel of information,
mutual information gain, and then it just builds out a model from there
into something that is more and more applicable to different regimes.
So you can kind of stop at each point that you, any point, at any point that you want.
And then it just kind of grows into something that is, you know,
immediately applicable to clinical trials, which is quite wonderful.
And I really did appreciate that.
I'm just going to have to sit through and probably process some of the things that we've discussed here today.
Yeah, I think that let's just in the last minutes think about what we might want to process over the next week
and prepare some questions.
It might be cool to see the code.
So Thomas, if you want to have it loaded up,
or we can try to prepare it on one of our machines, Christopher.
Yeah, or Thomas, what would you look forward to discussing or doing?
If you'd like to, it's all available on GitHub repository.
And I think it's set up so that if it's run,
it will generate a series of animations showing process of sampling as well.
So if that's interesting.
Yeah, that would be awesome.
Yeah.
Let's return on that and look at the code.
What's the easiest thing?
Would you like me to send you something there?
If you could just prepare to share your screen with the code running,
and then we can start with just a little bit of looking at it,
just seeing what the code does.
And then in the second part,
talk more about the clinical trial setting
and how it is all brought together in Section 6.
Sounds good.
Cool.
Any last thoughts from any of you?
None here.
Thank you, Thomas and Carl.
This is awesome to have you join.
Thank you, Chris, for helping prepare this too.
So, all right.
See you next time.
Thank you, guys.
Have a good one.
Bye.
Bye.


























































Thank you.
Thank you.

## qztkjHf2g3g

All right, hello and welcome. It's June 4th, 2024, 6-4-24, and we are in Active Inference
Livestream 57.2. Welcome to the Active Inference Institute. We're a participatory online institute
that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference. You can find us at
the links on this page. This is a recorded and archived Livestream, so please provide feedback
so we can improve our work. All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll follow
video etiquette for Livestreams. Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about projects.
And today in 57.2, we'll jump right into it with a new guest, Fraser, and picking up on some topics
that we left from the dot one, plus any other things that come up. So by way of getting started,
Fraser, do you want to say hello? And then any recap slash anything that you're thinking about
would be exciting to discuss today. Hello, yes. So my name is Fraser. I hope everyone can hear me
okay. So I'm a recent computer science honours graduate from the University of Western Australia.
My interests very much lie in applying active inference in sort of in situ, real world,
you know, real time processing and so forth. So I'm very much interested by the way in which
organisms can, well, artificial or otherwise, can use active inference to sort of build an
eco niche that affords their their adaptivity over time. Of course, that's quite a general statement.
But doing this in real time is quite difficult. And if we can get a way to optimize on how we're
soliciting data, you know, soliciting data intelligently, and so forth, we're going to
be able to do that much more effectively than we have in the past. So that's a little bit about where
my interests lie. And I'm particularly interested in the conciliances between this paper and this
suite of ideas with another emerging framework in cognitive science called relevance realization.
I think there's quite a bit to be had there. So that's a little bit about me and my interests. So
thank you.
Cool. Thomas, what would you say just right off the bat, in terms of relevance realization and
active data sampling, or what else would you want to sample to know how you could answer?
I'd want to know more about relevance realization and what that involves. It's not something I have any
expertise in. Well, excellent. I think we'll be able to have a bit of a back and forth then. So
sounds great. Yeah, go for it, Frisjur. How would you bring it in? And then we'll see where it goes.
Well, it is, I must stress, it is an emerging framework. There are several papers on precisely
named as such, you know, relevance realization and emerging framework in cognitive science. But the
general idea, and this is very much spearheaded by, I would say, John Viveki of the University of
Toronto, and a few other people, Mark Miller in the University of Monash here in Australia.
The idea, the central idea is that the ability to zero in on relevant information is the criterion of
the cognitive. So, you know, there are cognitive agents, we are all cognitive agents, we're trying to
make cognitive agents in active inference. What exactly does that entail? The hypothesis is that to the
extent that you are a cognitive agent, you're able to zero in on the relevant information that is
necessary for maintaining your survival across time, and your ability to achieve certain goals,
certain goals that one would expect are constitutive of your autopoiesis as an organism.
And so the question then becomes, okay, well, what precisely does this mean? How can we cash out
what it means to look for relevance in an environment? You know, classically, this is going to involve
avoiding things that are deleterious to our Markov blanket, and seeking out things that are conducive
to it. The only other thing I would say, so that's a bit of a broad discussion. The only other thing I
would say is that it's very much stressed in, I would say, the work of Viveki and colleagues that
we actually cannot end up with a theory of relevance per se. Nothing is canonically relevant. So things
might be relevant insofar as they are large, or insofar as they are small, or as far as they live
for a short amount of time, or they have, you know, they are selected or case selected. There is nothing
that is, you know, relevant in any absolute sense. But what we might be able to do is have a theory of
relevance realization, that is to say the processes and mechanisms and trade-off relationships that allow
and afford for the realization of relevance. But one more thing, the emphasis is on that
that web realization is quite important. The framework does not presuppose that relevance is sort of out
there in the world, and we merely detect relevance. Neither is it assumed that we simply express
something from within our own schema. In a sort of, you know, romantic idea, we just sort of express relevance.
Relevance is co-created in the, you know, sensor motor loop, the eco-niche between the agent and its
environment. So, I mean, all of these ideas are very, very broadly conciliant with the active inference,
you know, framework more generally. So I thought this would be a kind of perfect place to bring this
other framework in. I know, I'm sorry, Thomas, that I'm sort of blindsiding you here with respect to this
this theory. But I think the general discussion that we will have, even if we don't focus on,
you know, the particular theory of say relevance realization per se, will very much swim in the same
sort of waters that I'm interested in navigating. So I hope that makes some sort of sense.
Absolutely, and thank you for explaining it. The thought that came to my mind is, if you sort of go
back a little bit in psychology, what's the relationship between the idea of relevance there
and the idea of salience? Would you say the two are in some way analogous or is one subset of the other?
Well, one, so the framework, insofar as I'm familiar with it, the idea is that relevance is,
relevance realization is perhaps isomorphic or at least deeply, very much deeply, you know, bedfellows
with predictive processing. So the idea would be that the mechanism of, say, precision weighting
is very, very much shared by all of the processes that underwrite relevance realization. So to the
extent that predictive processing and precision weighting have things to say about salience, as
opposed to relevance more generally construed, I suppose there would not be much of a distinction to
be made. But to try and answer your question, the, you know, conciliance is very much between
the idea about dynamical self-organization over sets of trade-off relationships, that's essentially what
relevance realization, you know, the ontology of relevance realization. The isomorphism is between
that and precision weighting and predictive processing, that's the very specific mechanism that is identified.
Okay, so that's an interesting point to sort of consider, and one of the reasons I think that's
quite interesting is to think, is there anything intrinsic about relevance that requires action?
Are my actions in a clear way determined by it? Because one can imagine having an attentional
system that just precision weights based upon some passive data to work out which stream is going to
be most informative in updating beliefs without actually acting in any way to change it. Whereas the
concept of salience, I think, goes a little bit beyond that and says, actually, it's not just a matter that
I'm estimating how precise the data streams that I'm getting are. I'm actually choosing those data streams.
Right. Where approximately do you think it would sit?
Okay, in that sort of schema, I would very much say it's within the salience kind of landscape.
The emphasis is very much on the means by which we can adaptively
interact with our environment to solicit the right observations that are, you know, conducive to our agency.
Do you mind then just, I suppose, riffing on the exact kind of definition of salience?
You've already done it, I suppose, but that might be helpful.
Yeah, I mean, I think it's an interesting one. And probably if you asked five or six different people,
you get five or six different definitions. And I think, you know, I don't want to put my definition
as being in any way superior to anybody else's. But the way I tend to think about it
is that attention, as you say, is effectively a process of gain control. It's working out how precise are the different
vitalities that are available to me. And that can be various different levels. It can be a sort of spatial channels
that I want to emphasize in spatial attention. It might be attending to particular features. And there are various different versions.
The distinction I'd make with salience is that I think salience is something that will actually drive action.
It's the amount, normally I think of it in terms of the amount of information gain I would associate with several different actions.
And so the degree to which I'm drawn towards doing it. That also raises the question then, what do I mean by doing something?
Because I could be doing something by overtly moving my eyes towards it.
But we may be able to loop back around and say, well, actually, there's also the possibility to do something without making any explicit action,
but by choosing to allocate more of my or choosing a model in which I allocate more precision to a particular channel compared to a novel.
But I think it relies upon a weighing up of alternatives, that there are several different things I could do here,
and a selection between those.
Of course, how I select between different actions will also depend upon the precision that I ascribe to different
or the modalities that I might be able to observe following those actions.
Because if something is more precise, then that also implies that less ambiguous has the potential to
allow me to gain more information.
So you see immediately why all these concepts end up quite conflated, because they do,
quite sensibly in some ways, they do all feed into one another in quite a profound way.
But I think it's sometimes useful just to be able to separate out the process of describing precision to something
from the process of choosing between several alternatives in order that I can gain the most information.
Right, yes, because specifically with that information gain, there is, of course, the
perhaps equivocation between, say, which model are we going to deploy to make sense of the sensory errors and so forth,
and then also exactly what observations are we going to pay attention to.
So that issue is perhaps one that needs to be finessed.
And I would say more particularly relevance realisation is, at least historically,
comes from the issue of model selection.
So the emphasis was very much on how the framework might be able to address the frame problem in psychology.
So which you have a particular schema that you're bringing to bear on the way in which you're dynamically self-organising around
your sensory prediction errors that's within a particular model.
The, yeah, so historically that's been the focus, I would say, which would fit more precisely with model selection,
as opposed to just the key sort of, you know, base raw salience of any particular observation.
So there's almost a form of covert salience attribution, isn't it?
Not necessarily acting in the sense of moving, but acting in a covert mental action to select between some alternatives at that level.
Yes, yes, there is a, there is an action in terms of which model is deployed and, yeah, in that respect.
It is very much, you know, action of the prosaic kind of the deflationary kind, as Carl might say,
you know, moving your finger or circading your eyes and so forth.
That is, that is definitely part of, very much included in the relevance realization framework.
But, yeah, it does go all the way up to and is largely concerned with the question of model selection,
as we might pose in a machine learning context.
I think that's an incredible, sorry, Dan, do you want to go ahead?
Go ahead.
I was just going to say, I think that's a really nice perspective, really important perspective to bring in,
in this particular discussion, sort of around themes that we've been discussing over the last couple of live streams as well,
about the importance of selecting your data.
And that only comes about when you're capable of a particular kind of action.
And it's worth thinking about why particular kinds of action like this are so important.
And one of the reasons may just be a matter of efficiency,
that if you can select relatively small portions of the data that are going to be relevant,
then you don't have to process everything at once.
Arguably, that's the reason we don't have, you know, many, many eyes pointing in all different directions,
because we don't need to, we just need something with a very high focus at a fogeal level,
that we can use to specifically select the information we want to process at any one point in time.
So, on this salience question, it reminds me of the classic two options to dissipate the free energy,
with change the mind, change the world.
So, in terms of changing the world, or at least what it hands to you, there's the overt choice of which stream of data to sample from.
That's like moving the eyes.
And then on the change the mind, there's the inner salience landscape, inner relevance realization,
that given a fixed stream of observations, still enables a degree of freedom in selecting models
that provide epistemic value.
What is the pragmatic counterpart to salience?
Expected utility associated with inaction?
Yeah, I think that's probably, again, it comes down to lots of different words, possibly the different meanings,
but also lots of different meanings that, sorry, lots of the same meanings that have lots of different words.
And so, you're probably right to say pragmatic value, expected utility, expected reward in some communities,
negative cost, there are all sorts of words you could use that more or less mean the same thing.
And what that means is just a description of something being attractive or aversive.
And even that is itself a little bit tautological, because it's just saying,
my description for why a particular behavior has occurred is that there is something that this particular behavior,
or that will bias behavior towards or away from it.
So it's almost quite a simple idea, which is that behavior depends upon attractive or aversive things.
But in a sense, the reason they're defined as attractive or aversive is entirely in relation to behaviors they elicit.
Yes.
I think this also relates to the first principles partitioning of pragmatic and epistemic value in active inference.
So if we were dealing with a purely cost-based data sampling method,
So, something different than the approach taken in this paper.
Then, we might find a way to add in different epistemic features or heuristics and make a cost objective
that could encompass various elements of like novelty and so on.
However, we would still only end up with one monolithic, cost-based, still pragmatic objective.
Whereas the approach taken in this paper was to actually start with the cost-free, purely epistemic elements of information gain.
And then from there, cost can be brought in, but then it is clearer how the costs associated with sampling
are not of the kind that the epistemic gain is.
Whereas if you start with a cost-reward, pragmatic, utility, etc. based model, then the only real method is to bring in the costs or values of information.
But then that ends up all kind of dumping into the same silo and it can't be brought out back later.
Yes, and it's interesting thinking about those two different strands, partly just historically thinking
you could regard active inference and the approach that we sort of outlined in this paper as being
a point of convergence between several different strands of work that had been going on for many,
many years before then. So there's a lot of people would think of it in terms of how things like expected
utility theory or reinforcement learning or those approaches that are based upon the idea of a cost
might have now incorporated information gain like terms into those cost options.
But the other way of thinking about it is that there's a long tradition in things like Bayesian
experimental design, not experimental design, so much more from the question of how do we best design experiments
or even feature selection from particular data sets to try and work out how best to draw inferences from it.
And you could argue that those sorts of entirely reward cost-free approaches that have then been
based upon how do I get the most information out of these things are now being equipped with a cost
function. So you could see it from either perspective and really this is one way you could go from either way.
You could either say, am I trying to equip my cost with information gain or am I trying to
equip my information gain with the cost of sampling?
Yes, meeting in the middle. But it really does depend where it starts from.
Chris, want to add anything or we can continue?
I think, I don't know, can you guys hear me?
Okay. What I really appreciate about kind of the cost on this, on that topic, in this aspect is
that it is a very useful sense of when do we not care about what we're gaining?
At what point do we say, hey, we've made enough, it's good enough. And I think it's
parallel to a lot of the costs that we have in other models, but it's also its own unique thing
that we have in the world. And so, you know, we're just saying, hey, you know, we don't need to sample
more. We don't need to go with the full factorial, like sort of like sampling design.
We've gotten to the point that we are satisfied with the information that we have gained here.
And we can move on with kind of the next steps of actually using that data in some way.
And what's really nice about it is that, you know, if you equip the cost to your situation appropriately,
you can really reduce sort of the time it takes to sift through large amounts of data or kind of
through the monetary cost of actually collecting that data. Because that's, we are in a big data world,
but still a lot of areas that just don't have a lot of big data that you can actually utilize,
you have to collect data yourself. And so you're actually showing the concept of cost data sense to
a literal monetary value. I think that makes it infinitely usable in industry spaces. So I think
I think that's a lot of the things that we can do in the dot one.
Pretty sure Thomas want to add anything or we can move on to some of the pieces that we
didn't get to in the dot one.
I have a few questions of my own, but I would very much like to get on to
some of the things we didn't do in the dot one just initially.
Okay. I think the main area that we held off for, so maybe we can cover it and then sort of just
in the, in the openness, see where it goes was section six. So for review in the dot one,
other than Carl's amazing exposition and defense of epistemic value, we walked through a few of the
fundamental formalisms and got essentially on up through figure five with a dynamically changing
setting and spoke a little bit about the, uh, the similarities and differences with the maximum
entropy based sampling.
Then several pieces come into play in section six.
They close section five saying we address next, we address active sampling in a situation where
analytical solutions are no longer possible. So there's a few things happening. First is that
the, the loss of the analytic character where the generative process and the generative function have
the same form. That's what is going to motivate this kind of variational approximation. And then also
there's the sheer fact of bringing in the cost and the relevance of the clinical trial setting.
So maybe to kind of set up this example, Thomas, you're a clinician. What did you bring in or how did you
bring together this research section and ground it in what you felt was going to be helpful and
meaningful for clinical settings?
Well, I think you've, you've highlighted some of the key sentences already. And that's the idea that
when we're, you know, as, as a theoretician, often the sorts of simulations that I'll end up building
are those that work relatively well in an analytic setting or where a lot of the problems are relatively
easy to solve. And that's certainly the case for some of the earlier simulations in April.
However, if there are anything to be practically useful, you often need to go far beyond those,
those domains and you need to work with problems that are sometimes non-linear and don't have clear
analytic ways of solving.
But it was also trying to think, so, so it was trying to think what's a good example of something that's a bit more realistic,
a bit more like what people might do in practice.
The other part of it is, is trying to think what's a really good example of something where there's a really obvious cost,
but also it's really important to gain information about it.
And clinical trials are quite an obvious example when you start thinking about it in those terms,
where there is some uncertainty about the benefit of a particular therapeutic intervention, whether that be a new drug or
surgical procedure or whatever else. And if you knew the answer to this, if you knew whether it was effective or not,
or even harmful, that could make a big difference in terms of your cost function, because you can benefit some
people relative to if you haven't offered them that intervention.
So here, there's this sort of interesting combination of those two things.
And you think about how a lot of these trials work in practice, and in some cases they end up
stopping early, either because they've just become so convinced of the benefit of the effect that it seems
unethical now to have a control on where you don't give people the treatment,
or if they've started to become convinced that the intervention is harmful and therefore the trial
should be stopped so as not to cause any more harm. So there's already implicitly a lot of these
evaluations and these trade-offs going into this domain. And so I thought it'd be really interesting
to try and unpack that explicitly and formally to see how we might start to deal with this in a simulated
context, but in one that could be applied in quite an important real-world question.
Okay. So here in 14, we have delightfully stated the whole joint distribution. So maybe could you
summarize equation 14 here? Yes. So equation 14 was a way of writing down something very much like
Kaplan-Meier type survival analysis function, but written down in terms of a Bayesian generative model
and something that could actually generate some data. So these sorts of survival analyses essentially
look at the time or look at the probability over time that someone has experienced an event and
the word survival would come if that event is death, that we're looking effectively how many people
have survived over time and the shape of that function, then you can compare that with different
different function shapes to see the ratios between them, which intervention led to greater survivors.
essentially. It doesn't necessarily have to be death, it could be acquisition of a particular symptom,
it might be a positive thing, so you might actually want to flip it the other way around,
you know, the time until some recovery threshold has been met. But essentially you've got people moving
from one category into another. And traditionally in a survival analysis that would be from alive to dead,
and you're trying to map that out. But again, it doesn't necessarily have to be so morbid and can
even be a positive category. So the way this is constructed here, I think our Y variable is the,
let me try to remind myself, it's a while since I've looked at this, so the Y variable will be whether or
not, or depending on how many people you're looking at, the proportion of people who survived to a
particular time point. The pi tau variable that's underlined in blue is going to be the time we've
chosen to sample to check how many people have survived in this analysis. And then we have a number
of other parameters that are going to be potentially relevant in explaining that. The theta variable here,
which is underlined in purple, is going to be the effect of our intervention or anything else that
might be relevant. And you can see that's making use of a design matrix, which is this X on the lowest row,
and the columns of which are each going to represent different sorts of potential explanatory variables.
Stop me if I'm jumping around too much as I do this. But you can imagine this X, or the multiplication
between X and theta, as being very much like a standard general linear equation of exactly the kind
that you might use in a regression analysis. The phi variable is a set of temporal basis functions.
So the point of this is that we can now start to estimate the time-varying survival function,
so something that is a bit more interesting than just a simple sort of exponential decay.
And the relevance of that might be time since a particular intervention, there might actually be
variations in terms of survival or experience a particular outcome as a consequence of the time since
an intervention was put in place. It might work for a short period of time and then stop working.
Then I think the d and v here are additional explanatory variables. Okay, so v is the randomisation ratio we choose,
or sorry, which group someone was randomised to, as a categorical variable, and that's chosen by our variable pi r.
So pi r is going to be whether we've chosen to randomise in various different proportions.
So I think here the options were to randomise in a one to two, a one to one, or a two to one ratio between placebo group and interventional group.
So depending upon those, we'll sample a value for v, and that will tell us which group somebody has ended up in.
And the row variable here is just giving the survival function. So this is effectively just a sigmoidal function at each point in time,
saying whether somebody has survived up until that time point. And you can see that that's the product of that over a series of discrete time points.
And the reason for that is that we're effectively saying if I have survived one time point, then I'm in the cohort who may or may not survive to the next time point.
And then I'm in the cohort of people who may not survive to the next time point, which is why it's that product over time.
So cumulatively, the number of people who have not experienced the outcome should drop at each point in time.
And again, the sigmoidal function at each time point is just to make sure that that's in between zero and one.
So that one would be everybody avoids the outcome and zero would be everybody experiences the outcome from one category to the next.
The key thing to bring out of this is that the two choices I can make represented by pi as to how I sample my data are
when I choose to follow someone up and what randomization ratio I choose.
And each of these are going to be the things that are subject to our constraints based upon our pragmatic value cost,
which here is going to be the want for people to survive and avoid the negative outcome.
And the randomization ratio will also affect that same and the information gain that I'm going to achieve by doing this.
And so the idea here was that we will carry on gaining information about the shape of these survival functions
until the cost of gaining more information or the benefit of gaining more information is less than the cost of randomizing to the wrong group.
So, we'll see that in the equation.
Awesome. Thank you.
So we see it in its joint distributions specification form in equation 14 and then figure 9, the top with the graphical form.
Okay.
So then let's briefly walk on through to the figure.
We then have equation 15, 16, 17,
giving details about how the variational Laplace is being applied to the joint distribution before.
Anything to add on this?
I don't know how deeply you want to go into it, but essentially the importance of these things is
is just that we're now having to deal with approximations.
And because the form of the generative model on the previous slide was quite non-linear,
it becomes much more difficult to solve in an analytic way.
So what we can do is make use of various components of an extension around different gradients and essens.
So this is looking up to second order.
And that's quite useful in that those same quantities are the quantities that come up in,
I think the lowest row here is effectively a, the penultimate row is a Newton scheme to optimize
a variational free energy.
And a variational free energy under a class approximation requires exactly these gradients and
Heskins, so first and second derivatives, in order to be able to approach this sort of problem.
Cool. Yeah, there's probably a lot to say on the math, but one part that I always find
fascinating is however these distributions are shaped, whether they're with a central tendency
like a Gaussian or whether they have some other kind of structure, the variational Laplace is going
to fit a parabola basically facing down over the central tendency. And so there's places where that's
misleading or not, but it's just so interesting to see here how you stepped through and we can still
trace out what those variables mean. And then by looking at the properties of the distributions
as specified, it's like, there's this incrementsable optimization scheme that will put a central tendency
on the distribution. So it's really getting at what the variational approximation is, which is there's
some family of function that maybe is completely intractable, but then we can choose to treat the
distributions in a way where it is possible for us to shift and scale and tune an upside down parabola,
and then that has a well-behaved property. So it's cool. Okay. And then we get...
Can I... Yeah, go ahead.
Can I just ask, sorry, on that, on those approximations there, is it the case that with
respect to this approximation that we assume the distribution is quite tightly peaked about the mean?
So we have quite a precise approximate posterior, is that, is that the case?
No, you don't need to assume that it's tightly peaked. You just have to assume that there's a
reasonable approximation around that. In fact, I'm trying to see whether it's obvious from these equations.
I don't know, how much not.
It's in a slightly different form to what I'm used to, but I just wondered if that was the case,
so the answer's no then, sir?
No, so the reason that that sometimes comes up is that if you are trying to derive a variation of a
class procedure, often part of that procedure is saying that at some point you effectively say that all
I need to do is work directly with the mode rather than working with both the mode and the variance.
And the reason for that is that the variance or the covariance in the posterior should just be in
well, not necessarily an analytic, but a function of the mode in relation to the probability density you have.
And that's evident in the lower part of the final equation here. So the precision here is dependent
directly on the Hessian evaluated at the mode. And that's why we're looking at the maximum iteration
where we've reached hopefully the mode of that distribution. Now, it sometimes seems that to go from
a free energy function where we're taking an expectation under the posterior to one where we can
effectively neglect the variance to just deal with the mode. One way you can think about that is if I
were to assume that the mode is so sharply peaked that there is no variance to deal with, and then the
expectation just becomes a delta function and you can just evaluate directly at the mode. And that certainly
will get used some very similar equations and you'll end up sort of arriving at a map estimate. The other
approach to this is to say that if I'm assuming that the posterior is approximately Gaussian, in other words,
that the log probability of my data and explanatory variables are approximately quadratic, then it means
that expanding up to a second order term, so making a Taylor series approximation up to the quadratic
element. I can assume that that quadratic element is effectively constant in the region I'm dealing with.
That means that when and that quadratic bit is effectively our posterior precision or our negative
posterior precision, as you can see in the sort of final plot here. So the point I'm trying to make
here is that although one intuitive way of deriving some of these same quantities is to say well let's
throw away the variance and imagine we're just doing a map estimate, a maximum a posterior estimate,
then you'll arrive at very similar modes. However the variance and the posterior covariance can actually be
recovered under this assumption that you're treating it as being approximately Gaussian and at least close to the mode
around which you're estimating it. Thank you. Yeah, it's explored in SPM. I see the variational
applause as mode seeking and then secondarily estimating how spread a parabola should be, which isn't a normal
distribution because a parabola drops off. Whereas if you do the variational Gaussian, then you actually are
jointly tuning the mean slash mode and the variance parameter and then you do have the tails going off
into the probability distribution. Well, what you should remember there though, and so you're exactly
right to talk about the mode seeking behavior and fitting the parabola. But remember that the parabola
we're talking about, so this quadratic function, is actually being used to fit the log probability, not the
probability itself. And if your log probability is of a quadratic form, then you are dealing with a
Gaussian distribution. And in fact it is the coefficient of the quadratic term that is then your precision
where your inverse covariance. Thank you. Great addition. Okay, we get to figure nine. So it's in
it's in the medical journal. What does it mean? What is it saying?
So when you're looking at, and probably the easiest thing to look at here
would be, sorry, I'm just minimizing video so I can see it clearly.
Yeah, so the sort of thing you might see in a medical journal would often be a survival curve
that looks a bit like the prediction curve that you see here. Often it's more stepwise in terms of
how it's expressed and that's to do in the form of Kaplan-Meier estimators.
And the way in which you'd read that is that the y-axis is showing the number of people,
the proportion of people who have yet to experience an event. And often that event is either a
particular kind of clinical outcome or sometimes a loss to follow-up, which is another thing that
always needs to be incorporated in the image. And then you end up in questions about sort of censorship
of data, which essentially means how do I deal with data I no longer have access to?
And the x-axis here is time. So at each point along the x-axis I'm asking between these two curves,
each of whom represent a population of people who have or have not been exposed to an intervention,
what's the difference in terms of the proportion of people who have not yet experienced an event?
So that event might be a heart attack or a stroke or various other things that you might pick out as
being clinically relevant. And the key thing really is trying to understand how do these, how does
either different interventions or even the absence of an intervention or more commonly a placebo
intervention differ? And that allows you to estimate the effect of a particular
therapy that you might want to choose. Awesome. So here we have the random sampling in figure nine for
the randomized control trial. So in this situation, there was randomization of 50-50 and then the choices
as shown here are uniformly scattered throughout the duration of the study. Then you build in
the deliberate choice of follow-up time and randomization by combining the general message
passing with the information gain imperative here and we get to figure 10. So what is different in figure 10?
Well, I mean, the other thing I'll just point out is, so the choices here are both the choices about
follow-up time and also the choices about randomization. So the size of the dots representing each choice
represents, and I'm afraid I can't remember which way around this is, but the number of people who were
randomized for each group. So the three different sized dots, one of which represents one third in the
placebo group, one of which represents half in the placebo group, and one of which represents two thirds in the
placebo groups. So it is actually, and you're right to say it's deciding in a completely uniform way in the
first figure, just to illustrate what would happen if we just decided these things at random.
So nobody ever decides these things just at random. It's a bit more rational. There's normally
often a pre-specified follow-up time, or even in Bayes adaptive type clinical trials, there'll be
criteria that we've met in terms of when people are followed up and how the randomization works.
But we're comparing to a slightly straw man example if we were to completely randomize and just pick
things entirely at random. So the difference between figures, is it figure nine and ten, is that in figure
ten we've now put the information gain as one of the key things we need to make use of. And so here
it's going to adjust the randomization as it goes to try and make sure it learns most about what happens
in each of these different conditions. So there's more uncertain about the trajectory in one condition,
and it will assign more people for that condition and vice versa until it's got more precise estimates
hopefully of each of these lines. It's also going to change where it's on and you can see that there's a slight
slight shift I think towards later in the trial. One of the reasons for that is that the later the follow-up time,
the more informative that is about all the previous follow-up times. If I observe someone early on and see
that they've survived, that doesn't necessarily tell me how much longer after that they've survived.
Whereas if I observe someone at the end and know that they've survived, that tells me they've probably,
well that tells me they've definitely survived throughout all of the preceding guidelines as well.
And so there's a little bit more information to be gathered towards the end compared to at the beginning.
So there's a little bit of a shift in that direction. What's not done in this particular
simulation is any cost or any preference for people surviving, which obviously is a very important thing to
include in any realistic decision-making. I think that's going to be the next figure we look at.
So then you layer in the cost in 11. So explain this one.
Yeah, so the first thing I tried doing with this one actually was just putting a general
preference for observing someone surviving. The issue was it then just selected all of the points at the
very beginning of the trial. Because everybody survives at the beginning, nobody had time to experience the outcome.
So the first thing is, if you prefer seeing people survive, is actually a completely reasonable thing to do.
But what we really want is for people to survive for the duration of the trial.
So here, there's a sort of increasing function of preference that says, I prefer to see people having survived at the very end,
which is, of course, also weighted with this potential information gained. And one thing you'll see here is that it relatively rapidly switches its behavior to randomize more people to the placebo group, which is the group in pink.
And that seems like a very reasonable thing to do because as things progress, you can see that the placebo group, even though it's less confident than on the previous slide, it learns that the placebo group actually survived better than the treatment group.
So in this particular case, the treatment would not be a good treatment is actively harmful.
And this is analogous to the idea of stopping early in a clinical trial because you're concerned about the effect that your intervention is having.
And so I think this is, this is sort of encouraging to see that it's, it's behaving in the right way.
It's, it's saying actually more people survive and don't experience this deleterious outcome if they have a placebo.
So as I become more and more confident of that, I'll randomize more people to the placebo arm.
And the end conclusion of this is that every two of you randomize that arm.
And in a sense, this is, this almost blurs the boundaries between, between the information seeking, which is the primary and medical trial.
And the public health imperative to try and make available the best treatments that are going to be most effective and to not give people treatments that are going to cause harm.
But by trading off exploration and exploitation, sort of traditional sense, we can actually blur the boundaries between those two things and gather information until we've reached the point where actually the amount we could potentially gain from that information is less than the
cost that that's having on people who are randomized to the wrong group.
Thank you.
It's very interesting in light of our earlier discussion on the sort of reward first or epistemic first, when we think about the Hippocratic oath, like do no harm, do no evil.
And then it immediately comes in.
Well, what about a blood draw?
And this is going to cause harm.
Oh, well, there's a better benefit.
But then that is still all cast and reduced down to the expected benefits and utilities, which leaves information gain kind of out in the cold as something that can't really be compared or brought in.
Whereas this is, in certain ways, blurring a line that gives, there's a lot of structures around that line between what is health research and what is public health.
And so helping paint that it is blurred in practice and that the formalism brings clarity to that fusion imperative rather than blurring what was clear.
It's a society shifting concept that would change how studies and day-to-day health could be done.
And I think in many ways it is done already at an implicit level.
I mean, I think a large number of the decisions that any doctor is making on a day-to-day basis revolves around, do I have more to gain by getting this new piece of information versus the potential cost of doing this to the patient, the health service, to society in general?
And, you know, do you treat somebody early before you're completely sure about what condition they might have?
Or do you wait until you gather more information but potentially risk them deteriorating in that time?
So there's always a lot of these trade-offs happening in clinical practice.
I think implicitly they are already happening at the level of these sorts of trial designs as well.
People do stop trials early.
Or do you use adaptive trial designs where they can change the parameters based on what's happening?
Probably means they are implicitly using these same ideas without necessarily formalizing them this way.
So in a sense, I think it's maybe an endorsement of that approach rather than necessarily saying people should do things differently.
I think in many ways people are already doing this.
Yeah.
From the help...
Oh, yeah.
Chris, go ahead.
I was just wondering, because you...
What I like about this figure that, and you said it outright, is that it shows kind of a stopping early sort of modality in the study where, you know, you're shifting more people towards the placebo group.
You're effectively more or less just saying, you know, that it's not worth it anymore.
And what was interesting to me, or I guess what I'm wondering is, is also the counter to that, that you could, you know, in a different scenario say, hey, this is working really well.
We're going to put more people into the treatment group.
Absolutely fine.
But is there a way that you can embed kind of extending the time into some of these models or decreasing the time?
They're just saying at some point, hey, it's no longer worthy of me continuing to randomize people here.
It's just, let's stop here.
This is kind of that cost function.
Can you optimize the cost function to either decrease or increase the time so that you can get the most benefit from the trial?
That's kind of what I was wondering.
Yeah.
No, absolutely.
And I think sort of changing the time parameter is another one of the key things that you, I mean, in a sense, you could argue that this choice of when to follow up is precisely that.
That actually is already to some extent doing that.
And it would be interesting to trade off the costs in terms of the information lost when people are lost to follow up and those sorts of things as well.
In a more realistic model, still relatively simplistic one we forward here.
But I think to take your point more generally as well, it's really interesting to think about what are the parameters, not just in a clinical trial, but in any sort of experimental design or policy decision.
What are the key parameters that you have control over and what are the effects of those parameters on the information you might gain and on the preference you might have for different kinds of outcome?
And in principle, any of these that you can formulate in a clear way, you can use these sorts of approaches to start to try and optimize and choose in a principled way.
And I think that's fantastic.
I'm kind of thinking through now.
You know, survival is a pretty binary like outcome.
You know, you're dead or you're alive.
It's a very clean system to try this out.
When do you start getting into more nuanced health benefits?
So if you're looking for possibility of you're tweeting somebody with a myocardial infraction or faction, however you want to say that,
and you're trying to treat them with a drug that is supposed to change an arrhythmia in their heart or something of that nature.
You'll see smaller gains instead of just like alive or dead.
You are hoping the patient lives regardless in both cases, but you're not really measuring death.
You know, how does this sort of model change when you start to look at more distributed data?
I think I caught all of that.
Sorry, the sound is still a little bit quiet.
But if I could summarize, I think the question is effectively one of, yes, it's obvious that if your outcomes are life or death,
that there's a clear distinction in terms of preferences I might want to have for those things.
But there are a number of things that are much more nuanced and may have trade-offs in themselves that it becomes a little bit harder and less obvious as to how to assign preferences, degrees of preference.
And so you always get back to what is often quite a generic issue as to how do I choose my priors?
How do I choose my degree?
And in this case, it's the prior preference that I'm choosing.
How do I select that?
And there are a couple of interesting approaches that people take.
So one would be to say, well, let's actually look at what people already do in settings.
When do people set these criteria for only stopping the trial or whatever else?
Can you then invert that process and then infer what the implicit cost function they were using was or what the implicit prior preferences were?
And then that might be a way of then just formalizing and saying, OK, so this clearly is the relative preference I have for these different outcomes relative to the information game.
That might be one way of approaching it.
The other approach I mentioned at the beginning of the session last week, there's a lot of this sort of come out of initially attending a workshop in Australia, in Sydney, where a lot of the discussion was around Bayesian networks and how you select priors.
A lot of people work on the problem of elicitation and how you take focus groups or songs of the population or key groups who are invested in a particular problem, stakeholders, and how you extract from their views and how you ask questions in the right way to be able to get out the priors that matter to them or that they take to be relevant.
And that's obviously particularly used in contexts where the priors are uncertain and you want some expert views or there's limited information.
You want some way of constraining a particular prior for a particular setting.
But I think it's also potentially very useful in terms of writing down the right kind of preferences here.
So you could imagine if you asked enough people who might be relevant stakeholders in a particular outcome, how much do you value this over that?
And do a number of comparisons there.
You could start to construct the relevant cost function because the relevant cost function here is often going to be for the people for whom the intervention is offered.
And so those of us who are not necessarily the beneficiaries of it or people who might be harmed by it are probably not the right people to be setting preferences.
Finding out a way of engaging the relevant people and taking account of their views on it and how those might be incorporated into the right preferences, I think is a really interesting and not entirely solved question.
Could I jump in with a quick question as well?
Please.
Please.
So if I may be so bold, the, shall we say, the guiding normativity of the various simulations that were offered in the paper was something like, at least initially, the degree of expected information gain that one is able to ascertain at a certain point in time as a consequence of a certain intervention or not.
And now we're running into the issue of this, let's call that the cost function, perhaps.
This is what we're going to perhaps use as our proxy for the relevant thing to do at the relevant time or the relevant population and so on.
But we're coming up against issues now of, yes, but there are, the question is to the relevant, you know, action is not merely reducible to expected information gain at, you know, as a consequence of a certain action.
There are meta considerations like, ah, we would like to observe people living throughout the trial, basically.
So we don't want to just have, you know, people who will be observed to be living at the beginning of the trial.
You can do expected information gain perfectly fine with all of that, but there is this meta consideration of the way in which we're going to, you know, solicit preferred observations.
That doesn't seem to be just reducible to expected information gain.
So a lot of my particular, you know, interest are in, well, how do we, how do we map out that sort of space?
It perhaps expected information gain could, could be, you know, exacted into this larger space of considerations.
One might think, but, but that's, that's a very interesting problem that I think you said as well was, it's an incredibly difficult problem.
And it wasn't, it certainly wasn't the focus of this paper.
So it's a bit unfair perhaps to, to, to lay upon you, you know, questions as to, okay, well, what, what might guide those, those higher order considerations?
But that, that is something that I thought was, would be very interesting to discuss maybe later or now.
As you, as you've raised it now, shall we discuss it now?
I think, yeah.
Unless there was something else, but yeah.
I mean, I, I think you're exactly right that expected information gain on itself is not enough.
Um, in, in, at least in some settings, I think in some settings it probably is an instant.
Um, and, and that almost begs the question in how do you know whether to put more emphasis on expected information gain or other forms of cost?
And I say that the, the sort of addition of cost into this, it, it is partly relevant in the sense that, as in relevant to the expected information gain in that it's only when you have a good quantification of the cost of, or the benefit of, of gaining information, cost of not gaining that information that you can actually start to do that, um, trade off.
Um, so although it, it can sometimes feel a little bit arbitrary that you're just sort of adding another term to the objective function.
But actually the only reason you can do that is because by expressing them in exactly the same units and the same, uh, notions, different kinds of probability distribution, uh, or log probabilities or potentials.
It's only by, by being able to put them in that same space that you can even start to do this trade off.
Um, which is the reason it was relevant to introduce the cost function.
In addition to that, in this setting, obviously the other approach that we might take in active influence is actually to go from first principles, try and derive something that looks like, um, expected free energy.
That is already a combination of these things.
And then can be pulled apart to see how it contributes to both these sorts of costs and information gain.
Um, and I think.
Clearly putting the right sort of costs so that you will only seek out information if it doesn't lead to something that is very, very aversive.
Um, and, um, and vice versa, you'll only seek out things you prefer if there's also some scope to gain information, at least relative to other actions you might take.
I think is useful in allowing these things to contextualize one.
And that's something Carl put very well last session we did.
What, what were your thoughts about it?
How would you approach that question?
I mean, I can't think of any other way than to sit.
I mean, you've kind of already said it then to situate the whole task where, uh, considering, you know, in this case, it's, it's maybe clinical design, trial design, and so on for survivability.
Uh, the only way I can really see to do it is to relate it to the kind of auto poetic goals of the agents involved.
So we, maybe we have a meta assumption that all of these agents wish to continue across time, uh, or a certain subset of them.
We wish a certain subset of them to continue across time, given certain considerations.
Um, that I, I'm just spitballing here, but I don't really see how to situate the guiding normativity in anything other than the.
Continuation of, of the, the, the, you know, sensor motor loop of a particular subset of the, the, the, uh, you know, agents under consideration.
Of course, then that raises the question, well, which subset do we want?
Uh, so we, we, we sort of have a recapitulation of the same issue.
Uh, so to sum up, I have no idea, uh, that, um, that's, that's the only really thing that comes to mind.
If we can somehow tie this to the, the, you know, the ways in which auto poetic beings are able to maintain their water polices across time.
Um, if anyone else has a better suggestion, um, that's, that's as far as I've been able to get so far.
Okay.

What, what that makes me think about is something like a, um, semantic supply chain for the, for the clinical study.
So it's like, we didn't assess in this paper.
Should we do a clinical study?
But there's another room where that's a question.
It's like, well, what could we stand to learn?
What would the cost be?
And then so, and then someone, so somebody says, should we do this clinical study?
And then someone's like, should you have taken the policy to ask if we should have done a clinical study?
And someone's like, yeah, I didn't know.
So I asked to find out.
And then that's where the buck stops.
Because right there you can say, here's where there was a definable uncertainty that was actionably addressed.
And that's how it propagated on through to the clinical study.
And then, and then, um, all along the way, counterfactuals could be analyzed.
Like if it were 10 times more costly to sequence the genome, then we would have had done this study.
But then that also opens the door to when the cost of something is lower, that another study could be done.
Um, there's this element of the participatory stakeholder involvement and asking people questions that, that keeps it grounded.
But, uh, and it's, it's obviously such a generic situation that there are strong answers.
But just the idea of tracing our uncertainties and preferences and norms back on through to the cognition of the study design seems to take it into a place that's going far beyond just trying to sample optimally from a population.
Um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um
trying to make it more general is maybe just a fool's errand.
Maybe there isn't a way to generalize that
other than to swim in the waters
of the particular situation we're considering.
And of course, it's a very noble and worthwhile thing
to consider Bayesian optimal trail design.
So perhaps it's not much of a problem.
Well, I mean, I think you're right to think about
how to try and generalize the problem.
And arguably the answer is exactly the same
way, exactly as Daniel's described.
You could say the question of actually designing this trial
that's based on thinking of doing it,
is itself something that comes with potential information gain,
potential costs, benefits, and that actually a lot of behavior
is based, well, almost all behavior where I select
between alternative things I could do
is going to be based on similar desires to both explore,
to find out, and to exploit once I know that I can
satisfy certain preferences.
Arguably, it's only by doing those things that you can maintain
your persistence over time in exactly the way you were describing.
that possibly is one of the key imperatives for any sort of creature that can
envisage alternative paths forwards and select between.
To the public help.
To keep playing the game.
I think there's another way that this comes into play with a health study versus just public health.
In a health study, oftentimes, just like laboratory studies in general,
there is, you want to make a control group that's actually like a valid comparison.
Like if you're studying the effect of food X versus not,
you really want to make sure the people who ate it ate it and who didn't eat it didn't eat it
because you're trying to make the maximally separable.
Whereas if a given health intervention or program were driven to a large extent by pragmatic consideration,
like we want to reduce the prevalence of this in this population,
then that would plug into many other policies that could come into play.
So instead of like, we're going to study whether a daily email can help with this health condition.
And then you want to then the whole imperative of the researcher,
okay, we want to make sure those emails were delivered or not.
Versus if we pull back and say, okay, they want these people to have less of this disease.
And here's how that is being balanced with reducing uncertainty about the effects of email.
Then somebody else, maybe that group or another group could pick up
on the pragmatic consideration and then plug in with a different policy.
So from that pure epistemic standpoint, it's like, oh, but now this is like less of a controlled experiment.
And it's like, well, yes, that is the trade-off that is being finessed is the frontier with who does what
when there are both things that are uncertain,
but there are things that we could be uncertain and simply be unsalient to us.
And then we don't need to take the policies to reduce uncertainty because the information gain,
even if it was a lot, could be just like, well, you could look at a block of random text
and you could reduce your uncertainty a lot.
But then that is not usually selected because it's not aligned with other preferences.
But that also, I think, the example of looking at a block of text is an interesting one as to why
you might not do that, even though it might resolve your uncertainty as to what's on the page.
Because you also need to think about what else it might resolve your uncertainty about.
So if you are curious about something or do not know something,
and that block of text will tell you that, then it may be quite a useful thing to read that block of text.
Whereas looking just to see the particular wording about something you already know about,
about some, sorry, terrible English, isn't it?
The wording of something about which you already know,
then there's not much point looking at it, is there?
It's sort of a waste of time and energy because it's already some uncertainty that you don't even have to resolve.
You don't have that uncertainty in the first place.
Similarly, you might not know something and the text may still not tell you a thing about it.
In other words, it's quite ambiguous text because it doesn't help resolve between the alternative hypotheses.
And I guess this comes down to an interpretation of expected information gain or the mutual information
between your hypotheses and the data that you could measure.
And mutual information can always be separated into two entropies.
So one of them is an entropy, which is how uncertain that might about what these data would look like under this plan.
And the other one, the other entropy is, which is subtracted from that, is the conditional entropy.
So how ambiguous is this measurement?
And the way I would often like to think about that is there's no point doing an experiment where you already know what the data would look like.
If I could picture exactly what I would measure before I even did the experiment,
there'd be no point in that experiment because what am I going to learn from it?
And that's our predictive entropy. That's the first one.
That is how uncertain am I about what I can see?
But then you have to account for the amount of information that you're actually going to be able to resolve.
And so subtracting this ambiguity, making sure that actually this experiment is going to resolve that uncertainty.
It's not just going to be uncertain, noisy data that, yes, I can't predict, but that's just because I've used an extremely noisy measuring instrument.
That would also be a point this experiment to do.
So the right experiments to do are the ones where I couldn't predict the data,
based upon what I know already. But conditioned upon a particular hypothesis, the data would actually be very predictable.
And so by seeing those data, I can start to really disambiguate between things that I didn't know already.
Okay.
Okay. In this kind of spirit of the block of text, there's a lens or a frame in which it's just uniform,
but then there's another way in which it might resolve or not. Okay.
So there's no point to do the experiment if you already know what the outcome would be.
But then maybe in that case, it would be something more like a habit or a ritual.
Or even if you have an experiment that you don't know what the outcome is going to be,
there's still procedural elements of the experiment that you do want to know the outcome on,
like the intermediate calibrations or assays.
So I think this kind of points to the very rich and woven nature of epistemic and pragmatic value
and why it's so important to have an accounting system that can hold them up side by side.
Because even on one action, there might be many ways or different scales of a nested model,
which that action or the consequences are being chosen for a variety of competing factors
and then sample probabilistically. And then the impact on a hierarchical predictive processing system
also may not simply fall into an epistemic or a pragmatic bucket because it could be epistemically
novel at this layer, but then that was exactly what was expected at another layer. But then the fact that
was expected at that layer was learning at another layer. So it's very interesting.
Yes, we spoke last week about the idea that you can actually use a form of message
passing in sparse generative models to pick out the uncertainty or the expected information
gain about a particular state. And I think that's another way of looking at exactly what you've just
outlined. That it may be that there is a great one action that gives you a lot of potential
information gain about a particular state. But you have to then encounter the information gain
that other states or about other states in your model or about other things. And so that's a situation
where maybe it would be the wrong thing to do to focus in on a particular margin. And actually what you
want to know is the information gain about all of the things you don't know about.
Awesome. So here you might say, do I want to know about the effects of all the confounding
variables or do I just want to know or do I just want to estimate the effect of the intervention?
So is it relevant for me to characterize the precise shape of the function and temporal trajectory
use those basis sets? Or is it sufficient for me to just focus on resolving my uncertainty about the
size of the effect of treatment? How different those two plots are?
And that problem, we were speculating before, the issue that I have in my mind is, well, how do you
decide between those two levels, let's say, of expected information gain resolval? Do you have another
meta expected information gain between the two, say, the lower level? Which basis functions should I have
versus the, you know, well, which approach should I even take at all? That's a question that I find
particularly interesting, scaling all the way up to the previous example that Daniel mentioned, you know,
well, should I even do the intervention at all? I know that comes quite a far field from the subject of
the paper, but that very much gets into the question of, well, exactly what level is relevant,
what information gain is relevant, and how do we score which one is relevant? When we're doing a
clinical trial, it's quite obvious, relatively obvious, let's say, for sure.
Yes. And perhaps part of that comes back to the original discussion we were having about
the relevance of different sorts of states and distributions. And obviously, this is a very
subjective thing, exactly as you were talking about with relevance realisation, the idea that it's not,
it's both about myself and my model and the environment, so I'm dealing with, can't take one away from the other.
And probably a large part of that does come down to the precision ascribed to different sorts of
mappings, whether those mappings are going to be conditional probability distributions,
and the perhaps voluntary attentional weighting,
deployment of different precision values to different parts of your model.
And you could argue that if you were to do this at a higher level, you might be able to use it
for empirical prize over what might happen at a lower level of the model as well,
or even to contextualise the preferences. So there's no reason why your preferences or cost function
can't be context sensitive. And in fact, the really interesting question comes when you invert
that and you say, well, okay, if I'm predicting my cost function based upon the higher level,
then what I'm doing at the lower level should be able to tell me something about the context at the higher
level. So if I believe that in this circumstance, I like doing this, whereas in this circumstance,
I like doing that, then seeing what I do might then give me evidence for being in one of those two
different contexts. So it's a really interesting question is how you might hierarchically decompose
these things and allow layers and layers of context sensitivity that then allow me to select my preferences
and also potentially conditioning my precisions in such a way that the balance between
these exploitative and explorative drives will vary.
Yes, there's a relatively canonical example that John Viveki gives on precisely this issue.
You know, imagine you're in a lecture and you need to take good notes. Your initial state is,
well, I don't have good notes. You know, what are the possible actions? Well, I could write stuff down,
I could type things, I could use finger paint. The affordances and the prediction errors,
the precision of the prediction errors and the expected information gain afforded as a consequence
of any particular action is very undefined. It's not unspecified, but it's underspecified.
And so the exact, you know, low level routines that you should engage in, the expected information gain
is a consequence of, you know, any particular low level action is relatively similar to any other one.
So again, there is that question of, well, presumably there's going to be something from a higher order,
you know, preference whereby I have in the past, let's say I built up a model that, ah, my laptop is an excellent thing for me to use to write down things and so forth.
So that's going to kind of solve the problem in that case. So yeah, there does appear to be some model of,
you know, hierarchical nesting of these things in some fashion. I know that's delightfully nebulous, but that's the only,
that's the only really thing that came to mind.
I was just wondering if in the inversion of that particular example, if you found yourself having
not taken very good notes, you might then say, well, if it were a good lecture, I would have
wanted to take good notes. So the fact that I haven't, I find it wasn't a very good lecture.
That has crossed my mind from time to time.
Something in there about like, if I had more time, I would have written a shorter letter,
but I didn't. So I must have had more time. Or the other thing it made me think of was the back to the streetlight example.
So we talked about how the streetlight is, is both justified, but it's also this kind of like limitation.
On one hand, that's where we can resolve our uncertainty, but also that's not the whole story.
But now we zoom out a layer and there's a policy on the electrical grid deciding which streetlights to turn on
or how to dim different streetlights. And then you pull back even another layer. There's a construction policy
on the streetlights over the decades. And then, and then at the nightly scale, it's the energy grid policy.
So then that agents looking around information foraging is happening within slower scales,
such that they're not in a stationary single streetlight world. They might be looking around
and then spiraling out, just like you described. And then that moves them into a new attractor,
a new regime of attention where they're sampling differently from there.
So it's kind of when we read a paper like this and we see a motif get built up so methodically,
and then always there's this point in the dot two, or even that motif is just one puzzle piece
swirling around with the broader question of, of how we make these generative models.
And then even the motif, which looks awesome and sounds very cool. It's very educational to learn about,
but then it is also just another element in these broader models.
Yes. And I think clearly it's a very, I mean, there are two, two big issues when you're,
well, three big issues when you're trying to trying to design creatures that behave in an
active inference way. So while one of those issues is, it's obviously drawing inferences about the world.
Another one is changing the world to comply with your predictions. And then the third is,
given that I've evaluated the first two in relation to the fit between my model and the data I currently
have, the third question is always, how do I deal with data that I don't yet have? And that's where,
that's where this sort of generic issue of selecting things, so that, or selecting courses of
action that lead to informative, but also preferred data becomes so important. But you're absolutely right.
All of these things are then conditional upon the model that I, that I have in the first place. And that model
will condition these various other things. That model may say I have very, very precise preferences
or very precise prior beliefs over the sort of outcomes I'm going to seek out, or it might not.
And that may be conditionally dependent upon other things at other levels of the model, which may be
subject to exactly the same generic objective functions. But because of the form of the model at
that level, may lead to different sorts of behaviour than you might anticipate otherwise.
So I think you're absolutely right to highlight that, although there are these generic motifs,
that the optimisation of my model fits both by action and perception, and the optimisation of future data
by choosing informative preferred data points, are all relevant only in the context of the models under which
they act. There are of course also ways of building, which is another interesting point, but some of that
will be dependent upon the data that's presented back by the world. And we sort of get back to some
of the discussion we were having last week about things like natural selection, the selection between
alternative models, and alternative individuals being alternative forms of models that are selected
with each generation. So there's a history dependent element, which is dependent upon the data I've had before,
which just comes down to that question of if I'm comparing to the data that I've observed previously,
and I'm back to just the problem of comparing models.
Finding the most evidence or finding the models that have the most evidence.
In the conclusion, you pointed towards
using sophisticated inference to approach some of these situations where you might want to plan
over future observations. So where are you hoping to develop what is presented in this paper?
Well, I think to the point about the sophisticated inference scheme, and for those who
haven't come across this, the idea is that although I have my separable objectives to seek out things I like,
and things that will inform me about my model of my world, each of those things may also be
dependent upon what I've observed at earlier points in time. So it might be that having performed a particular
action, made an observation and updated my beliefs in relation to the observation I've got, that will then change
what might be most informative at the next step in time, or what might be most rewarding at the next step in time.
So by rolling out my beliefs about what I might do next, and conditioning those upon what I might do after that,
and conditioning those upon what I might do after that, and more than that, conditioning those on the beliefs I might have at each of those points,
and you can really start to develop much deeper policies and have that recursive aspect that
is probably quite familiar to a lot of people who've worked with things like Bellman Optimality Problems.
And one of the things I find quite interesting about that is that in principle you might now do things
that will help me seek out more information in the future, as well as doing things that will gain the information,
might help me achieve more rewarding observations in the future.
So again, they are still separate, but actually it will look like what a lot of people in probably
reinforcement learning type fields would be more familiar with, the idea that I might seek out information
to gain reward. If I have a recursive scheme then it will look like I'm doing that, even if I additionally
see information as having its own unique value in and of itself, regardless of whether or not it leads to reward.
So I think that's one of the key reasons for bringing that in here, that I might want to find out
how far someone survived up until this point, so that I can then contextualise the shape of the function,
when I know when they've survived later on. Or I might have the option to now put in multiple
follow-up points and actually if I were to do that independently of one another, I might put them
both in the same place because that's where I'm going to gain the most information. However, if I
would use a recursive sophisticated scheme, I might say if I put in this follow-up point, then I'll resolve
all the uncertainty I need to about that point, so I'd better put this at the other point. And so you can now
start to think about multiple follow-up points, multiple interventions, taking account of how one
of those might influence the information you might gain from another one. So that was probably the key
point of putting in that idea. Anything you wanted to raise or discuss in depth on that?
Yes, I think that's where some of these computational costs start to expand. However, if a given situation
can even be brought to the table of sophisticated inference, then it's well set up to do a lot of
interesting analyses. And then the other directions that you specified, empirical evaluation of active
versus alternative sampling methods and identifying appropriate cost functions. So what about these?
Yeah. So I think the empirical evaluation, I think if you were to convince probably a broader
community of this is a useful thing to do, then one of the things you'd have to do would be to show
that it outperforms in a very clear way of the schemes that you might want to use. I think there are good
principle theoretical reasons to see how this offers some benefits. However, it may be that if you're
dealing with a very non-linear problem, that the cost of even doing all the computations to work out
what I should do next might exceed the process of actually just doing it or sampling at random. One of
the things I found quite interesting is that actually when for the first couple of simulations in the
paper, the random sampling is actually not much worse than choosing the data very carefully. And one of the
reasons for that is that random sampling will tend to give you a fairly uniform distribution over the points you sampled.
And assuming there's uniform uncertainty initially, that's actually a perfectly sensible thing to do.
So part of this is not just about evaluating it for the sake of it or to prove that the theoretical results
translate into something empirical. It's not just about benchmarking, but it's also about finding where
are the places where it can be most useful. Clearly, we have to have some sort of addressable way of
generating the data, we have to be able to say, I'm going to sample over here or over here, with a set of
uniform unlabeled data points that there's no way of selecting between that have no spatial or other metric
involved. That's going to be a much harder thing to do. In fact, it's going to be an impossible thing to do if
there's no sensible way of defining your policy. So I suppose the key thing here is thinking about when
is this approach useful? When will it actually help to resolve uncertainty? And in many cases, it might not,
if there is no difference in the information gain between different options I might take, or if that difference is
more or less the same as what I might get using another strategy, it may be more computationally efficient to use another
sort of strategy.
That's very interesting. And the paper is set up accordingly to this
development from the random uniform to the max ent to the full epistemic gain. And so each of those are
actually sampling policies that can be compared. And I guess to...
But they're not just sampling policies, they're also sampling situations that I might be in.
So if I'm in the sort of situation where ambiguity varies, then it's no longer sensible to use a
maximum entry type approach. So ultimately, you could argue that this formulation automatically accounts
for these different situations that if I'm... if my model is good enough as an explanation of the world,
and how do I make sure it's good enough? I make sure it's good enough by sampling appropriately
during those inferences. But if it's good enough that I now have a sense of how the variance
changes as a function of where I might sample, if I know where I'm uncertain, where I'm not,
then each of these things automatically becomes a contributory factor. Whereas if I don't know these
things, or I think the situation is one in which things are completely uniform, then this will now
reduce back to one of the earlier approaches we were talking about. And if there's no benefit anywhere in
terms of cost, no benefit in terms of the entropy I might be able to resolve in terms of
predictive entropy, and if the ambiguity is the same everywhere, then ultimately this is a random
sampling approach and we'll reduce back to that. So in a sense, all of these things are versions of
the same general problem. But the situations in which I might benefit from employing different parts of
this are those in which there is difference in ambiguity, in which there is difference in predictive
entropy, in which there is difference in cost. And so it all comes back to the model and whether I've
got a good model of my world and my world complies with these different sorts of features.
Yes, it shifts the focus from summary performance on a previously acquired batch to more granular
outcomes in a sampling-driven regime.
Yeah, this is kind of a real ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
get data on and then how would you assess the cost benefits preferences and the epistemic value
associated with that so that moves it from not just out of sample sense making but puts action
up in front of getting that out of sample sample yes and even you could you could reframe that as
being a decision as to what should it even be within sample versus out of sample and at each
step I'm just bringing more things into the sample if it's still valuable to do so
Fraser do you have any last thoughts or questions I have two questions one of which is actually I
am familiar with them relatively familiar with sophisticated inference of it being a you know
a matter consideration of not just beliefs about policies but beliefs about what I would believe
in certain states and so on could you just very quickly recapitulate the potential advantages that
this had in this particular situation I that sort of went a little bit over my head if you don't mind
yeah so it's the particular place I was thinking about this is so imagine you don't use a sophisticated
inference scheme and you want to say okay I'm going to follow up after my intervention at two different
times where am I going to put those two points and if you see that each point is effectively being a
separate decision where do I put follow up point one and where do I put follow up point two if you're
doing this in a non sophisticated way then the optimal point but both of those follow-up time
points is at the same point and it's the point where I've got the most uncertainty however if I take a
sophisticated inference approach then I would say okay if I put the first follow-up time here that would
resolve my uncertainty my beliefs would be much more precise about that time point so the second one I should
put somewhere else and and that means you can start to think about this and plan this before you even start
doing the experiment it also I mean you can see them serially like that but also it matters in terms of
way but in relative to one another so you might not need to put the first follow-up point right in the middle if it's better to have it slightly
earlier to characterize that bit of the function so that you can put the other one slightly late
and so it is just having a sense of how each of these things would change my beliefs in such a way
that I can then take account of that when when dealing with the other choice and you could roll
that out for a whole series of potential future follow-up points and sampling decisions right right so
that I mean that clearly does give us a sense of maybe higher order considerations then excellent stuff yeah
my my only other question was with respect to the issue of you know affording computational
tractability and affordability and so on has had you seen any you know potential ins or avenues to
maybe instead of things like sophisticated inference to use federated inference and sort of belief sharing
approaches where perhaps we have you know several agents communicating amongst themselves in a joint sort of
free energy minima minimization scheme with respect to this approach I'm very interested on you know in whether that would be
applicable here and to what extent perhaps it would be yeah just very interested on that issue no that's a very interesting point
you know at a very simplistic level I suppose being able to share beliefs when different agents have different vantage points is is one of the most obvious examples of that so if I'm the
I'm if I know what's over here and you know what's over there then there's no point both of us looking in both locations if we're able to share our beliefs directly about what's happening in each of those locations so you can
some with much fewer data points or many fewer data points if someone else is sampling some of the other ones and by optimizing a shared generative model or passing messages that allow you to communicate
then then that can be massively beneficial
if you were to put a clinical trial analogy on that you might imagine that being equivalent to a multi-center trial
something where different groups across different centers or countries
are jointly contributing to different parts of that sample space
so that they can jointly optimize a model of how effective a treatment is
yes well I had the thought as well that you could even we touched on this the issue of you know well
how to sample or you know where my where my prize should be for where I sample and so on
we can see how people have done it before and do that you could have some sort of you know imitation scheme
where you say okay well I'm going to have a certain number of agents yeah exactly so yeah that was just an interesting
avenue that I thought was worthwhile to think about yeah and that idea of having habits passed down from others
may feed into that as well because now as we were saying maybe that sometimes the computationally efficient thing to do is to adopt a policy that will always lead to the same sort of something rather than have to compute the policy in you each time so form sort of amortized policy selection which is effectively prior habits or
or biases or biases or empirical prize over what I should do that potentially resolve these problems without me having to even start to think about what I might see
yeah that really cuts down on it doesn't it doesn't eliminate it but very much delimits the problem of you know where do your prize come from for these certain things so yeah very good stuff
well Thomas do you have any last comments or thoughts or or how do you see the active data sampling going from here
um that's a it's a good question isn't it um where's it going to go from here I mean I suppose it in a way this is the same sort of themes that have come up in a lot of up to influence research
research um it I think it's going to be interesting over the next few years seeing how clinical trial methodology develops
I think there's been a lot more focus in recent years on things like Bayes adaptive clinical trials
possibly some of these relatively old ideas about how to optimize experimental design might be coming back
in those sorts of settings you know particularly in settings where where there's quite a rapid change in evidence and understanding
of evolving situations pandemics and or epidemics and the like these things become very very relevant
so it'll be interesting to see how things develop along those lines and whether they end up adopting approaches
like that we've sort of outlined here um but I think it's also as a lot of what we've discussed has been
the sort of generic issues around how we sample data as well um one of the difficult issues I think in
a lot of machine learning and approaches is the the approach of dealing with very very large data sets
um which are computationally costly to acquire costly to collect and and not necessarily the
mode and there may be in some circumstances but but in general may not be the most efficient way of
dealing with the underlying inference problem um certainly not the most energetically efficient
um so I think there'll be some interesting approaches thinking about how best to optimize that process
and whether part of the process is not just optimizing the algorithms that do the um inference
based upon those data but actually optimizing the way in which those data are selected in the first place
and that's what we do and what we behave
Awesome, Frasier?
I only want to say thank you very very much um Thomas my uh this this carefully crafted you know um facade of
my relative uh you know uh I'm extremely grateful to be here and it's been just amazing so um although it
is uh early for me but uh thank you very much it's been most of my life and uh hope to do it again
well thank you I enjoyed learning about um relevance realization
thank you and maybe you said all this to link something
awesome thank you again Thomas thank you Frasier and and Chris and see you all next time bye
um





Thank you.