SPEAKER_00:
All right.

The next recorded talk is 50 Minutes Long by Shager Raman, Humanity's Story, A Search for Moral Clarity.

Hi, everybody.

So I'll be going over what I'm calling humanity's story, a search for moral clarity.

And I'll get into kind of what that cheeky title means.

Going over kind of myth, morality, narrative, self-understanding, and the meaning of life.

And that one was too far, but I guess not too much farther than what I'm claiming.

So yeah, before we get started, I just want to give a big thank you to the Active Inference Institute for all the work they do.

It's been super rewarding and engaging to be a part of.

I put my information here, so feel free to reach out if anything piques your interest or bothers you or you have to correct anything, feel free to give me a shout.

So we'll be discussing a few things, as I mentioned.

So one of the big roles that I feel Active Inference can, one of the ways that it can at least intuitively scale

into human culture, first of all, is through our use of symbols, what makes us unique as a species can be understood semiotically or through symbols.

And the road there, as I make the case in myth of objectivity is through morality, largely through by codifying norms and expectations.

which again ties very nicely into active inference, I believe.

The last way is through narrative.

And specifically, I'll be talking about, kind of at a meta level, the narrative of modern narrative.

And, you know, why are we doing this?

You know, it's, you know, epistemic reasons, interesting as it is.

But also, I think that kind of applying a rigorous framework to humanity specifically, particularly as we get into narrative, we'll see it,

more broadly tackle some other areas of humanity.

This is necessary, I feel, for cultural cohesion, something generally lacking these days with partisan and polarizing the nature of our culture at the moment and our politics.

And so it'll achieve, hopefully, at least understand the outlines for cultural cohesion and things like social and personal integration.

And I'll do this by, as I mentioned, by expanding upon my myth of objectivity hypothesis.

And so my own road to becoming interested in the free energy principle and active inference was being disillusioned with the economics paradigm, finding it to be, as I'm sure other folks were,

insufficient to describing human behavior, even through the kind of quote unquote narrow lens of the marketplace, conceiving people as a neoclassical framework does as utility maximizing individual agents who are well versed in what their own preferences and interests are, it's quite unrealistic.

to say the least.

But behavioral economics didn't really do it for me either.

It also held up this neoclassical idea of rationality as a goal standard.

And you can see that with some of the recommendations, the way we should

constantly default to 401 s. Maybe that makes sense, but it comes up with that advice.

It justifies that advice using the principle of stationarity, meaning an agent's preferences should not change over their lifetime, which, of course, is not realistic.

And so speaking of behavioral paradigms that are lacking,

At first, I thought, well, the neoclassical model on its own isn't interesting.

Maybe we can marry that with some views of moral philosophy, because I'm sure moral philosophers have a much better view of humanity.

That's what I thought.

So here are a few different moral philosophies that maybe some of you folks are aware of, maybe others not.

But kind of briefly, deontology, utilitarianism are traditional from the Enlightenment era, going back to Kant and Stuart Mill.

paradigms of moral philosophy.

Interpretivism is a bit more recent, but I think it's still been around for quite some time.

And the last one is just a couple examples of some Eastern philosophy.

And so when we think about, I guess the question I'll pose to those listening is, what type of thermodynamic systems in terms of their adaptability, how do we characterize these various different systems?

Are they single equilibria?

Are they steady states?

Are they maybe chaotic?

Maybe they don't reach equilibrium.

How do we think about these?

Um, so firstly deontology, uh, and utilitarianism, um, and you know, if you're not familiar with them, um, the word I'll come explain it, but, um, the ontology and utilitarianism, um, I view as single equilibrium, even though they are, uh, different, um, they seem to have one, um, kind of one unifying, uh, mistake, which is, you know, the environment or kind of context.

doesn't change, or in other words, there is no uncertainty in these systems that they assume by their prescriptions of morality and moral philosophy.

So deontology assumes there are a certain set of rules that you should never violate, that never change over time.

So maybe thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal, et cetera, et cetera.

There's no conditions under which those should be violated.

And utilitarianism.

This is all of your actions are based, their morality at least, is evaluated based upon the impact that they'll have on the aggregate welfare of others.

So this is going to feature, for instance, in The Good Place for those who watched it.

Problem with both of these is that, in a word, it's uncertainty.

There's no epistemic forging.

There's no model for how agents come to learn, OK, what are the rules, maybe the deontic rules that I should follow?

What are the ways that my actions impact others?

What is that process of socialization, that kind of awareness, the empathy, all the things that

Should I read a book?

Should I read fiction?

How should I speak to people?

All these are essentially epistemic tasks, learning tasks that are not featured into these twin systems.

And I'll get into perhaps what this reveals about Western society.

kind of spoiler alert, but this is the kind of analytical bias of Western society, I think, revealing itself in deontology and utilitarianism specifically.

So interpretivism, this comes out of postmodernism, I believe, or at least it was re-brought into

the dialogue following modernism into postmodernism etc etc so it says essentially kind of rejecting these uh analytical reductions single equilibrium as I've presented it here um you know frames of moral philosophy and says that well it's based on the agent's interpretation of their behavior you know what are the context for their actions also how do they interpret their actions Etc Etc

of course it's an important element of morality um the kind of classification that at least i would label is chaotic right so if if we're just saying it's up to someone's interpretation well how should they interpret it um should everyone interpret it differently is everyone's interpretation is equally accurate how should we you know yada yada and the point is that it's not super helpful for society to um as a

approach to morality.

So final two, Confucianism and Taoism.

I see them as being adaptive, it being steady state, focused on the kind of rituals and behaviors, not content specifically, not focused on particular deontics, and not kind of hyper-focused on the impact of behaviors to others.

Well, that can be a component as can interpretation, but it's really about the emphasis of these two paradigms, kind of inherently acknowledging

that the world is changing, that society is changing, and yet the goal of morality at both personal and social level is to find coherence.

So it's still privileging some kind of equilibria, some kind of harmony, but not how you get there.

And I'll get into how it does that.

with active inference.

So before active inference, what I would say is that Taoism and Confucianism, they come from a tradition that Carl Jung would label as the mythological construct of the cosmic human or cosmic man, a.k.a.

the symbolic self, which is the term I'll use for going forward because it ties into my theme of symbolic agents, et cetera.

So the point is that Carl Jung, after surveying, doing a cross-cultural analysis of various different mythologies and traditions, found that this particular, what he called archetype, reemerged.

And essentially, the cosmic human

was the perspective that we were all kind of connected to one another, not only to other people, but to the cosmos and to the world in general.

And our actions do have consequences because of that inherent interconnections.

Moreover, we do have a certain responsibility to the world as a whole, to other people, because of our place as a kind of a node in this hierarchy.

This is where I'm going with this.

It allows, as you can see, an area both for the characteristic states of the ways to minimize uncertainty using both that epistemic and exploitative paradigm of active inference.

But it does so specifically by conceiving this broad view of the self.

And so here, of course, is how it connects to active inference.

So active inference, unlike the neoclassical framework and unlike other

single equilibrium approaches to social science and the science in general, it allows knows to communicate both with spatially and temporally.

And so kind of over time, an individual passive information to itself, or to kind of quote unquote, it's its future self.

And in some ways, it's its past self in terms of goals.

But the stealth is not a stationary construct.

It is something that is constantly seeking what other nodes are included in my hierarchy, what other selves are including myself.

And the symbolic self is an example of our ability to explicate all these different nested nodes.

So our...

The result of us being a symbolic agent is that every time we meet someone who says they're Canadian, well, if we haven't met this person before, our model of what it means to be Canadian now include that person.

We now have a instance of,

the general concept of a Canadian, of that kind of general archetypes.

That means that the model we have of Canadian, whether or not we are Canadian, we have the ability to compute, to constantly compute what the self is, and by virtue, what the other is.

And so the kind of road, the trajectory that I outline, that kind of brought us to here, and what it means and all that, I draw from our social bias.

So what are some instinctual, impulsive elements that first started to see human society expand outward, laterally, or even over time?

Well, at least laterally, at least within a specific time.

I make the case that it's social bias, something that we are inherently born with.

Although we are not born racist per se, we are born with a specific bias, and that's accent bias or shibboleth.

It does seem to be something that emerges in utero when we have preference for pronunciations, for vocal accents over others, those we are more familiar with.

And while that's often negative, it does have clear biological benefits.

Of course, that's why it exists, and that's why it persists today.

And secondly, what do we do with a society that's based on people with the same accents?

Well, that's an inherently unstable one, one that's not super adaptive, although it is extensive and allows for greater cooperation.

It's unstable because it allows for deviance, free-riding, things like that.

So enter morality, enter morals.

And so here now we're connected in this symbolic node way by codifying those expectations, by minimizing surprise, using morality.

So this is my myth of objectivity.

You're supposed to behave cooperatively.

You're supposed to follow these norms by virtue of where you're

you've grown up you know that is social bias that is chivalrous um evidently you are not doing that um so how do i deal with that surprise well over time of course that model you have um the shared model you have of um you know that's based on identifying with those like you it starts to wear thin starts to break down and so in comes morality as a way to stabilize um to

offer a kind of a hood that you place on um deviance and that you can then you know use to shame and guilt um into aligning with the shared model um or of course there's punishment and ostracization and other things right but that's what the the tool that morality probably had in the uh police scene and continues to have with us today

All right, OK, that third leg is, OK, so if this is the self, what are we modeling off of?

So we have the internal model, active inference.

We have the Markov blanket that screen between us and the world.

So then we have the external states.

So once we have symbolized the self, what is the world?

What exactly are we modeling off of?

Sometimes it's the world, you can say.

OK, let's think about farming.

Think about someone who was born and raised as a farmer.

The land will feature very prominently in their model of the world.

Think about a hunter.

The land will figure.

The world itself, the physical world,

will mean something.

However, it won't mean everything.

So what are some other things that will constitute the world?

Probably the other.

So social bias, of course, works into that.

There's those who sound like you.

There's those who are not like you.

So by virtue of having a bias means that you're biased away from other people.

And that's why we don't like to admit that we have biases.

And that's why we were troubled when people tell us that we're biased.

So that's one example.

Over the trouble with the other, and you can think about the Cold War, think about any time that a country is under attack, the other becomes prominent, becomes salient.

The in-group binds together.

And for a while, whether it's 9-11 or whether it's World War II, there's great social cohesion.

Trouble of war's end, enemies become as salient.

And then what happens?

Well, this is how we enter mythology.

Not that these things are entirely separable.

There's a lot of overlap.

But for our purposes, if we think of mythology and we start to think of narrative, what we're talking about is in the language of Michael Levin and Chris Fields, we're explicating the reference frame.

we're exploiting the measure, the kind of yardstick of what's good, what's bad, whether as according to Mike Levin, the frame of reference that allows agents, whether bacteria or complex organisms, to judge whether they should approach something, whether they should avoid it, is an internalized

ordnance, ordnance plane or frame of reference.

What we're doing eventually, once we get to myth, once we get to

explicit morality, once we get to narrative, is we're explicating that frame of reference.

We're saying, OK, these group of people say are evil.

We were all descended from this ancestor, from Hercules, from Beowulf, from this half man, half God.

We're explicating these reference frames to gain cultural solidarity, to gain cultural cohesion.

And so I mentioned this.

This is more going into my myth of objectivity hypothesis, but I'm just going to briefly show it because I would love to get some feedback from the folks listening to this.

So this is how I have, well, I hope to formalize how we

became symbolically literate, if you will, so that kind of path from shibboleth to morals to, you know, full symbolic agent.

And so I just have kind of an agent here, assuming that another agent B has a fellow X and therefore shares the model of the world, has some error.

The error reaches some threshold.

And then suddenly, if then else, you end up with a new model.

it eventually leads you to modeling the prediction error.

So we have a somewhat familiar equation, but modified.

But instead of taking where the posterior is conditional on,

traditionally conditional on the model, here in place of that I have an objectified error.

So the point is that you have these categories of, whereas typically the prediction error will just be whatever kind of noise that you experience that are not in line with the prediction, and either you'll select a different prediction model, a different model at that point, or you just assume it away as noise.

In this case, there is an explicit model of error.

So when someone decides to steal food, when someone decides to not help with child-rearing, when someone decides... I can't think of any moral deviations.

But the point is that there is a specific set of

deviations from the typical predictions versus just being surprised generically.

So it's a modeled version of error that then allows an agent A to view a given agent as possessing the ability to select between adherence to a higher level or superordinate

model um now an objective model um of the group or a narrow one so they can comply or they can deviate that's the c and d um subscriber and the point is that um or you know i guess one one takeaway is that okay this is metacognition um that kind of upper level superordinate g um and this is transjective meaning that it's not um

purely objective.

It's framed as objective from the point of view of the agent, but that only means that they're transcending their own subjectivity and the subjectivity of the agent by conceiving that they have the ability to select between a high-level or a lower-level model.

And so in this kind of simple way, at least at this level of explanation, we can see how from an active inference point of view, we could have gotten to something like objective morality, and more importantly, something like free will.

And of course, it varies different significance.

Again, I view this as the kind of hypothesis hiding in plain sight.

Why?

Because morality is something that we're so impulsive about, something we have so many emotional ties to.

For instance, we're constantly claiming to be the victim, we're constantly looking for

people who victimize.

And yet, we can't really agree on what the specific contents of morality should be, even though when I mentioned deontology, I'm sure there was folks listening who had ideas of what could be deontic meaning forever, forever there.

So I went over some of this.

There is social biasing morality.

There's an impulse to do this.

some kind of research that i've done um in the economics going back to that neoclassical paradigm although i was kind of dumping on it earlier um what these single equilibrium analyses allow for uh is the ability to say okay where does this model break down where does this model fall so you might say it falls down everywhere well it's not quite true um people are uh salvaged they do have um

stationary preferences, at least for a long enough time for that model to be useful.

However, it does fall down in certain interesting ways.

One interesting failure of the single equilibrium economics paradigm is the need for social trust.

And so social trust means that we have certain expectations.

We have expectations that a company selling something sells what they promise to sell.

It means that you can trust the market system, trust the institutions in the market that you inhabit and engage in economic activity.

So you think that at all levels, you essentially need it.

You essentially need to take medicine and understand it.

Hope the people are so ethically inclined because, of course, if

they do something bad, they might not get caught for it, yada, yada.

The point is that there needs to be some sort of agreement on social trust.

So it's an example of how morality seeps its way into something, even as

even as intended to surgically remove all humanity from the paradigm, all morality, all essence of morality from the study of economics, social trust and morality seeps back into it.

The same thing with linguistics.

We'll get into this one too much now, but the idea of transcendental signified, so it's a way of

structuring otherwise kind of elusive um instead of symbols uh linguistic systems um we always have something there's always as i mentioned there's always god there's always

some sort of myth that's tying everything together.

Even in secular society, we don't have uppercase G God the way we might have in the past.

There's a lot of different religions, a lot of institutions, and probably agnosticism and secularism is increasingly dominant.

So what do we have in this case?

We have democracy, we have science, we have other

essentially kind of mantras, if you will, that require this kind of shared belief element, which has very moral characteristics but is kind of tied back into a kind of shared belief system that then heathers our norms and expectations to and allows for us.

They kind of have social and political dialogue

Yeah, I spent a bit of time on the mythophobicity hypothesis.

Quickly, I don't know if I'll have time for this entire run through, but once we have established that

we achieved a symbolic capacity of what is the next step?

Do we just walk around shouting symbols?

No, we have narratives that attach to our symbols.

It's the way we piece them together.

It's how we connect one symbol to another at a very crude way of describing this.

There was a recent paper on narrative theory and active inference.

which I encourage folks to go out there and seek.

It covers episodic memory, it covers narrative identity, so some interesting topics throughout on narrative.

The one thing that I wanted to add is it makes the claim that narrative is for the future, it's for prediction, just as many things in active inference are.

However, I think that you could equally say that in order to establish a productive prediction, we write narratives about our past.

So we can separate the person who we were in high school, the person we were in our 20s or 30s.

We tell stories about that, about our last job, in order to

draw a boundary between us and that person.

So it's a way of inheriting and inhabiting various selves, but not over-identifying with the past one.

So I just want to add that because I don't think it was covered in that paper.

um and so here i have a couple different of the core elements of narrative and why i think that it it speaks so well in the the narrative paradigm so i think the story describes the set of you know the underlying events um so it's not explicitly what's in the narrative so if we read a novel um and you know the novels are short story about

um you know harry potter it's uh exactly what's happening in that version of harry potter maybe he's um you know already at school doesn't kind of go into his backstory necessarily um but this but the the story is all the things all the underlying events that happen that are related that are necessarily depicted in that narrative um

And so this is essentially the generative process.

So it's the outside world that's being modeled in the narrative and in the causal chain that is the plot.

So the point is that, and we're going to kind of quickly, but the point is that when discussing or when analyzing analytically

core elements of narrative.

A lot of the themes that emerge are kind of similar to at least some of the key elements of Back to the Conference.

Yeah, let's skip this one for now.

Yeah, so one thing I think it's important to notice is that there is implicit versus explicit narratives.

And so there's the idea of feature placing.

So this is essentially how

Vocalizations emerge prior to symbolic cues.

So other animals have verbal expressions, but they're non-symbolic.

A feature placement is one single verbalization.

That might be some way that we can think about how

language began.

And so essentially, going back, the concepts need context.

If you just saw fire, what does this mean?

Does it mean that I'm fired from a job?

Does it mean that something is burning?

Or does it mean that someone said something that was really cool, and I'm just seeing fire in that kind of slang context?

So explicating the explicit, so here

I just wanted to raise the instance of where creating narratives

Although everything can be narrated, not everything is narrated.

So there could be unconscious events that happened in your past or childhood, or even during the day that you hadn't really thought about.

So various different therapeutic techniques address that.

So internal failing systems is one where you address different emotional states or different psychological states and try to personify those and try to kind of give them

um uh you know abstract structure in your mind by engaging with them you know through journaling or through uh dialogue with a therapist um so that's internal family systems there's also expressive writing similarly and so if we think about um one of the impacts that um narrative can have that that's one and sometimes it's good to um

Sometimes it's good, or sometimes it's just the fact that we don't have narratives.

We don't have narratives about all of our feelings every day.

I don't think we would be able to narrate everything that's happening to us.

If we think about meditation and mantras,

The idea there is that, for a time at least, we shouldn't narrate everything, or at least we shouldn't accept the first order narration, which we think about mindful meditation and focusing on the breath as opposed to following our thoughts.

For anyone who's practiced meditation, you'll know that sometimes we should just be quiet and not listen to the narratives that show up in our brain.

They have a couple different, obviously, examples.

So here what I'm talking about is, and as I mentioned on the previous slide, or I had it written down.

I don't know if I spoke to it.

But what we're talking about here is that the problem is of cultural narratives.

This is most known as master narrative or grand narratives that traditionally would have been the purview of mythology and religion in more modern times.

is kind of constructed um in other ways and so um as i mentioned from our nomadic multi-band past um to even agrarian societies um and then kind of coming into the universal age

these started from these fully integrated narratives where a particular nomadic hunter-gatherer tribe would have a single master cultural narrative.

At least that's what we understand.

It's our best guess is that this was the case or wasn't.

Which religion am I part of?

I'm part of my tribe's religion.

You know, why did we catch food today and not yesterday?

There was an answer from the shaman for that.

It was fully integrated.

The second epoch was leading up to the Axial Age when the universalizing religion, setting the stage for Christianity, Hinduism, Taoism that I mentioned.

So for a very long time, this is following from 10,000 years ago when we started farming.

Perhaps up until recently, we had these dominant religions that essentially took over the cultural sphere.

um those are the universal narratives religion areas that i'm sure folks are aware of and most recently in um weird societies or western societies western educated industrialized rich and democratic um that's an acronym for for weird there um in my case here is that these are you know we're large in a culturally fragmented environment

So earlier when I mentioned single equilibrium analysis, neoclassical economics, but specifically deontology and utilitarianism, those are all examples of, from I think a thermodynamic systems point of view, from an active inference point of view, this would be kind of a very single equilibrium ways of looking at the world.

And why are they?

Well, according to Joseph Henrique, and I think according to some similar analysis from Ian McGilchrist, this is because Western people are distinctly individualistic.

They're a bit more left brain centered than at least the axial age portion of society.

So those in traditionally enough settled societies that are more gestalt and more right brain oriented would think of things a bit more holistically rather than as kind of reductive.

So the good, of course, there's many benefits for left brain thinking.

It's more individual, it's more analytical, and it'll be a bit more geared towards science versus mythology versus stories and narrative.

But what is it missing?

Well, it can make a lot of mistakes and not kind of

random mistakes, a specific type of mistake, which leads to reductionism, which is how we ended up with, which might be according to these views, how we ended up with some of the paradigms that we did.

And so the fragmentation we can understand along these three different dimensions.

And so one is aesthetic, the next is institutional, and the last is objective.

And so this is essentially how I see our master narrative currently broken down.

And of course, there could be additional ways, but here's three ways as a starting point to understand the cultural narrative.

and how specifically it's fragmented.

So aesthetic, we have the kind of modern era, the postmodern era.

And now some people are calling the better modern era.

It's maybe a bit too soon to turn on it.

However, I do think it's super interesting, especially in the light of the free energy principle, which I'll hopefully have time at the end to kind of touch on.

The second one is our institutional.

narrative, so the economic framework, how we should distribute wealth, what does that say about us, and what's the most, quote unquote, efficient way, but what are the narratives around our economics, what's our narratives around our politics?

And finally, there's this idea of objectivity still kind of creeping in.

So what are the, quote unquote, true narratives out there?

And so, you know, a reasonable question is, okay, this is, you know, we all have kind of our own stories.

Perhaps there's still vague senses of a master narrative.

And I think, you know, there always are, there always kind of might be at least some emergent master narratives.

by virtue of us kind of all occupying the same, at least, digital space, the same kind of time, we'll all converge on some things.

However, without a kind of coherent or more of like a religious story that we

perspective that we had in the past where the narrative is not just, okay, we're this third rock from the sun, we're revolving around space, and we're

you know victim to to laws and um this is what happens to be happening with society um what we lose with the kind of Korean cosmic narratives of the past um the type of psychological um coherence um so where do we fit into this world you know the idea of going back to kind of cosmic band you know where is our place in the universe um what is the kind of personal meaning for me that's where a um

tighter narrative kind of more intentional master narrative um comes into play so our current fragmentation um leads to personal anxiety can lead to social anxiety um and it can lead to kind of the polarization uh and partisanship and the results are fragmentation institutional misalignment so whether

the company you're working for shares your values, whether they're working on something that you find deeply meaningful, that is deeply meaningful for your identity and your values.

That's what I mean there by misalignment.

So in terms of aesthetics, as I mentioned, the period owner is sometimes called metamodernism.

And so that kind of gets into

the idea of genres, meaning that we have plenty of good narratives available for us to consume.

That does include classic genres, but the problem is that they're all genres.

So we're all consuming different

content, we're all consuming it through different media.

Even in times past, not even too far past, we would watch TV at the same time.

You watch the same movies because they're in the movie theater.

That's where you could, that's the only place you could watch them up until recently.

Now we're watching movies at different times moving from movies from 20, 30 years back, 50 years back.

And essentially, the fragmentation has gone up an explanation.

As I mentioned, there's an analytical orientation.

And so here, I think it's worth noting that along with the fragmentation that has occurred in weird societies, along kind of side that

of loneliness that happens um with the rise of uh the analytical world is some great some great literature um and so one of the reasons i argue that this came about was specifically because um once mythology once religion stopped serving the role that it did um that left in particular artists in particular those kind of aesthetically inclined to seek out

art, to create art in some cases, to fill those gaps for offering a narrative, for answering the questions, the big questions that were typically answered by those institutions.

And so kind of going back to

My quest, what we're kind of after here, is we're looking for greater cultural cohesion.

We're aiming for better personal and social integration.

So I argue that these pieces are connected.

And I'd argue that

if the free energy principle has told us one thing, that agents minimize uncertainty.

However, if it tells us another thing, it's that one way to verify any claim about the self-organizing system, it's to not look at one paradigm assignment.

It's to synthesize various different views.

So what we can glean from that is essentially a modern approach, which is to not necessarily ensure that everyone in culture, everyone in a particular society is consuming the same content or media, but it's to highlight certain aspects of it that each person can find meaning and the right type of meaning.

in their own content.

And even if we achieve that through different areas, we'll all be experiencing something similar with each of our traditions or interests.

And once we've identified the certain components or make the case for certain components that

answer maybe some important questions from an activist point of view and allow greater visibility into that uncertainty minimizing process at a cultural scale.

So here, I think poetry is a great example.

And because of it, it reaches everything from the senses, from its sounds to its visuals.

to its deeper symbolic meaning.

And I think a great example of that is T.S.

Eliot, the great many references he makes in his work, and also the kind of poetic conventions he adheres to makes it very, in some cases, accessible.

works that he offers.

And so whether it's TS Eliot or Kendrick Lamar, in each case, what these artists are constructing is a executed symbolic self, an executed number of different nodes

in a hierarchy that are connected with all these various references in a particular song that can be made clear.

For instance, in this website, it's genius.

So you can see where the different lines, in this case, Kendrick Lamar has and what the references were.

And so, in a sense, what you experience when we read poetry or we read a work of fiction that has deep references, deep cultural references like this, it's constructing an extensive self, bringing coherence to it and to everyone who listens to it.

And by kind of calling it out, you're able to

share it almost as if it's a greater work of literature in the past, as folks would.

And so that, I think, is a few examples of ways we can start to apply a rigorous framework to the humanities.

It tells what literature does for us, why it does what it does for us, and parse through some of the components that

make it meaningful to us and allow us to use literature in ways that I think it was originally intended to and in past times has.

So I'll leave it there.

And once again, feel free to reach out to me with my contact information.

And please follow my sub stack and let me know if anyone has any feedback.

And I just want to thank Daniel Friedman again, and all the folks at the Active Inference Institute, and Carl Fristen for

this content and the discussions here.

So thanks again.