SPEAKER_00:
all right that has concluded the live presentations section of the symposium i'm now going to play the pre-recorded videos so one second to rearrange get it in position

now we'll continue with the pre-recorded videos hopefully all of them concatenated into the next few hours okay this talk is by leonardo mola rodriguez groove as the musical glue for social bonding


SPEAKER_01:
Ladies and gentlemen, hello!

Welcome to today's talk on groove as a musical glue for social bonding.

My name is Leonardo Mulo Rodriguez, I'm a PhD student at Simter.

And this is a neuroscientific and cross-cultural perspective.

Now, I'm a bit self-conscious by the fact that the only audio you'll be hearing today is my voice, no music.

But do books sing?

No, we're doing a deep dive into the scientific literature, not musical theatre.

Maybe musical theatre in the future, of my active inference.

Who am I?

My name is Leonardo Mulo Rodriguez.

I'm a PhD student at the Cambridge Institute for Music Therapy Research, CIMTR, and my focus is on sleep music for dementias.

And if you're curious, how does this tie in with dance ability, where it relates to musical entrainment, more specifically slow beats.

I'm also a composer, music producer, and musician.

So how does Groove foster social bonding?

There's a little outline of today's presentation, Groove and its relationship to Spotify's danceability, the neuroscience of it, the social bonding, the cross-cultural aspect, flow states in music, what musical features define Groove, an active inference application of Groove, and a little update to Spotify suggestion.

So what is Groove?

In essence, it's the apex of an inverted U-shaped relationship between rhythmic complexity and grooviness, and pleasure if you wish.

Grooviness is at the moderate level of rhythmic complexity, which is, rhythmic complexity is, if you use the musical term, syncopation is the amount to which the rhythm deviates from the meter or the beat, or

Alternatively, you can think of the tempo.

The beat is a tempo.

And it relates to how certain you are of your predictions of that rhythm.

So groove is a pleasurable sensation of wanting to move the body to music driven by rhythmic patterns that balance predictability

and surprise there's another study looking at the same thing and we'll see into the neuroscience in a bit that proves this now spotify's danceability is a measure they use and they define it as so we don't have the the actual computation that they do it's the suitability of a track for dancing based on a combination unknown combination unless you work at spotify

of tempo, rhythm, stability, beat strength, or pulse clarity, and overall regularity.

And this data sets, someone put this on Reddit, and they've looked at a million tracks.

I was like, okay, you beat me in terms of data sets.

And so they've categorized all the musical genres, several musical genres, in terms of as a function of dance ability.

And based on the discussion and

makes sense um on reddit it's more about rhythmic simplicity seems to analyze because it's more of the more danceable music is techno deep house and then you have salsa music which is lower and people in the comments who had salsa dances like oh water what's going on and especially metal heavy rock or hard you know metal fans they were thinking like wait is comedy more danceable than my favorite genre so they're a bit offended with that

At least sleep music makes sense that it's kind of low.

Yeah, so it lacks this relationship between the complexity and predictability.

Fun fact, if you listen to all the million tracks, it will take you seven years and nine months if you listen to it on a 24-7 basis.

Here's my data set.

I compared sleep soundtracks, sleep playlists that are either very popular on YouTube or that I've created my own self or playlists that have millions of subscribers on

Spotify to high energy music such as gym music that has this beast mode playlist has a mini 11 million subscribers or this reggaeton music with reggaeton is a Latin popular dance music very popular here 11 million and this has about 5 million and you see the dance ability is in general higher for this higher energy music compared to sleep music and here compared valence and high energy music is also more positive apparently sleep music is more negative

Anyway, let's dive into the neuroscience of it here.

The main thing I want you to focus on is the fact that.

Beat perception is present in the brain and frequencies

increase their strength at the onset of the pulse.

Here, there are different tempos that we're used to or different speeds between pulses.

And as you see, there is always an increase just after the pulse, regardless of the tempo.

It happens all the time.

And it happens at the level of beta and alpha brainwaves and gamma brainwaves, these higher frequencies.

And it activates these brain regions here, and we'll go a bit more in detail, but it seems it's quite wide range.

And it turns out that we can call these the musical rhythm brain network, because it makes use of the dopaminergic reward system in the brain.

for beat perception and positive affect of groovy music.

And this involves the supramental motor area, premotor area nearby, the putamen, as well as for pleasure and the urge to move to the music, the nucleus accubens and this connection to the medial orbital frontal cortex.

Because we're talking about an auditory stimulus,

auditory regions must be involved, and the cerebellum also for fine motor movements.

It turns out that musical rhythm predictions and surprises are measurable in the brain in two forms.

The first one is about short-term habituation to a rhythm via repetition of a certain rhythm.

And then the deviation from that, the surprising change to that rhythm, is seen here in this paper, where there's this measure called the mismatched negativity, which measures prediction errors in relation to rhythm deviations, changes, or omission, where you don't have that note that used to be in that rhythm.

And the other form

surprises and predictions is by the recruitment of long-term memory or we can talk about it in terms of implicit music theory syntactic knowledge where here regardless of you being told in advance that there will be a non-traditional chord sequence

will be played you will have this sort of mismatched negativity which is more specific because it recruits long-term memory here's called the electric response in the auditory nerve era and um

Yes, that's an interesting aspect.

By traditionally, I mean traditional Western music theory for harmonies.

Here again, we're just looking a bit deeper into this, whereby beta waves we saw earlier, and gamma waves, the high frequency waves we saw earlier in terms of beat perception, are responsible for top down, so the beliefs, the predictions, beta, and the updating, the surprises through the gamma high frequency

activity in the brain.

So another aspect of music is that it's usually done in groups, such as musical performance, appreciation music therapy, or learning about music.

And it turns out that music in groups synchronizes brains.

And this is called interpersonal brain synchrony.

In addition, it recruits the same musical rhythm network that we just saw, with a bit more broadening of it.

It has the amygdala insula, which is usually involved in visceral activity.

And more generally, the prefrontal cortex, the motor areas.

It could involve actually moving if you're performing.

And the basal ganglia in general, which incorporates all the dopaminergic reward system, which

nuclear succubans, dopaminergic system, etc.

Putamen, koret, we saw that earlier.

Now music, the real function of music beyond the auditory cheesecake that Steven Pinker says, it's not just pleasure, not just reward systems, it has to do with social bonding and building trust.

Music is a participatory activity and dancing actually is a way to participate

without any musical virtuosity or even familiarity to the music this is why i call it embodied democratic music participation open tool and fosters joy and social bonding and music strengthens this interact uh interactive rituals you can talk about it in terms of ritual and it's a social tool for enhancing uh groups so as you can see here you start to predict you the beats you see repetitive

motions this induces groove induces dancing to it and this enhances social bonding within this sort of you can frame it within an agent environment system moreover seeing others dance and move encourages dancing so this reinforces the social bonding aspect and this was exemplified here where eyes open

with low tempo, high tempo, high groove, actually increases the collective movement in a group of people listening to music.

And this is what they were measuring here with this cross-wavelet.

And dance promotes also, here interpersonal movement interaction, promotes self-other integration.

It enhances social cohesion

through synchronized movements.

And more specifically, moderate syncopation and low as well.

Also, there's an implication of Parkinson's disease.

Low and moderate syncopation, which is groovy music, does so as well.

It encourages self-other inclusion with social bonding.

And we're talking about music, the groove, and is it applicable to a cross-cultural definition of music?

Well, first, there has been... This is with Japanese music, actually.

There has been an optimal groove tempo range identified, which seems to be...

inverted U-shaped relationship, non-linear relationship with tempo, is this seems to be from 107 to 126 BPM, beats per minute tempo.

And the evolutionary interpretation for this is the fact that it's near 120 BPM, which is the optimal tempo for walking and dancing.

So this is where groove might come into sensory mode, so synchronization is most optimal in that around 120 BPM.

And there are also universals, cross-cultural universals of music, which has been identified using statistics.

And the main aspects that are cross-cultural is beat, dancing, making music in group, percussion, repetitive melodic sequences.

These are musical features that are universal.

Just going a bit deeper into this, they used music from all around these spots.

It's quite a geographically varied data set, although only 304 recordings.

There's millions of music.

But I think it's a nice generalization we can make based on the black box.

So the black box here are musical features that are at least 50% shared globally.

And the most, which are the most, the whiteness is shared.

the most shared of beats, subdivisions by binary, ternary subdivisions, or scales that have up to seven notes.

So this is interesting.

And this was controlled phylogenetically, meaning that this ensured that these musical patterns and associations are not solely due to shared cultural or evolutionary histories.

Another aspect that is cross-cultural

on musical bodily sensations and emotions.

What I want you to focus on here is this correlation.

They asked Asian participants, 500 people, and Western participants, 500 people, to associate emotional labels to musical features.

And there's a very strong correlation, 0.94 between these.

So there's a sort of cross-cultural aspect here.

Obviously, it's not all cultures, maybe.

african latin and uh middle eastern cultures do feel differently but he has just a latin influence that's indeed instrumental sinking in syncopated music which is uh groovy music which here was samba um encourages the urge to dance so groove at least is present in latin american music

Now, musical flow is not restricted to groove.

What is flow?

Flow is a state of absorption, total absorption in an activity.

In other words, the feeling of losing yourself in the moment.

Flow state is usually characterized as a state of emotional resilience against trauma.

And here, emotional expressivity is one of those not groove musical features that induces musical flow.

And here,

The two main things I want you to focus on is the blue histograms, which are states of flow.

Here were performers, piano performers.

And this is a musical feature.

And so there was higher flow during swelling dynamics, so crescendos, decrescendos, which is volume fluctuations, as well as repetition.

of melodies and not only just any melodies but step wise melodies that are not too far apart in terms of distance on the keyboard or in terms of notes so the closer they are blue is again flow states the closer they are the the melodies the more flow inducing they provoke another

musical element that provokes flow, that is not groove, is the narrative arc.

Storytelling, emotional journeys in music.

And this interesting paper by colleague Annie Heidescheit identified stages, emotional stages of the hero's journey, which is a narrative arc found in myths, films, popular films, stories, narratives in general.

They've identified emotional stages of the hero's journey in patients and clients, specifically in this case with eating disorders, but applying to Justin more generally, undergoing music therapy.

So they were doing guided imagery with music, which is a type of music therapy.

And depending on what they're saying, the clients, these themes were identifiable within the hero's journey narrative arc.

So that's very interesting.

And this is very important for music therapists because this informs further the scanning aspect that they usually do in GIM, which is that they try to identify using the music where is the emotional stage that the client and the therapist should start their work, emotional work.

And so this is actually

Emotional journey is actually a concept that is applied by DJs.

They usually talk about energy arcs for their DJ sets.

And it's also very prevalent in film soundtracks.

You know, film soundtracks are using, so music is being used to guide the emotional journey of the audience.

Now,

flow as neural entrainment.

I think it's neural entrainment is evident for beat perception.

We've seen it several times.

Here's more evidence like accurate beat perception increases neural entrainment.

Here it's just saying that beat sensitivity, there's a sort of tempo range where this sensory motor synchronization decreases with very slow tempi.

But here again, beat perception, there's the beat is being identified in a neural activity.

And even if you imagine certain rhythms, these frequencies appear also in the brain activity.

So neuron training with beat perception is clear.

But how about for emotional expressivity and emotional journeys?

Well, this study reconstructed the music that was listened to by the participants from their neural patterns.

It was a combination of EEG and fMRI, a technique that

made use of EEG, fMRI and deep neural networks to reconstruct the music based on the neural activity.

And you can see that not only very impressively resembles quite a lot in terms of spectrogram information, but obviously there's not just rhythm activity or rhythm information that's being displayed, there's more, there's frequency activity.

This takes us to this study that demonstrated that spectral flux is actually the most accurate measure for neural entrainment to music.

And you can see this with this red line.

It's the highest correlation with neural entrainment.

And in addition, they've demonstrated that it is a metric that encompasses amplitude envelope as well as beats.

They have mutual information here.

And spectral flux, or spectral novelty it's called, is a measure of novel energy increases in the frequency spectrum.

So this is an interesting aspect.

Now, nevertheless,

As you can see, other strong neural synchronization musical features, in addition to spectral flux, are tempo range.

So roughly, as you can see here with the orange line, 60 to 120 BPM, high familiarity with music, and pulse clarity, which is to perceive the beats.

So let's keep it simple.

One are the groove's musical features.

Two things.

Moderate rhythmic complexity within an optimal range of around the walking tempo of humans.

These two encompass most of these characteristics.

Syncopation, tempo, microtiming, event density.

This has to do with, and even beat salience has to do with rhythmic complexity.

Slope of attack is a variant of beat saliency.

Low frequency band.

The bass enhances dancing, volume, and then this is the chord progression and that.

Now, keep in mind that sensory motor synchronization is not limited to this groove tempo range.

The sensory motor synchronization tempo range is shown to be between 60 to 180 BPM.

Below and above this, the sensory motor synchronization, which is usually finger tapping or dancing to the beat, decreases, which is probably linked to biomechanical reasons.

However, probably training increases your capacity to do so, to synchronize.

However, the beat perception still

can occur beyond this tempo range.

I recommend watching this YouTube video by Adam Neely which goes into the extremes of beat perception.

Let's apply active inference into a groove.

But first, before we do that, we need to understand that the brain is constantly generating predictions about how the world works in order to minimize the uncertainty about how the world works.

Two, the brain is a layered thing and it balances top-down and bottom-up influences, where higher layers send beliefs about the world down to lower sensory layers, which these sensory layers, as we can see here, actually

send back up sensory stimuli to adjust the beliefs through the mechanism of minimization of prediction errors or minimization of free energy.

Now talk about groove.

Groove balances confident predictions with surprise about the rhythm.

Just reminding you, it is an optimal playing with belief updating about musical rhythms.

Now listening to groove is accessible to groups of people and therefore can become a shared stimulus for motor and emotional synchrony.

And therefore under the active inference framework generates generalized synchrony, which means that people have shared world models, the listeners have shared world models.

And this is depicted here.

with this quote, it is neither a model of my behavior or your behavior, but a model of our behavior, quote by Friston.

And generalized synchrony actually requires flexibility in terms of your higher beliefs.

Because you're trying to model flexibly your collective identity and collective behavior.

Because of this, and the social bonding aspect, I place musical groove on the spectrum of the Rebus hypothesis, which is a relaxed belief under psychedelics.

Meaning that the flattening of the free energy landscape is not as extreme as psychedelics are supposed to do, but musical groove can achieve this through the social bonding.

So dancing to the same music not only increases trust and social bonding, but it also allows for individual creativity.

Compare an expert dancer and a novel dancer.

A novice dancer and an expert won't be having motor mimicry, but they will be sharing emotional synchrony.

And this provides the mechanism for trust and bonding while considering

creativity of individuals.

And you can make use of a federated belief multi person system to model groove as the shared marginal likelihood that people non verbally communicate.

So because idiosyncratic dance moves have been shown to even increase more

uh the social bonding and trust i encourage you next time to take the risk and bust on some moves on the on the dance floor all right so what uh what i want you to consider right now is the current models of the context that encourages dancing yes they say musical properties they have

temporal predictions that you can do.

It induces pleasure, induces arousal and this together with regularity creates the urge to move to the music and this will generate motor planning or policy generation under the active inference framework and this desire to move and in training

The body movements create social connection.

But I'd like to add a bit more to this in terms of contextual factors based on the literature review we're presenting today.

This is a hypothetical contextual factor framework for dance ability.

Basically, groove is the mechanism for dancing, but there are several contextual layers that people, individuals might need to cover

before starting to dance.

For instance, we have two example individuals, a white individual here, this white arrow, who requires seeing other people, their friends, before starting to move.

Whereas this red individual just requires to feel a change in emotions to start wanting to move.

And these layers have a nonlinear relationship with the groove, meaning that your entry level contextual entry level to start dancing might be seeing a friend starting to dance and you might not need familiarity with the music to start dancing, to start connecting to the groove.

Whereas DJs sometimes make use of familiar music.

in their DJ sets to encourage people to start dancing.

They say getting those first three people to dance is always the most difficult part.

And once you have them, the crowd joins and you have a crowd dancing.

So this was modeled with a reduction of entropy to do relatively simply, whereby depending on the distance to the groove, there's a higher entropy level that has a nonlinear relationship with

grooving and K is based on personality and the relationship between each layer.

There's another way of conceptualizing this as the gravity of groove.

The layers are done, I guess.

So implications for Spotify's danceability.

We saw that it's more likely has to do with rhythmic complexity.

Comedy is more danceable than blues apparently, or heavy metal.

Head banging is not as, you know, dancing as laughing.

valence as well.

The most joyful music seems to be a salsa and the less joyful music is sleep.

Maybe Spotify is inspired by the rapper Nas, who has a lyric saying, sleep is a cousin of death.

So let's go beyond this and beyond rhythm and tempo and incorporate what we've been seeing today into danceability.

So if we want to generate a formula,

It goes beyond the stability unknown equation, which is most likely rhythmic simplicity.

We convert with our first.

I want to point you to this study, which asked musicians to perform groovy music.

with simple and complex melodies.

And they showed that there's about 30% occurrence of fast notes, specifically 16th notes, when people perform groovy music.

And this was also confirmed in terms of listeners saying, yeah, that's groovy.

And so here I've just used the optimal groove range and transformed it into seconds.

So you can have an idea.

And too quick for Spotify.

No, I'm just kidding.

You get to see the equation.

So.

What I've done is I made use of spectral flux, which is this spectral novelty, makes use of Fourier transform, and then logarithmic compression to enhance, weaken spectral components.

And then you compute the difference between timeframes in terms of positive energy increases.

And so it measures positive increases in energy.

Event density is another measure that's been used in these studies, and it's the number of events, onsets per a time window.

Here's the groove formula I suggest which is open to your feedback which is 30% of energy onsets that is in the 16th of a note time window divided by a measure that's dependent on the tempo and it measures 4 times the beat because most music is on 4x4 meter music so

I want to give you this quote, dance is an energetic mode of participation for a large population, regardless of age, familiarity with music or instrumental singing virtuosity.

To summarize, we found that groove is a musical mechanism for social bonding through movement and therefore through movement is dance ability, right?

And we can make use of the active inference to model groove as a musical mechanism for generalized synchrony, even as federated beliefs to model individual creativity.

Further works would encourage the usage of other social bonding metrics in music, such as group singing.

chanting is seen around rituals around the world and this has implications for group music therapy life performances and team building music recommender systems etc so please do contact contact me i'm open to collaborate for this uh groove um project and discuss any of your ideas uh we could discuss about musical uh

uh, you know, exchange music if you want.

And I just want to show here my YouTube channel, which explores thanks to the YouTube channel.

I've actually learned how active inference works.

You know, they say teaching is the best way of memorizing.

And in here, for instance, I,

Chris Fields' work in Active Inference with the holographic boundary for social interactions, which could also be a further direction of trying to conceptualize musical groove in that manner.

But shared marginal likelihood is

probably very effective as well.

Thank you so much.

Please do ask me for the references.

I will send them if they have been sent.

Yeah.

I should be on the chat by the way, answering some questions.

Thank you very much for your time.

See you very soon.

Bye bye.

Thanks.