SPEAKER_04:
all right hello everyone so it's uh july 10th 2026 we're here at the active inference institute going through fundamentals of active inference so this is our second week of review we've we've gone through part one of the textbook we're moving into part two we're going to be kicking up with chapter six next week uh and part two is all about kind of active inference proper when we actually begin to put action into the mix

So this is the last session of chapter one review, maybe more general questions and things like that before we do move on to the more regular pace of things again, where we go chapter by chapter.

So this session today, this is an opportunity to ask questions, live questions, or maybe we can go through some of the prerecorded ones as well relating to really anything to do with part one.

So that's what we're all here to do.

I will say before we do that, there's interest.

And indeed, we have been big because we have gone through part one.

There's three parts of the book.

We've gotten somewhat established in terms of the general lay of the land and things like this.

And we now want to think about maybe ways in which you guys and participants at all levels would like to participate in experimenting with things practically.

So I just want to let you all know that we are actually, so Daniel, myself, Andrew, and even Sanjeev are actively thinking about the best way to sort of create those affordances.

As we saw with Daniel's session last time, I'll just share my screen here.

Probably the entire screen is best.

Let me see the big nested things.

Hopefully everyone can see my screen.

I'll just maximize this here.

So we're seeing the coder just now.

As we saw last time, Daniel went over the existing, there is a place where we host the code for the existing code such as it is in GitHub.

And this was really cool.

There's a lot of stuff here.

It's very rich.

Daniel's putting quite a bit of work about

You know how it is that you can palpate and go through this at your own pace.

It is a bit overwhelming at first, maybe for people who are new.

So it's very powerful.

So pretty much all of the code is here for all of the chapters.

Very cool stuff.

But one thing that we're quite enthusiastic about is surfacing maybe different levels of participation.

So we saw in, if I go to chapter two here, I tend to think that it's probably a good idea for, you know, there's a lot of people in this group, all different backgrounds and so on, software developers, there's even a professor or two, and then there's

variety of backgrounds and perspectives.

I am thinking it would be quite nice to

have a sort of opportunity for you to just explore the code very much along the lines of what Andrew did for chapter two.

So if we come over here, Andrew created this very wonderful notebook where you don't have, I mean, there is code, you have to run some stuff for some setup, but fundamentally what you can do is you can just sort of look at an example.

This is the canonical example in chapter two.

I think figure 2.11, or at least that's what this instantiates, where you can have a look at the general relationship that we've got here and actually play around interactively with, okay, well, what if the observation Y was 2.6?

How does this affect the likelihood and then the posterior distribution?

You can sort of do this interactively.

And we shared this for chapter two, but we haven't yet implemented these kinds of notebooks for subsequent chapters.

I think for someone really new and who doesn't have much experience, this is probably a very nice way to begin to have some ingress into being able to play around with these ideas interactively.

um so that'd be great so we have you know this is just looking at the effects of changing correct while changing the parameters of various distributions when it comes to bayesian inference there's a wonderful example down here as well on gradient descent some of this can be cleaned up and maybe we can hide some things that don't necessarily need to be in here or whatever but this style of interaction i think is a very

excellent way to begin interacting with practical examples.

So you don't have to set up anything.

You don't have to download anything.

You don't have to worry about GitHub repositories or anything like that.

You just click on this link here and you'll go to this web page and you can just directly interact in the browser, which is very, very cool.

Now, for those of you who do want more of an interaction side of thing,

If we go here, Sanjeev has actually prepared, these are quite old, but he's prepared notebooks, code notebooks that are not yet available on the book.

So the idea is that these would be very similar to what you're seeing over here.

This is a notebook style thing where you've got these cells and you can run some code.

also some notes you know this is marked out notes whatever fundamentally he's done a similar kind of thing where you know chapter one all the way through to I think chapter 10 but he hasn't had time really to to build this out in a way that would be professional enough to release yes to the public

so this style of thing is very much what he's interested in in affording and the idea would be okay maybe you can go into chapter one uh well let me see here i'm not going to actually render anything particularly interesting to look at but if we take a look at a particular notebook you know these are these are hosted here on on github so the idea would be someone who's a little bit more interested in messing around with the code itself

you would have the ability to have this notebook here, maybe hosted on GitHub.

We could very easily have our own version of this in the fundamentals repo, where they're version controlled, they're on GitHub, so you clone the repo and then kind of play around with stuff in the notebook.

And then there would be hooks for you to directly interface with certain parts of the code.

So rather than, let's say, okay, we've got a generative model here,

And this is our observation likelihood.

And oh, look, we have the function that generates our observation likelihood is a linear model.

And then what you could do is you could come down here and say, all right, well, my parameters for my linear model, they're beta 1 and beta 0.

They're here.

What if I change beta 1 to be

something else you know you directly manipulate the code and then you could sort of see by changing the structure of the model and the structure of the environment how things change so that would be a little bit more of a direct use of you know python so the idea with the explorer you know the explorer type thing you wouldn't have to know any code to be able to interact with any of this stuff okay

and you would still be able to have the benefit of interactivity with the example.

But with this sort of style of thing, you would be able to directly play around with the code.

And then for someone who's maybe a little bit more advanced, someone who wants to build stuff, there is actually, if I go back here into the main repo,

Sanjeev himself has built out all of these examples in such a way that there is abstract, there's an abstract specification of what an agent is, right?

So there's a class that says, here's an agent, and it's got a bunch of things it can do.

It can learn, and it can infer, blah, blah, blah.

Daniel's actually done a very similar thing in the existing repo.

And, oh, you know, okay, there's a class for an environment, and you could hook up an agent to an environment, you know.

This is empty just now.

Yeah, so there's a few things missing from here.

And that's a very yet more abstract way of doing things.

And typically what you do is you work with these source files.

You don't work with notebooks anymore.

If I just look at the repo here, go to Active Inference.

I guess it would be good to look at, what would it be good to look at?

Maybe go to Core.

There's a lot of stuff here from Daniel.

We haven't looked at POMDPs yet, but I just want to get the idea.

This is a style of problem, POMDP.

We're going to look at that later.

There's all these different methods for talking about a POMDP.

You would have the ability to wire this up very much like a gym.

Some people here are probably very familiar with gym.

This is a well-known, go to gymnasium website, you know, set of environments where you can say, all right, maybe I've got a lunar lander, you know, and I can control this lunar lander and at certain times I can get rewards and observations and I can progress in a state space.

very much like this here.

So this kind of thing where you can hook up an abstract agent to an abstract problem and do active inference, that kind of thing would be very, very possible to do in the sort of source code based version of things.

And that's very similar to what Daniel showed on Tuesday.

So I think it's very important to be able to service this kind of spectrum of interest.

Obviously, some people have more time than others.

Some people have more interest than others.

Um, but, uh, you know, there's active influence itself is so heterogeneous in terms of what it covers.

We've got people from psychology, people from non-equilibrium statistical physics, and they all kind of speak different languages and they all have different backgrounds.

So it's not a matter of, you know, Oh, you don't know enough code really.

You should be spending 10 hours a day to learn code, blah, blah, blah.

Um, but we do have to be mindful of servicing people's, um,

degree of prior ability.

So that's kind of what I'm thinking going forward.

We're going to hopefully build out initially some of these notebooks here that you're seeing, the interactive style of things.

So the fundamental example of Bayesian inference, this is really, really important.

So that's very central.

And then other things like gradient descent.

This one here is excellent, but we maybe would like a visualization of the actual gradient landscape and that kind of thing.

That would be another very canonical implementation.

Maybe, you know, expectation maximization and then things like variational free energy.

So that's kind of what we're thinking going forward.

I personally would be very interested in people's thoughts as to what they would like in terms of the examples that they want to see covered.

Obviously there's lots of examples in the book and eventually we'd like to cover them all, but it'd be good to cover the sort of canonical core of the examples so far.

So I'm interested in people's thoughts with respect to, you know, A, the level of, or if that sort of makes sense, the kind of explorer and,

well, you know, experimenter and then maybe builder levels of participation and experimentation.

To that end, I myself have been sort of negligent.

We do actually have a Discord chat here for the textbook group.

This is actually, as Andrew said earlier, the chat that has been used for previous textbook sessions on the PAR et al textbook.

So this is the

Although Sanjeev's recent one really does expand on a lot of stuff in detail.

Previous textbook sessions have been going on and they've been happening here in this chat.

Now, this is a space for us to be able to talk about things with respect to the book.

Myself and Andrew and Daniel are on here pretty regularly.

So it'd be an excellent way to stay in asynchronous contact with us if you're interested in that.

Obviously, our emails are another affordance for that.

So if you don't have a Discord account, you'd have to make one, obviously.

But for those who do have them, you can immediately hop on over here.

And that would be a great way to share your thoughts on things related to examples.

So that's that.

I don't know if there's any questions or anything people would like to ask with respect to the examples.

We are thinking about how to build them and so on.

But I think now we can perhaps take any questions that are related to part one.

I'd be very interested in assisting where I can there.

The floor is open for live questions.

If there aren't live questions that people don't want to ask them, we can go over some ones in the chat as well, in the page.

Just taking a moment to read the chat here.

Andrew, yes.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just in lieu of

They're not being any other immediate questions right now.

This is a bit more of a brainstorming point that we don't have to spend too much time on.

But I was thinking for the code examples, you know, given that right now we're in, we're going to start part two.

So we've not got there yet.

We ended chapter five with predictive coding.

Um, 1 direction we could go.

Is that we could have a code example.

That sort of consolidates a lot of the things that we saw in chapters 2 through 5.

Not everything, obviously, there's some methods that were given that, like, kind of contradict each other.

They're sort of in their own respect paradigm.

Um, but still, um.

You know, in almost every chapter we see, it's like, well, here's the univariate case and then here's the multivariate case.

A coding example could just be geared around the multivariate case and then there's some option to only have one hidden state and one observation modality if you did want it to be univariate or something.

But, yeah, I'm just, you know, these are the kind of questions that we're sort of thinking about with regards to developing any code further.

Obviously, we'd want to exploit sort of Sanjeev's code that he shared with us to make sure that we're really kind of serving what he was going for as far as developing code goes.

But, yeah, like we could potentially do like a full, you know,

Here's code for a hierarchical predictive coding model.

It has all of your precision weighting and updates.

It has parameter learning.

It has all of the things.

And then having some kinds of interactive options for users that maybe initially lets you specify how many hidden states are there and all the rest.

It all has to do with how much time everyone, you know, kind of has available and how much we're able to build this out.

And then this is also why I've, like, in the past repeatedly mentioned, like, for anyone who wants to see something in particular, that could be really helpful.

Because given we only have so much time, it would be great to make sure we're spending our time on things that learners would most like to sort of focus upon.

But, yeah, I'll stop there.

I noticed Kobus has his hand up.


SPEAKER_01:
I could go for it.

Yeah, Andrew, that sounds like an exciting idea.

I like the idea of having a generic code base where you can say, I want to have so many components in my state vector, so many components in my observation vector.

I want to have so many layers.

But the code works for every possible case.

Now, I realize there's some downside to that.

It makes it more complicated.

less easy to understand.

But I think there's value in a generic code base.

And maybe this can even form the beginnings of what you mentioned previously, that you want to put together a library that works for the continuous case.

And eventually, who knows, we can make it even more generic to work for both the continuous formulation as well as the discrete formulation.

So I like that idea.


SPEAKER_04:
No, I completely agree.

I think that is a sensible way to go long term.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Yeah.

Thanks for the feedback, Kobus.

Because, yeah, it's like to some degree, it would be great to make sure that we're not sort of starting over with the code for each, you know, chapter related example, because a lot of this is like we're building up over time.

Like if we were to sort of do that, that more generalized approach,

I hesitate to use the word generalized because we're seeing it so much in the textbook.

But yeah, but a more general library, like that hierarchical predictive coding model set up that I mentioned,

You know, in Chapters 6 and 7 and 8, we're going to be looking at generalized filtering and then active generalized filtering, which also have an immense amount of overlap with the hierarchical predictive coding models.

We're going to start seeing similar diagrams of multiple layers, all the rest, and precision weighting.

So then, you know, with the hierarchical predictive coding, we could then continue building off of that as a general.

Library yeah to to like, further serve, being able to move further through the chapters.

No.

know, starting all over, maybe having a more consistent singular API for users to be able to call these things.

Because, yeah, I mean, that's sort of, that's sort of where Active Inference is at on the programming side, more generally, everyone's seeking some kind of, in the same way of like what Keras, the library Keras did for deep learning, right?

It'd be nice to have sort of like a universal

library that kind of lets us do anything we'd like.

Other questions that come up are like, yeah, as far as continuous and discrete state space problems go in a singular library, it's like, well, PIMDP is currently fully open source.

I mean, we even know some of the developers, so it might be nice to, you know, we could potentially integrate with PIMTP or we could do something else entirely.

I've been working with others who are actually trying to do the discrete state space stuff from scratch.

PyMDP does have its limitations, so maybe it is worthwhile to think that through.

But yeah, everything sounds great.

It'd be nice to basically supply users with all of the fundamental sort of building blocks for anything related to active inference and

All sorts of other things like hybrid models, where you have, like, a continuous model at a lower level and then discrete state space model at a higher level with, like, different kinds of link functions between, like, there's been work in active inference on those things.

They exist.

but there's not enough of them.

And they could be really fascinating when thinking about like modeling an agent who takes in a lot of continuous value data, but then has to make discrete decisions and do planning and things like that.

I mean, it's a very interesting case and even aligns really well with empirical reality in some ways.

So there needs to be more work.

Being able to have a repo where people can give that a shot as they please would be fantastic.

Yeah, Kovac.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and my personal preference for this code base should be to lean over to the side of making it very understandable, almost aligned with the mathematics precisely rather than making it performant.

You know, there's a saying that says it's easier to make a correct program fast than a fast program correct.

So, starting off, I think there's virtue in, you know, leaning to the side of, you know, understanding it as much as possible, and even the mathematics and that kind of thing, and forget about making it really fast, like, you know, the Jack's approach and things like that.

Maybe that can follow...


SPEAKER_04:
in the future as a as a different version or a different development path so that would be my personal personal preference yeah sanjeev himself actually in his notebooks has taken great pains to implement the code in such a way that it is essentially one-to-one with the mathematics yeah you know eschewing all issues of efficiency and such like because that's not the point you know the point is pedagogical in terms of demonstrating

The idea is, I completely agree.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Yeah.

It's, I mean, well, I think ideally what should happen for the repo is, you know,

I mean, first, we're trying to keep it tethered to Sanjeev's textbook for sure.

So, like, making sure that the repo, like, more or less fully illustrates the mathematics in the textbook.

Because, yeah, I agree, like, active inference is not purely about achieving, like, you know, high scale, full performance at the expense of sort of, you know,

mathematical integrity, we'll say.

You know, no cheap shortcuts, unless it's part of what you're going for.

But I think it should be focused upon, you know, contributions to research.

Of course, if we build out all of these things in a repo, then anyone who did want to start optimizing or using JAX or things like that would be able to then build on that further.

And that just becomes another section of the repository.

without sort of harming or undoing previous work that's been done.

But yeah, much agreed.

Because with, I mean, with JAX alone, because even I've like messed with JAX recently for some of my work that I've been doing, but some of the things I've been doing involve like structure learning, where you're like potentially adding or removing

different hidden state factors or the discrete levels of the hidden state factors.

And so what happens is that you end up with these matrices that are changing in dimensionality, literally from iteration to iteration.

And so Jax doesn't really like that, right?

Because you're, you, you,

Ideally, with JAX, you would have a lot of your tensor shapes and the rest like fixed in advance so that you could do all the just-in-time compilation.

But if the whole structure is changing bit by bit, while structure learning is a very interesting and kind of, you know, topical thing that a lot of people are working on in active inference, it means that JAX just isn't really amenable to it.

And I've even gotten some insight from Sanjeev on that point because he's been working on similar things.

So basically just recognizing like, yeah, there will be places that, you know, JAX won't make sense.

But maybe there is an alternative method that could be used.

So, yes, making sure we kind of meet the mathematics with fidelity prior to any kind of, you know, fun optimization tricks would be the best priority, I think.


SPEAKER_04:
That's always how you want to do it.

You want to understand what you're doing first and then move to making it efficient.

That's for sure.

All right.

There was a pre-written question that I think would be interesting to go through.

But if there are live questions or if you want to put them in the chat, I'll obviously give them preference.

Have I turned my video off?

There we go.

So if there are live questions, please do fire away.

But other than that, I will maybe share this question here because I think it's a relevant one.

So this comes from chapter three.

Hopefully people can see my screen.

Come down here.

Zoom in a bit more.

Chapter four, chapter three.

So this is on page 72.

So this question here.

Oh, my lights went off.

This is on page 72 from chapter three with respect to the expectation maximization algorithm.

And this was a big linchpin in part one.

Really it tied together everything we saw in chapters one and two and most of three with respect to the question of learning and inference.

How do we do both of these things at the same time?

Because we typically have to.

And the expectation maximization, this is how we do it basically.

This, you know, page 72, so equation 3.44A and B, those are the two steps of the EM algorithm.

The question is, you know, with respect to the expectation step, when Sanjeev says fill in the unknown parameters with their means, expected value, can someone break it down in this sentence?

I cannot relate it to equation 3.44A where an expected value of the log likelihood is calculated.

So if I just go to that equation so that people see it, 3.44a, this is, so we have 3.44a and b.

So this is the expectation step of the expectation maximization algorithm.

So I guess the question in some sense is like, what is an expectation at all?

The idea is that with the expectation maximization algorithm, we don't know what the parameters are.

so we need to take their expectation i'll define what that is in a second with respect to the current belief about the hidden state and then we can maximize our evidence for the hidden state by doing the maximization step but basically what what this is saying here what this equation is saying is we need to so like this e is an expectation we want to we want to say what we think the

The probability is of this thing in here, this log probability, where we're taking our values of x, the hidden state, from this distribution down here.

I know that's a little weird.

There's better ways of showing this visually, and that's one thing I would like to show.

But the core idea is that the parameters, they're unknown.

So we have some sort of distribution about what they could be.

And we're going to use that distribution to inform a guess about what they are.

And then we're going to use that guess in our evaluation of the log likelihood here.

So this Vi theta, this is the parameters.

So this is saying, you know, what, what do we think, what is our belief about what the parameters should be?

Uh, given our belief about them.

Now we take the expectation of the joint, uh, the general model basically under, uh, these, these, uh, the belief about the hidden state given observations.

So that's, that's the tricky bit.

This is a belief about parameters.

It's not a belief about hidden states here.

So we have to kind of average over our beliefs about hidden states.

And that's what this is.

I probably haven't explained that very well.

And there's actually a lot of nice visual intuition for this here.

But this is an important thing to get your head around, this idea of expectation.

This comes up again and again and again.

So this is an important question.

I'll go through and I will actually give an answer.

when there's more time, not in the group itself, but this question is important.

So it's basically saying, I don't know what the parameter should be, but I can use my belief about the hidden states because I have uncertainty about them.

I have this distribution of the hidden states to predict the hidden states most likely value in such a way that I can maintain a belief about the parameters.

So it's kind of a, it's a guess, the expectation,

I'll just stop sharing temporarily.

There are a lot of other, well, there are other questions as well.

Some of them are quite specific, so I don't necessarily want to go over them here.

Some questions related to general things would be good.

Andrew, did you have a comment?


SPEAKER_03:
I think Cobus had his hand up first.

So if Cobus, you want to.

Oh, I'm sorry.


SPEAKER_04:
I thought that was from before.


SPEAKER_01:
Just, you know, on the previous question about that expectation, I think what might help is to, in parallel with this expression 344a, just put down a very basic expectation expression.

For example, the expectation of, let's say, f of x.

And then let's make that f of x maybe 2x.

And then the subscript of the expectation operator is simply the distribution, the density from which that function is associated.

So here it looks very intimidating, but if you come up with a trivial example, you start to see what the role of each of these symbols are.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, no, I completely agree.

It is a bit of a hairy thing to get your head around initially.


SPEAKER_01:
And what's confusing is usually the expectation operator does not have a subscript in a trivial case, but all of a sudden we encounter them with subscripts.

And I think that's part of the confusion maybe.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I mean, so appendix, what is it here?

Appendix C, I think.

If I go down here.

Yeah, mathematical fundamentals.

that Appendix C takes you through the notation for things like subscripts, and they're used everywhere in the book.

So this would be a good opportunity if you're unfamiliar with some of this subscript notation to maybe go over, sprees over Appendix C again with respect to that notation, because that will continue to show up throughout the rest of the book for sure, yeah.

No, thanks for that, Cobus.


SPEAKER_03:
I guess I'd also add,

I'm not sure who asked the question that you were looking at in the coda, and maybe they do understand this, but I guess it can bear repeating of like, in chapter three, we have an algorithm that's given to us, just like we're given these other nice sort of algorithm charts.

in other chapters and so with algorithm three in the textbook which is expectation for linear factor analysis uh it just it bears remembering that um or excuse it's worthwhile to remember that this this expectation maximization process is like iterative and we're not literally

at precisely the same moment in the same computation, updating our hidden state estimates and parameters.

It's like just the general notion of we're updating hidden states, then we're updating parameters, then hidden states, then parameters.

And in both cases, whenever we move up to variational inference and we're looking at free energy, then

sort of the golden rule is that ideally you'd be able to update anything, whether it be a hidden state estimate or a particular parameter or otherwise in this iterative fashion with respect to sort of a gradient on free energy with respect to the thing that you're updating.

so um I I don't mean that as like an answer to the question uh but it's just like because I think that it it gets a little mixed up and like whenever you actually implement these things and computational code or otherwise it's like well yeah we have all of these different components in a model and we're talking about updating these different things but like how does that happen it's like well it's very procedural it's very iterative and it's very


SPEAKER_04:
we update this we update that we update this we update that so um yeah just adding that conversation now yeah fair enough that's that's for sure all right well uh yes I I have been going slowly through the uh the coder and answering questions putting my attempted answers not to uh denote well not to to connote the idea that that's final but I have been going through I do plan on um

finishing them all.

If I come to here, share my screen again.

One thing that's currently missing, as some of you might note, is in chapter five, where we've left off, typically I have this overall set of notes, but the more detailed notes for sections 5.1 and 5.2 are still not there.

I will put them in.

I'll also, for chapter

six next week we're going to be picking up uh produce those those same things for chapter six that's quite bare just now and that will help us maybe going forward as well so

in a bit of a rhythm is this idea of the the the code that people can interact with just you know in a very friction-free manner quickly and easily without having to really interface with the the the details you know just so you can get an intuition that's very much something that i i would like to bring into the group and have people have another interface for people to to play with the ideas

Because we haven't yet, especially for things like in chapter three, where we do talk a lot about the expectation maximization algorithm, it can be quite a visual thing.

And so it can be very useful to have visualizations and such like.

And the figures do a good job.

But it would be nice to have additional material.

So that's something I'm keen on providing going forward for sure.

All right, let me just check the chat real quick.

If there are no additional questions or anything like that, or if no one's got any burning concerns, we might potentially have an early session today, unless people are interested in asking some questions.

Do remember the Discord.

So that is in the chat.

I'll just put it there again.

There's the link to the actual Discord chat.

So that would be, as I said, a good way to stay in contact with us more asynchronously.

I can put my email address in the chat as well, although I think we've actually got that shared elsewhere.


SPEAKER_00:
Hey, Fraser, I'll jump in.

And I'm following up on the same line of communication from the last class, which is about Andrew's chapter two demo.

And this is more sort of just a sort of a broader approach question.

But it seems to me that that demo or not the demo, but the but the

um there's an opportunity to sort of train our intuition about the relationship between the priors the likelihood and and the posteriors and especially with us casting sort of um like

anthropo, you know, like that we think, like, I think, I think you just, you called one of it the stubborn scenario.

So just sort of running through some of these intuitions about like behavior that we, you know, and also breaking down some of the misunderstandings, especially as, as,

active inference is used by engineers that may not have as deep of an experience in the social sciences.

And then the other way around, social scientists who don't have such a deep understanding of

who's driving the car, you know, like what thing is contributing to what response.

And so I just, you know, again, like I'm in two different worlds where, you know, I want to be able to share active inference with people that are like physios.

And so people who may not necessarily have much math behind them.

And then the other extreme that I might be working with engineers that I want to be able to bring

um the social sciences intuitions and language from that world um and i and so i think to me this is like you know playing with it coming up with some demos you know creating some um ways to just talk about um what we perceive of in our models you know that and the behaviors um because again and i really do and again it's been so valuable to just focus on

Just perception.

That's all we've been breaking down.

While some of these intuitions will support us tremendously as we move into policy and action and everything else, but this has been a really valuable learning for me.

I just wanted to put that out there.

I don't know if there's anything more you'd want to share.

Maybe Andrew wants to share about his experience with

this sort of working within domains, because you've got two different worlds that converge and kind of sussing out maybe some misunderstandings that may be just sort of encoded.

Yeah.

Anyway, I'll just leave it in that.


SPEAKER_04:
It's tough.

Obviously, Andrew, I mean, you are you explicitly work in the social sciences and I don't.

I explicitly work in the, you know, hardcore computational side of things.

But I interface with those people.

So that's exactly why I think it's valuable to have a sort of gradated

know learning route let's say from more exploratory all the way to you know you're directly interfacing with the source code and that kind of thing um because it services those two different um necessities you know you don't as a physio let's say you know it probably doesn't behoove you to know the details about the latest variational optimization algorithm blah blah but having an appreciation of

the underlying ideas in abstract would very much.

So that's what we need to service.


SPEAKER_00:
One of my mentors states often like loyalty to the priors, like the problems that come up in different movement environments.

If we're too loyal to our priors, the problems we might encounter.

And so I feel like that graph and playing with those variables really do invite a deeper understanding of how we might want to be creating movement situations.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, yeah, I completely agree.

Well, thank you for that feedback.

I think that is, as I just said, it is a very central example, I think maybe of all of part one, definitely part two.

So it's good.

Yeah, it's the more we can give you guys the ability to play with that idea or similar ideas practically, I think the better.

I will see what we can do going forward.

Andrew, you had your, you had your hand up.

I didn't want to let you do.


SPEAKER_03:
Sure.

Yeah.

I just want to give a response to some of the things that Carrie said, because yeah, it's all, all of these things are what's interesting to me.

Like I'm someone who has this like deeper background in the humanities and social sciences.

And then, you know, I had an interest in psychology, but also like,

sociology and all the rest uh economics and so i was very convinced for a long time like oh like computer programming like like variational inference like what is any of that i'm never going to understand that that's what other people do uh and then maybe i collaborate with them someday but maybe not because it's kind of like scary it's a whole world of things and um

I guess it's just sort of I mean, not to wax philosophical or too broadly here, but we're in a

I mean, my perspective on anything academic or research oriented, or even just, you know, in an institutional sense or industry sense, like, we're in a highly interdisciplinary world today.

I think that there have been a lot of, like, sort of siloing of different disciplines as if they sort of pertain to their own respective material and don't really borrow from or dialogue with others.

People have been making that same criticism that I just did for decades, so I'm not saying anything particularly new.

Back in World War II, people were saying like, oh, we're all divided, not just as people, but also like in a disciplinary sense and academic sense.

So there were people trying to find ways of integrating all these different things.

And in some ways, active inference itself is this interesting thing.

We have people talking about statistical and quantum mechanics over here, and then people who are talking about emotion and affect and development of a human over here.

and um so yeah it's there's so much to wrap one's head around i think a lot of the work to be done very much relates to kind of what you seem to be pointing at carrie which i would uh one way one take on it is you know some of what we're doing is just trying to map cognitive

and not cognitive, subcognitive or subconscious processes to these mathematical variables, ultimately.

So, like, what is a prior?

What is a likelihood?

What is precision?

And, you know, we see in mathematics, actually, a lot of these things are kind of simple or basic, right?

Like a distribution, a prior distribution, or

uh precision is just like this this sort of modulator term in an equation um and then those in social science you know like like a previous an earlier version of myself are like you know intimidated by by looking at things like variables and all of that but even in the social sciences we're kind of making these different sorts of mental models like what does it mean for someone to develop in a particular

socioeconomic environment, like you're already thinking about different kinds of variables, like, oh, you're in this environment, or it could be this kind of environment that you're in and that can change its trajectory.

It doesn't look terribly different from, you know, what is the particular realization of a variable in this equation?

So, yeah, that's sort of the things that I would like to further.

I shared a couple things in the chat.

Mainly, I repeatedly share this epistemic communities under active inference paper, which is a few years old now.

But I just like it very much.

I think it's in the direction of what

social sciences and active inference could be.

It makes a lot of references to things like confirmation bias and other kinds of like psychological concepts or constructs and relates them directly to active inference.

Confirmation bias heavily relating to the idea of

self-evidencing that we see all the time in active inference.

We're trying to realize our predictions.

We're perhaps biased in a particular direction with our priors at the outset.

And so whenever we engage in the world, we very well may be trying to realize those prior predictions, whether it be something as simple as, oh, I believe that if I eat this food, I will

Then be sated very everyday sorts of things all the way down to like, oh, I will seek out this particular social group who has similar ideas to me because, you know.

they seem to have it right, just as I'm right, and we'll get along really well.

And none of this is to say that this is precisely the way that things should be worded all the time.

It's just a lot of these common principles between social science and active inferring sort of already exist.

And so some of the work to be done is simply to help with sort of that interdisciplinary dialogue, like being able to find the relationships

Between different nomenclatures and.

Engineering or mathematics or physics talking about flow we're going to talk about flow in chapter 6 and part 2 of the textbook pretty soon and then.

In psychology or social science, we can think people have a perception of time.

That's no simple thing and it's not something we can ignore.

We make predictions and assumptions about what happened in the past, what will happen in future.

You know, memory and how we store memory and all those sorts of things.

Like, there are different kinds of alignments between all of that with with active inference.

Yeah.

So so it's a great comment that you make and I think it's worthwhile to further those kinds of conversations at the end of the day.

You know, there will be, we could come up with our own singular universal language of how to talk about these things.

There'll be another team of researchers somewhere else who say, no, actually, we have the right universal language for talking about these things.

So we're always going to be having these kinds of like disputes and things like that probably to some degree.

But I.

I think there is zero harm in trying because I think it would be helpful to everyone to at least, you know, learn a few of these different languages.

I feel like I'm a little over speaking at some point, but I hope that this kind of subject matter comes up for like more in future in the textbook group.

It'd be nice to hear more voices and just talk more about kind of what that looks like.

Daniel is also highly interested in like trying to figure out like what is the active inference sort of ontology

and how can we you know translate he looks at it as like a translation problem like how do we translate that to uh you know psychology how do we translate that to um you know economics or whatever else um so yeah uh there's no very good though i see so yeah i was gonna say uh son did you wanna did you wanna ask a question really quick


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, just two quick questions.

In the book, The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain and Behavior, I noticed that mu is used to denote external states, while x is used for internal states.

However, in our current textbook group, the convention seems to be different from that.

Could this difference in notation cause

confusion later when applying the framework.

And the second question is, I have noticed that many papers simulating real-world psychiatry cases seem quite far from the mathematical formulas presented in fundamental sessions like this one.

Could you help me understand the relationship between them?

Is there a bridge I'm missing?


SPEAKER_04:
Right.

Well, OK. Yeah.

I mean, on your first question about so this is I've got the original par at all textbook up.

Yes, I mean, they I don't actually remember specifically their notation.

So here we go.

And this is maybe helpful.

So, yeah, they use X for hidden states and X star was an X for hidden states in the in the model and the agent and X star for hidden states in the environment.

So that's that's the way that Sanjeev has chosen to do things in his book as well.

And observations, why?

and actions you, but you're talking about when we look inside the model, I think,

I don't know if I'm going to get it up quickly enough, where we're looking at beliefs inside the model in terms of mu and such like.

So suffice it to say that, yes, and especially in the literature, in the papers and so on, there's lots and lots and lots of conflicting notation about exactly what's mu or eta means.

There's a nice picture.

There's a nice figure I'm trying to find.

I'm not sure where it is here.

So I'm not sure, I can't recall off the top of my head if, here we go, maybe we're talking about blanket states now.

So yes, sometimes the means of certain distributions are meant to encode internal states, you know, that stands in for x, let's say.

Sometimes it doesn't.

So we just have to be very careful about our interpretation of certain variables, and we can't

assume that they're going to hold, you know, okay, so mu here may or may not mean mu for the internal states in the Sanjeev textbook or not.

I will say that Sanjeev has made a great effort to be consistent throughout his book about how he uses variables, obviously, but

There are differences between this book and the Fundamentals book, although hopefully they're pretty minimal.

Now, your second question, I'm afraid I don't recall.

Do you mind just quickly running me through it again?


SPEAKER_02:
I have noticed that many papers simulating real-world psychiatric cases seem far from the mathematical formalism presented in foundations like this one.

I don't know whether if I miss some bridges between them or.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

I know you've I know you've talked about this specifically.

I'll see if I can find some examples.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, sure.

So I will say quickly, I added

this link to the chat just now on the TNU Computational Psychiatry course, which has been given for a fair number of years in a row.

And I've personally enjoyed it.

It's rather cheap.

You can attend online as well.

But what they do is that they give a very, basically for an entire week, they give many lectures in computational psychiatry from a lot of different perspectives.

And you can see that the way that they organize this course is that

They make the point that all of the researchers, all of these different directions are actually trying to do a lot of the same things.

So just kind of in that same conversation we had earlier, it's like, they're trying to seek something like a universal language.

What's really important to recognize is that as far as.

computational and what we could call precision psychiatry goes, it is very much moving into a Bayesian paradigm, Bayesian framework.

It's being used more and more as opposed to like more kind of classical statistics, like frequentist kind of paradigms.

So that's already one relationship that active inference shares with many others.

Then the questions, further questions become about action and perception because most of psychiatry's like simulations and the rest that have been done traditionally have been more focused on perception without paying attention to action.

So that's its own kind of paradigm shift.

Now we're starting to look at like trying to simulate like, okay, well not just

what does a person or, you know, experiencing a psychiatric disorder or disturbance or otherwise, like, what do they perceive, but what do they do in response?

You know, you could even relate that to sort of like a Skinnerian paradigm of like, here's the stimulus and here's the response, except in active inference, we're not just doing stimulus response.

We're doing like stimulus, like, think of that as the observations we're seeing your why.

And then at the end, we see the response, the action that they do, the behavior that they exhibit, which we haven't seen quite yet.

We're going to see that in part two of the textbook.

But then the way we break away from the Skinnerian tradition is that we also have our agent model where we can see the inside of it.

The behavioralist Skinnerian stuff ignores that.

It says, we don't know what's in the middle.

We just treat the organism, the person as a black box.

Here, we're looking at the inside.

and seeing like well if we come up with a relatively accurate model which is what all of computational psychiatry is trying to do they're trying to develop models that they can then fit to empirical Behavioral Behavior and experiments to try and get to a good model if you say you have a good model then perhaps it's the case that you can inspect the insides of it so to speak in order to better understand like how can we further develop a certain kind of treatment whether it be pharmacological

or be more related to traditional like talk therapy or otherwise.

psychodynamic therapy or something like that.

So there is a lot of strong interrelationships between the things in reference to your question.

I think the first place to look would be looking at the computational psychiatry course.

And I will say that they have made a lot of their previous year's lectures entirely free.

If you just kind of look through that website a little bit, you'll find a lot of resources and you'll see that they're actually very similar.

i think that the most distinct things about active inference is that it's it's saying like okay well everyone's doing a bayesian framework what's the right way of doing that and what are the right things we want to include active inference prioritizes keeping action in the picture rather than only assuming that we're perceptive and that everything about psychiatry is just a perception issue it also relates to what you end up doing in response to

the hallucination you're experiencing in the case of schizophrenia or something like that.

And then furthermore, mathematically, the variational methods, right?

Which, I mean, there's empirical work that's been done in relating free energy minimization specifically to different kinds of organisms' behavior and what they do.

So, yeah, there are many open questions, but I just want to make the point that active inference is not dramatically different from a lot of what's going on in computational psychiatry.

However, it will look incredibly different

from historical work in psychiatry, which is almost entirely focused on observation of people.

It's very much in the realm of like the way we're talking about social sciences earlier.

We're not quite looking at mathematics.

We're not quite looking at

Data collection, in the sense of, like, this continuous data doing neuro imaging scans and the rest.

So I hope that that's helpful as an explanation.

But the main thing is probably check out that computational psychiatry course.

They're really, they're really putting in the work to try and standardize and make a lot of things accessible on that front.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, maybe just as a quick last addendum to Sun's question, I would say that active inference, as far as I conceive of it and many other people conceive of it, is a theory of agency.

It's a theory about what an agent is.

If you make an active inference agent, you've made a thing that can perceive and act and it carves out its own little niche in some environment.

But if you're interested in maybe some narrow question about decision making under some context, you don't necessarily need to build a whole agent.

You just need to build a little bit of the procedure that corresponds to the particular decision making question at issue.

So if you're dealing with some kind of

question about okay what you know can i model a delusion as a delusion of inference on hidden states you can do that you can implement the mathematics with respect to that that could be used in an active differentiation but you don't need to build up the whole thing necessarily so i think maybe some that can be a reason why in some of the literature you see some

differing standards of implementation with respect to what is implemented.

Like you don't necessarily need to always build a full active inference agent or indeed maybe a very sophisticated one.

You can build a very simple sort of thing.

So that's another reason maybe why you don't see as much standardization as you might think in the field.

So I hope that helps as well.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

Thank you very much.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

All right.

Well, we're out of time today, guys.

But please do add questions on the Coda.

I'll monitor questions there.

I'll monitor questions on Discord and such like.

Other than that, we'll see you all on Tuesday for the first resuming of part two for chapter six.

Thank you very much.

I'll stop the recording now.

See you later.
