## NHfGuwoCXI8

SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Hello, everyone.

Welcome to Act and Flab guest stream number 16.1 with Mark Solms.

It's January 22nd, 2022.

It's going to be an awesome discussion.

We really appreciate everyone taking the time out to participate in the live stream and in the discussion.

We're going to have some intermittent presentation intervals by Professor Solms and also a period for discussion

alternating with that.

So we'll each just introduce ourselves and then pass it directly to the presentation section.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California.

And I'll pass to Dave.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm Dave.

I'm a software developer and student of psychology.

I live 200 kilometers north of Manila.

Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto, Canada.

And I'm doing a practice-based PhD around social topographies and how people engage in community development.

And I'll pass it over to Mark now.

Welcome.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks very much.

So what I propose to do is, in a moment I'll share my screen and you'll see my slides.

I'm going to start with the summary slide of all the points that I propose to cover.

And then I'll take them one by one, each of those points.

And at the end of each of them, I'll stop and see if anyone wants to comment or ask a question.

And then we slowly plough through it like that.

We've got two hours, so it should be okay.

But if worse comes to worst and we don't get to the end of the list of topics, we will arrange a follow-up meeting to conclude them.

So I'm very glad to be here.

Thanks for inviting me.

And I'm really looking forward to this discussion.

Here come my slides.

On the screen is the title of my book.

And here is the promised summary of what I'm going to cover.

As I said, I'll cover each of these points in turn, and then we'll have questions and comments in between.

And if we don't get to the end, that's fine.

Let's rather give each one of the topics the time that it needs.

So I start with the assertion that affect is the foundational form of consciousness and that affect is intrinsically conscious.

I then move to make the point that that claim that affect is intrinsically conscious, in other words, that you can't have a feeling that you don't feel, that this is not based on semantic arguments, but rather on empirical evidence.

And I will summarize the evidence.

I'll then make the point that affect is not synonymous with interoceptive inference, which is widely believed these days.

And I'll tell you why that matters when I get there.

And then I'll move on to making the point that all of this casts new light on the hard problem.

particularly if affect is not just an interceptive form of perception, because there are lots of problems about perception that have got us into this heart problem in the first place.

I'll argue that affect, rather than being interceptive inference, that it's an extended form of homeostasis.

I'll tell you what I mean by that when we get there.

And I'll make the point that complex organisms like ourselves require multiple homeostats and that these are to be treated as categorical variables, which matters.

And that these variables must be prioritized.

One can't meet all one's needs simultaneously.

I'll then, this is a large point.

This one is a large point, the empirical evidence about affect.

And this one is another large point.

The mechanism of perceptual and cognitive consciousness is precision modulation of allostatic prediction errors.

That's a big claim, and so we must spend some time on it.

I'll then talk about the nature of the predictive hierarchy.

I seem to see it a little differently from most people, so I want to set out my stall on that score and explain why I think the predictive hierarchy is arranged concentrically and that as one moves toward the periphery of the hierarchy, there's progressively increasing tolerance of uncertainty.

And then lastly, I'll say a word or two about why I think that consciousness can be artificially engineered.

So even if we don't get to the end of all of these topics, one way or another, even if we're the second meeting, those are the topics we will cover.

And we'll see how far we get tonight.

And at least you know what the overall, when I say tonight, I'm in Berlin.

I know it's morning for some of you.

But at least you get the overall picture from that slide.

So let's start with affect is the foundational form of consciousness, and it's intrinsically conscious.

The discoverer of the unconscious, I quote him because Freud, more than anybody, wanted us to realize just how much of mental life is unconscious.

Even Freud said that it is surely of the essence of an emotion that we should be aware of it.

That is, that it should become known to consciousness.

Thus, the possibility of the attribute of unconsciousness would be completely excluded as far as emotions, feelings, and affects are concerned.

It's quite a startling statement from, as I said, the discoverer of the unconscious to say that the possibility of the attribute of unconsciousness would be completely excluded as far as emotions, feelings, and affects are concerned.

Now, I know this is a controversial issue and that there are all sorts of ways in which people want to argue that there are such things as unconscious emotions and whatnot.

And this has partly to do with the fact that different people mean different things by these words, emotions, affects, and so on.

And there are also all kinds of methodological operationalizations of these things.

I won't go into all of that.

I'm happy to if any of you want to discuss it.

But I've emphasized the word feelings to make clear that if anyone wants to argue that they think that the word emotion can apply to unconscious processes or affects can apply to unconscious processes, that's fine by me.

But the word feelings, I don't see how you can ever argue.

that feelings can be unconscious.

It just doesn't make any sense that a feeling could exist without being felt.

If it were not felt, it would not be a feeling.

And so I'm going to focus everything that I'm going to say on this process, this thing, this mental state called feelings.

And I'm arguing that feelings are the foundational form of consciousness and that this form of consciousness is intrinsically conscious.

So that's a sort of a dogmatic statement.

I'm not sure if anyone wants to discuss that.

Perhaps you want to hold your horses, but that's the end of my first point.

So anyone who wants to interrupt here, go ahead.

Otherwise I'll move on.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for the digestible claim based format.

My question would be what else has been posited in your view as a foundational form of consciousness?

So what are the counterfactuals for that first claim?

What other horses are in the race?


SPEAKER_03:
The reason I focus on affect, well, I shouldn't say the reason I focus on affect because that's not quite what you're asking.

You're asking what are the other horses in the race?

So let me say that the whole search for a neural correlate of consciousness, which is in a way where the trouble began with Francis Crick, it was focused on visual perception.

And there are good reasons to focus on visual perception.

mainly because if you take a look at your consciousness right now, it's probably dominated by visual perception.

Visual qualia predominate in our consciousness and a very large part of our cortex is given over to visual processing.

And everybody's always believed that cortex is where it's at when it comes to consciousness.

And we also understand a very great deal about visual cortical mechanisms and visual mechanisms altogether.

So that was a perfectly reasonable place to start.

So that's the other main horse that's in the race.

But vision was thought to be a good model example, not because it is the totality of consciousness, but because it was assumed that if we can crack the problem of how visual consciousness arises, then we can generalize our conclusions to other forms.

And I'm going to argue that there's something profoundly different about visual consciousness and affective consciousness.

And moreover, that there's something profoundly different about cortical consciousness and

And the brainstem mechanisms, which is where affective consciousness arises, and I know that I'm saying that boldly now, and I'm about to argue that point in the second of the bullet points on the screen.

Affective consciousness is not a cortical form of consciousness, it's a brainstem form.

and that the cortical form of consciousness is contingent upon the brainstem form.

And this is one of the main reasons, apart from evolutionary reasons, which sort of interdigitate with and flow from that anatomical localization, why I think that affect is the foundational form.

So it's really vision that I'm using as my kind of foil to answer the question simply.


SPEAKER_01:
One question with feelings is would you say that feelings are integrated with proprioception in the sense that they are felt sense of where the body is as well so it brings it into kind of an action orientated domain or is it enough to have sort of a sense of how things are going?

and whether those two connect in some way.


SPEAKER_03:
As I'm going to argue when I get to my third point,

I don't think that affect is synonymous with interoceptive inference altogether, interoceptive perception altogether.

And I don't know, some people would class proprioception with interoception.

Some people would not.

Some people would say it's a sort of a hybrid between interoceptive and extraoceptive perception.

But to the extent that by the word proprioception you're referring to a form of perception, I would disagree with that because I don't think that affect is a form of perception.

I think that proprioception follows... If by proprioception you mean what neurologists normally mean by that word, it's part of the broader category of somatic sensation.

and therefore does not qualify, I think, as affective.

Because as I say, I'm going to argue that affect is not a form of perception.

I think it's perfectly fine to draw a distinction between extra-receptive bodily sensations and inter-receptive bodily sensations.

But I think that the inter-receptive type is nothing other than perception and not intrinsically different.

So even if you think of proprioception as straddling those two domains,

I still think that it's a modality of perception and suffers from all the same problems as vision for that reason.

I see we have a comment in the chat line.

I'm not sure how we're going to deal with that.

I'll read this.


SPEAKER_00:
It was a question in the live chat from Ingrid.

They wrote, what differentiates affect from feeling from your perspective?

Is affect conscious or pre-conscious?

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
You know, this is a perennial problem.

We don't all mean the same thing by these terms.

So that's why I've focused on the word feeling, because there can be little doubt what feeling denotes.

It denotes something you feel.

In other words, something that you are necessarily aware of.

if you were not aware of it you it wouldn't be called a feeling because you wouldn't feel it um affects and emotions denote many different things to different people so when you ask me is affect pre-conscious or conscious and so on it depends what you mean by affect um to my mind and i can only say um you know

just make clear how I use these words.

I use the word feeling to denote the subjective experience of affect.

Affect is a kind of abstract term for a function that we feel.

But that doesn't mean that you all have to use the word in the same way.

And it's precisely in order to not get lost in this kind of semantic tangle that I'm focusing on the word feeling.

And

I'll make clear in the very point that I'm moving to next, what I mean by feeling in terms of its physiological and anatomical and other objective instantiations.

Excellent.

Stephen, you have your hand up.


SPEAKER_00:
Probably just did.

Or is that your previous hand?


SPEAKER_03:
So just go to the second point.

Okay, very good.

So the second point is, as you saw, we've just been talking about the meaning of the words.

And I've staked my claim for the word feeling to make clear that that's what I mean when I say that affect is intrinsically conscious.

I mean that it is necessarily felt.

I'm also saying it's the foundational form of consciousness that doesn't flow from the word except perhaps from the word in the sense that the way that Nagel and Chalmers define consciousness and many people seem to have got a sort of

He agreed with this way of defining it, that there is something it is like to be conscious, that this something it is likeness seems to be more or less the same thing as feeling.

It seems to mean the same thing, but feeling in a rather broader sense of the word than affective feeling.

So I want to be clear now why, other than those linguistic or semantic points, why I'm making this claim about feeling.

It's not by any means based in the semantics that you have to feel a feeling.

I want to be clear why I think that this is the foundational form of consciousness.

We've all known since 1948 when there was this big surprise that Magoon and Maruzzi found that all consciousness is contingent upon what we subsequently called

reticular activating arousal.

In other words, upon something that's contributed by these core brainstem structures, which after Mugun and Maruzzi's work came to be known as the reticular activating system.

I want to be clear, I'm not only talking about the reticular activating system, but also about the periapoductal gray, which is not technically part of the reticular activating system, but it is part of the brain structures which seem to be fundamental to the generating of consciousness.

What Magoon and Maruzzi showed, among other things, was that if you make a small lesion above the reticular activating system, thereby severing it, disconnecting it from the forebrain and from the cortex in particular, then consciousness is obliterated entirely.

Cortical consciousness is 100% dependent upon brainstem arousal.

That was a shock and a shock that I don't think we have fully come to terms with even all these years later.

it should have led us to realize that we've been looking in the wrong place for the neural correlates of consciousness if we're looking to cortex, because it's plain even from just that study performed in 1948 that cortical consciousness is derived from elsewhere.

Cortical consciousness cannot occur in the absence of reticular activating arousal.

But the way that Magoon and Maruzzi fudged it was to say, and everyone more or less in their wake has said the same, that it turns out there are two kinds of consciousness.

There's the brainstem kind, which we call wakefulness, or the level of consciousness.

And then there's the cortical kind, which we call awareness or the phenomenal contents of consciousness.

So this distinction between a quantitative level contributed by the brainstem and qualitative contents contributed by the cortex is the way in which we save the cortical theory of consciousness following Magoon and Maruzzi's work.

seminal observations.

In case you're wondering what this refers to, it refers to a more recent study by Fisher and colleagues, which showed that the smallest lesion necessary to produce coma in human beings is a two cubic millimeter lesion.

In other words, a lesion the size of a match head in the parabrachial complex.

So there's no doubt on the basis of Magoon and Maruzzi studies all those years ago, and on the basis of these much more recent observations, that consciousness cannot exist without whatever it is that this part of the brain contributes, this primitive brain stem core.

But this idea that it's merely a level or a quantitative dimension of consciousness is what I think is unsustainable.

And I'm going to very quickly, because I'm sure many of you have heard me talking about this before, I'm going to very quickly whiz through the evidence for why this notion that the brainstem contributes only a quantitative level, a sort of a wakeful prerequisite for consciousness, rather than a quality and a content.

But I want to before I do that to just give you a clear picture of what is meant by this distinction.

The distinction is analogous to the difference between a television set and its power supply.

The idea that the cortex is responsible for the contents and qualities of consciousness, for phenomenal consciousness, the real stuff, the real qualia of consciousness, where the thing that all the arguments are about, it's that this is like the television set.

And it has to be plugged in.

Of course, a television set can't do its televisual thing unless it's powered up.

But to claim, therefore, that the real source of television and all that that word represents is the power supply, the electrical source in the wall, is ludicrous.

And that's pretty much how we've all seen, until very recently,

how we've all seen what the brainstem contributes to consciousness.

So nobody's doubting that it's necessary, that it's prerequisite, that without it you can't have cortical consciousness, but it's been reduced to a mere power supply, something which is not actually consciousness itself in the sense that we're all arguing about.

So why do I think that that's not correct?

Well, I'll start with the most dramatic evidence, which is patients who have no cortex.

If the theory that the cortex is necessary for the contents and qualities of consciousness, then patients without cortex should be in a coma.

or at the very least, if we claim that the brainstem produces nothing other than this sort of background level, then patients with no cortex should have some kind of blank wakefulness.

I suppose the closest natural kind of thing that tallies with blank wakefulness

is the vegetative state, which is also called non-responsive wakefulness.

In other words, there's wakefulness without anybody being there, without there being anything it is like for the

organism that has blank wakefulness due to the absence of cortex.

But when you look at cases who have no cortex, and here's the scan of a girl with hydranencephaly,

born with no cortex, and you examine the girl herself, you see that she's not only conscious, in other words, not in a coma, she's conscious in the sense that she wakes up in the morning, goes to sleep at night.

But more interestingly, she is responsive.

Remember my definition or the definition of the vegetative state, the state of blank wakefulness.

It is non-responsive wakefulness.

And clearly this girl is not non-responsive.

Here she's responding to...

the placement of her baby brother on her lap and she responds emotionally in a way that any little girl, you place a baby on her lap, most will express pleasure.

Most kids like their little baby siblings being placed on their laps.

And it's not just her, it's most of these kids.

If they're raised in something other than a state of complete deprivation, like Romanian orphans who fall into what might look like a vegetative state, although their cortex is entirely intact.

If you actually raise these kids in reasonably humane conditions,

They are conscious and responsive, affectively responsive.

That's the main point that I'm making.

These children with absolutely no cortex, their consciousness has a quality and the content, that quality we call affect.

It feels like something to be these kids.

And the content is not monotonous affect.

It's all kinds of affect.

Here's a summary slide extracting what Bjorn Merker, who studied many, many, many of these kids, what he said about them.

They show all of these different emotions.

And most importantly of all,

They show them in situationally appropriate ways.

In other words, they respond with laughter if they're tickled.

They respond with arched backs and protests if something that they want is denied them.

They respond with a startle if there's a sudden unexpected noise and so on.

So the evidence is that these kids are not only conscious in the sense of being awake, which is interesting in itself.

In fact, I can't imagine what a state of blank wakefulness might be like, but there you have it.

The concept derived from Mugun and Maruzzi's work is that there is such a theoretical fiction as blank wakefulness, but these kids are not blank.

These kids are emotionally responsive in exactly the way that you would expect if they had consciousness, at least in the form of affect.

So I'm arguing that with no cortex at all,

these kids display the content and qualitative, conscious contents and qualities in the form of affects.

Now, of course, the big methodological problem is that how do you know what it's like to be these kids?

How do you know if there's anything it's like to be these kids?

They can't tell us anything about what it's like to be them.

So all you can do in this situation is look at other lines of evidence.

If we can find multiple converging lines of evidence, converging on the conclusion that the brainstem is where the affects are actually generated,

then we can do no better, we can do no more, we can do nothing other than that in science.

So I want to show you now what happens if we look at cases who can speak, who've lost great swathes of cortex.

They can't have lost all of their cortex because otherwise they wouldn't be able to speak to us.

So I'm wanting to show you examples of cases who have lost great swathes of cortex

The cortex in question is the cortex that has been most closely identified with sentient being, with the subjective presence of a mind, of a conscious mind.

The first example is of prefrontal cortex.

I think that it's fair to say that the mainstream view is that where all of this information processing comes together and is received by a sentient subject of the mind, the mainstream view is that it would be in the prefrontal cortex.

Now, there are a few patients there.

It's rare to have a patient with absolutely no prefrontal cortex.

But here's one example.

And I'm just giving you examples in this presentation.

I'm speaking about individual cases, those individual hydranencephalic kids that you just saw.

They are representative of the class of patient that I'm talking about.

Here is a patient of my own who has no prefrontal cortex, but happily has a sliver of language cortex.

And so he's able to tell us what it's like to be him.

I asked him if he was conscious of his thoughts and he said, yes, of course I am.

And I explained to him that according to classical theory, he shouldn't be.

So in order to confirm that he's conscious of his thoughts, I asked him if he would be willing to solve a problem that would require him to consciously picture a situation in his mind.

And he agreed to do that.

So I said, I want him to picture in his mind, I want him to imagine that he has two dogs and one chicken, which he then says, okay, he'll do.

And then I'll ask him, do you see them in your mind's eye?

And he says, yes, he does.

I then ask him to count the legs.

You know, this is not an everyday task.

It's something that's unexpected.

So there he has these two dogs in his mind's eye and a chicken, and he has to count the legs.

And of course, the answer is 10.

I ask him, how many legs do you see?

And he says, to my great disappointment, he says eight.

I say eight.

And he says, yes, the dogs ate the chicken.

which I think is enough evidence for me that this chap is there, that there's somebody at home who's looking at these dogs and the chicken and imagining perhaps concretely that the dog's actually at the chicken, or perhaps he's pulling a fast one, he's making a joke.

And in fact, the making of puerile jokes is a very common feature of patients with the frontal lobe syndrome.

And this is linked traditionally with the commonplace observation that these patients are emotionally disinhibited.

And why I draw your attention to that is that if it were true that the cortex and the prefrontal cortex in particular is where affects are generated, then how come if you have an absence of prefrontal cortex, not only is affect preserved, but affect is excessive?

There's more affect than normal.

There's too much affect.

This is entirely incompatible with the idea espoused by many respectable neuroscientists.

Joseph Ledoux, for example, who's a great authority on affect.

Joseph Ledoux says that, of course, the amygdala and other subcortical machinery for anxiety doesn't actually generate any feeling at all, that the feeling of anxiety is read out to use his term labeled by the prefrontal cortex.

And that's when it actually turns into a conscious experience.

So I say again, if that were true, then how come not only my patient, this one making this joke to us, but all frontal lobe patients, the less frontal cortex they have, the more affect they have.

So the less capacity they have to read out and label their feelings, somehow it seems as if they're beset by more feeling rather than less.

Since I'm talking about feelings, the other major candidate, the other major cortical candidate as being the seat of the sentient self is the insular.

But Craig claims that the insular, or perhaps even just the anterior third of it,

is where the sentient subject comes into being.

And he links this particularly with affect.

He says that this is the part of the cortex which registers the state of the own body.

How do you feel now is registered by this part of the cortex.

And it's on this basis that he claims that this is where the sentient subject comes into being.

So again, just one case, who had absolutely no insula, bilaterally obliterated, and he interviewed in much the same way as I interviewed my patient with no frontal cortex.

And Damasio asks him if he has a sense of self and he says, yes, he does.

And I won't go through all of this, all of which is Damasio trying to ascertain whether or not this person is conscious and in particular, whether or not he possesses selfhood.

Does he even understand what selfhood is?

Eventually, Damasio says, what if I were to tell you that I know you better than you know yourself?

The patient says, I would think you're wrong.

Damasio says, what if I were to tell you that you're aware that I'm aware?

The patient says, I'd say you're right.

Damasio says, you're aware that I'm aware.

The patient says, I'm aware that you're aware that I'm aware.

Please note all these references to I. There is a sentient subject speaking to us here with absolutely no insular cortex.

So I think the claim on the basis of the hydranencephalic children, the claim that the cortex is the seat of consciousness and of feeling in particular,

has to be dismissed but they can't speak so we look at the other major candidates who can speak patients with no prefrontal cortex they are conscious there's a sentient subject there and they feel like something they tell us and they show us and likewise patients with no insular cortex

Of course, the claim can be made.

Well, in these cases, their consciousness arises from the remnants of the cortex, the remainder of the cortex, the cortex that is not removed.

Bear in mind, the ones who have no cortex, who clearly show behavioral displays of affect, every prediction that you might make from the hypothesis that it feels like something to be these kids is confirmed by their behavior.

by their responses to affective stimuli and in that case we say well we don't know because they can't speak so then we use these other cases with no prefrontal cortex no insular cortex who can speak and then we say well it must be the the other bits of the cortex that are generating the consciousness it seems like a losing wicket to me

But let's look at other evidence than lesion evidence.

Remember, we're looking for converging lines of evidence, converging on the conclusion that the feelings are generated in the brainstem.

In the brainstem.

And so here we look at the case of a patient where an entirely different method is used, that is deep brain stimulation of a part of the reticular activating system, in this case, the substantia nigra.

The surgeon was aiming for the subthalamic nucleus, but the electrode went into the substantia nigra.

And when he stimulated it, the patient fell into a profound depression.

within five seconds.

Again, I'm not going to read all of this to you.

It will take more time than is necessary.

If you read it yourself, you will see this patient within five seconds fell into a profound depression.

She has no psychiatric history, never been depressed before, never had a diagnosis of any kind, let alone a diagnosis of major depression.

And here, within five seconds, you can generate, produce, cause a suicidal depressive state, which within 30 seconds of switching off the stimulant, 90 seconds, I mean, after the stimulation will stop, the depression stops.

Very interestingly, she agreed, or very bravely, she agreed to have the stimulator switched on and off either in the subthalamic nucleus or in the substantia nigra of the reticular activating system, where she was blind as to where the stimulation was being applied.

And every time it was applied in the reticular activating system, she fell into this severe depressive state again.

So this is what you would expect.

This is the prediction from the hypothesis that affects are actually generated in the brainstem.

The prediction would be if you stimulate these reticular activating nuclei, you will generate affects.

And that's exactly what you do.

This is also why I mentioned the periaqueductal gray earlier, because if you stimulate reticular activating nuclei, you generate intense affects, but the same applies to periaqueductal gray.

In fact, the greatest intensity and range of affects anywhere in the brain can be elicited from deep brain stimulation of the periaqueductal gray.

Brain stimulation of the cortical mantle produces very little, if any, affect.

Another method, positron emission tomography.

So another study of Damasio's patients in states of anger, sadness, happiness, and fear.

You see where the brain, the major brain activity is in all of these affective states.

The major activity is subcortical.

It's in the brainstem.

It's not cortical.

So again, this is exactly what you would predict if the affect is actually being generated by the brainstem, not being read out by the cortex, but generated by the brainstem.

And then there's also the matter of the neurotransmitters that psychopharmacologists tinker with.

The mainstream psychiatric medications modulate neurotransmitters that are sourced in the reticular activating system.

We don't normally think of it that way, but it is simply the case that serotonin, which we increase with antidepressants, is sourced in the reticular activating system.

Dopamine, which we block with antipsychotics, is sourced in the reticular activating system.

Noradrenaline.

which is blocked in many anti-anxiety drugs, is sourced in the reticular activating system.

If the reticular activating system was just a power source

that I referred to in my analogy about the television set, then it should only interest anesthetists.

You shouldn't be able to change the channel, alter the programming of the television set by pulling out the plug or by attenuating the power supply.

You might expect the screen to sort of go blank or just flicker, but not to have whole new programs with new contents and new qualities

And so this is my argument, that the idea that feeling states, affective feeling states of the kind that those children display, of the kind that these patients describe, of the kind that psychiatrists are describing,

or directly trying to manipulate are generated by upper brainstem structures.

They're not generated by cortex.

You don't need to have cortex in order to have these states.

And yet we all know and agree, we all agree that cortical consciousness is contingent upon reticular activating arousal.

If we now are forced to accept that reticular activating arousal is not contentless,

is not a mere quantity, is not just a level, but rather has content and quality that we call affect, then we have to accept that affect is a prerequisite for all other forms of consciousness.

And it's on this basis, not on semantic one, that I'm claiming that affect is the foundational form of consciousness.

It also makes good evolutionary sense that this ancient structure, rather than the cortical mantle,

which evolves only with mammals, that the ability to register your own subjective state, how you're doing affectively in terms of hunger and thirst and sleepiness and too hotness and whatnot, that this should not require

such a late evolutionary development.

But that's another point.

I'm just wanting to slot in there that I also mean it in the evolutionary sense when I say that affect is the foundational form of consciousness.

I don't only mean it in the functional sense.

Now, I'll pause there because that's a big claim

and a very controversial claim.

In fact, I must tell you, I'm still slightly dismayed that it remains controversial.

I've been really surprised by the degree of pushback that I get when I argue.

And I'm not the only one who argues it.

I'm not the first one to argue it.

But Damasio argues it.

Panksepp was the first to argue it.

Merkel argues it.

And here I come a good few years on and argue the same thing, citing all of this evidence.

And, wow, people just don't want to accept it.

So let's hear what you have to say.


SPEAKER_00:
um yeah yeah i'll read a question from the chat first and then we'll go to stephen so jonathan in the in the chat wrote i can imagine a modern large language model the likes of gpt3 creating such conversations without apparently having a mind's eye

While I agree it is good evidence, I think we are seeing machine learning systems having similar conversations.

So you presented case studies that are the tip of the iceberg of broader populations and analyses.

How do we think about our evaluation of conversational dialogue in questions about necessity and sufficiency here?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, you see, this is a kind of a

a relative of the philosophical zombie argument.

The problem with this sort of thing is that, in fact, the same applies to you and me.

I can't know for sure that Daniel is conscious, that Stephen is conscious, that David is conscious, or that the person who asked that question is conscious.

The point you've just made really does apply in exactly the same way.

There's no greater reason to believe that it applies to the patients that I've just presented to you than that it applies to you and me.

Because you too could be a philosophical zombie.

In other words, you too could look as if you have internal states, say that you have internal states, but actually there's nobody there.

I can never disprove that.

That is a metaphysical problem.

That's not a scientific problem.

The scientific method requires that your hypothesis has to be consistent with all the known facts, and then you have to make falsifiable predictions from that hypothesis.

And if your predictions are not falsified, then they are upheld unless and until some evidence is found which positively, this is what positivism is all about, which positively falsifies it.

So I'm saying these kids look as if they're conscious.

They behave as if they're conscious.

Now, it's true that they might not be, and Stephen might not be, and Daniel might not be, and David might not be.

But my hypothesis is that they are.

So what do I do?

I say, well, if Daniel feels pain like I do, then when I stick a pin in his hand, he's going to go, ouch, and withdraw his hand and avoid me in future.

And that's a confirmation of my prediction.

The same applies with these kids.

But that's just one source of evidence.

As I said, you don't accept just one.

You then say, okay, well, what about this line of evidence?

What about that?

And I've given you five lines of evidence here in which in every instance,

The prediction from the hypothesis that these people are conscious and that the consciousness is generated in the brain stem and that it has an affective quality, every single line of evidence, the prediction is confirmed.

What you would expect would happen, if that were true, is what happens.

So I'm afraid you can do no more than that in science.

And it's a curious fact that we raise the bar of evidence when it comes to the problem of consciousness.

I think we must be very careful not to require any different sort of evidence in the case of consciousness than we require for any other matter in science, and in this case, in any other discipline.

biological function.

If you start with the assumption that consciousness is something special, that the ordinary rules of science don't apply to, then you're going to have a self-fulfilling prophecy.

Yes, it's possible that these kids and those patients are not there,

that they're lying to me.

It's a little bit of a curious thing that somebody without a sense of self wants to pretend that they've got one.

I think you're on a kind of slippery slope there to irrationality, but I can't prevent you from holding that view.

It's just not consistent with any of the evidence, I'm afraid.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Mark.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I was wondering how much you think the challenge with uptake is because people are sort of stuck in the idea that knowledge and information is a signal coming in and meaning, it's all about meaning and the ability to communicate meaning as opposed to engaging in meaningful action and skillful, inactive processes of the voice twitching

the voice box twitching and enabling words to be in the space around us in some sort of way.

And whether that issue is kind of a deeper ingrained challenge to overcome.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I completely agree with that.

I think that that is a fundamental source of the problem.

because our common sense tells us our consciousness is extraceptive.

As I said earlier, you know, our conscious experience is dominated by visual qualia.

And where do they come from?

From, you know, things, light waves impinging on my retina from outside and I'm seeing things out there.

And so consciousness seems to be so obviously derived from something out there.

And this was at the heart of the experiments that Magoon and Maruzzi did.

Magoon and Maruzzi weren't expecting to find what they found.

They were expecting that a cat deprived of any extra receptive stimuli will fall asleep, if not fall into a coma.

And it was therefore a great surprise to find that that's not what happens, that the consciousness is generated endogenously, comes from deep within the brain, doesn't flow in with sensory stimuli.

when they lesioned that core brainstem structure, the lights went out and they couldn't make sense of it.

And they came up with this theory, which as I've shown you, or at least as I've shown to anyone who's willing to look at the evidence and draw the conclusions that

the way that they framed it is wrong.

It doesn't explain what they saw.

What they saw was that consciousness is endogenously generated.

And where does the notion come from, this common sense notion?

that it flows in from outside, it comes not only from our own everyday experience, but also from the British empiricist philosophers who probably themselves derived it from common sense, you know, that the mind, literally, the mind as a whole, you know, is derived from sensory experience.

that leaves impressions, leaves memory images impressed upon our cortex, which are then associated with each other.

And this, according to British empiricist philosophy, which underpinned the whole of 19th century and early 20th century neurology and neuropsychology.

It's all predicated on that idea.

So I think it's deeply ingrained within ourselves and within our science and, you know, within public perception generally that consciousness comes from outside.

And you're speaking about some further, you know,

ramifications of that and therefore sources of resistance against the alternative view.

But all the evidence suggests that consciousness is endogenous.

Consciousness is generated from within.

I mean, you saw, I have, I'm sorry, I don't know who the person was who made the comment about, you know, how do we know that this is not, you know, just some sort of program spewing out language.

I have nothing against you.

I don't know who you are.

I just hear that all the time.

And, you know, I find it, frankly, I find it astonishing, you know, that you present all of this evidence and then still people say, well, you know, how do you know, how do you know that

that these patients are really conscious.

And this demonstrates the extent of the prejudice that has come with that historical, with that legacy that I've mentioned.

So yeah, I completely agree with you.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Stephen with a raised hand, then Dave with a raised hand, and we'll go with the raised hands.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, thanks.

Yeah, so sort of following on from that.

Yeah, I totally agree.

And actually, I think the work with Carl Christensen and active vision is quite helpful.

There's the idea that we're reaching out and feeling the world.

And I think, actually, I was looking back before 300, 400 years ago.

If you went back in time, people actually almost had that as a,

an intuition that we're looking out in the world.

But once we discovered the retina and then photography, we kind of reimagined.

So one question I've got is regarding cerebral palsy.

I work a lot with communities with complex disability or non-verbal, and their premotor cortex is often damaged.

And in the 1970s, it was thought, medically, if you couldn't speak, you couldn't think.

So that was where they were then.

If you couldn't communicate words,

And then once they started using symbols, this symbolics and the ability to, and they suddenly discovered that all these clients who were non-verbal actually could form complete sentences because they had a way to act in the world and interact in the world and develop language syntax and all of that.

So I'm just thinking whether you've had a lot of, whether any of this work's been tied in with clients pursuing or pausing.


SPEAKER_03:
Not only with cerebral palsy, but with all sorts of neurological conditions.

If I can just sort of piggyback on what you've said about cerebral palsy, the whole trend within clinical neurology has been us realizing that patients who we thought were not conscious actually are conscious.

And the whole sort of tenor of the research that's been done in recent decades, I mean, locked-in syndrome, of course, is the extreme example.

But I don't only mean locked-in syndrome.

I mean, all of these states of reduced and octunded and clouded consciousness and so on, minimally conscious states, so-called vegetative states and so on,

We're finding more and more patients who actually who we thought were not conscious with increasing technology.

We find that they are with with improvements in our methods.

We find that they are.

So it's it's a sort of an odd.

It's an odd.

contradiction with the sorts of philosophical skepticism and doubt that one confronts from people who are saying, well, how do we know they're conscious?

They're behaving as if they're conscious, but maybe they're not.

In fact, what we've been finding in clinical neurology is patients who are behaving as if they're not conscious.

And then when we use the proper tools, we find that they actually are.

So your comment about cerebral palsy can be multiplied, the observations that you referred to.

Consciousness

using reportability as a criterion, the capacity to declare your conscious states has really, it's not just led to methodological and epistemological problems.

It's really led to gross clinical errors.

It's ethical problems.

I feel we need a lot more than mere philosophical skepticism before we can take seriously

in neurology which after all is a branch of medicine before we can take seriously the possibility that these kids and these patients look as if they're conscious behave as if they're conscious say that they're conscious and we say well we can't be sure i mean think about the implications thanks mark dave with a question


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, I'd like to say two things.

To what you were just talking about, the difficulty of telling whether people who seem to be locked in or comatose are conscious.

There have been some people who initially got their experience in working with the dying.

They just wanted people who were dying to not be alone.

And they spent a lot of time, typically as volunteers, sitting with folks who seem to be comatose, who seem to be completely unresponsive.

And they found that events that unroll very, very slowly in the patient's room seemed to elicit a response.

And they got in high-speed cameras and would record what the patient is doing.

And that's a study that's also been done with infants, that infants seem to act extremely fast.

And that if you speed up those movements,

You can actually see a child responding who seems to be just kind of lying there.

They found with the comatose that it seemed they can carry out conversations, and it actually did resemble conversations, taking a person through childhood scenes.

for instance, and watching them respond.

And they'd nod or they'd shake or they'd grin.

You mentioned some kid that used to bully you over a period of minutes, maybe saying it over and over or speaking very slowly.

And you'd get this very slow, but eventually a full grin that a nurse would say, oh, that's just a grimace.

Let me check her diaper.

And the other thing is a much bigger picture question.

Who actually is hyper alert?

getting out of professional settings or ideological settings you walk around you see someone who's just you got to be really careful with them they will just startle you have to be really careful what what you say you don't bring up unpleasant topics you never imply that they've done something wrong who are these for the most part these hyper alert individuals are children of alcoholics

who as small children had to be the responsible person.

They had to keep daddy from hurting mommy.

And I wonder, how was Niels Bohr raised?

Was he hyper alert?

Is that why he became so amazingly oppressive?

As nice as he might have been, nonetheless, unremittingly insistent that only he was correct.

So in that big picture thing, are the folks who want to insist that you absolutely positively are controlled only from the outside, were they the people who as children were never able to emit?

They always had to react.

They always had to be really, really careful because the environment really is something that will come in and get you.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, about your second comment,

I will just say, please note how affective all of this stuff is that you're talking about.

I think that we really underestimate the importance of affect in terms of the whole gamut of phenomena that we call consciousness.

But to your first point, I want to make clear that I am, I mean, I agree with what you're saying about the inference of consciousness in these patients.

But I want to make clear that I'm making actually quite a

in light of or notwithstanding all of this other evidence and all of these other very interesting clinical phenomena, all of which point in the direction of we've underestimated the presence of consciousness, that we've been relying on very poor evidence

criteria in terms of reportability and so on, that really we need more sophisticated methods.

And the more we use more sophisticated methods, the more we find evidence that there is, in fact, somebody there.

I agree with all of that.

But I'm making a very, very limited claim.

I'm not saying these kids are like you and me.

I'm not saying they have a full, rich inner mental life.

I'm saying only that there is something it is like to be them.

And in light of all the evidence in their cases, plus all the other evidence that I've cited or using all these different methods, all I'm saying is that that's something it is likeness that these kids possess is it feels like something.

They have feelings.

That's all I'm saying.

So it's all very interesting, all these other things about how all these other capacities have been missed by us in relation to all of these other neurological conditions.

But in these cases, which have no cortex whatsoever, some of them have basal ganglia and other subcortical forebrain nuclei.

Some of them don't.

But even in cases you have no forebrain,

only a brain stem, they display affects.

And so I'm saying that the brain stem prerequisite form of consciousness does have a quality and the content

It therefore feels like something.

There is something it is like to be these kids, and that quality and content is affective.

That's all I'm claiming, that the foundational form of consciousness is affect, and it's generated in the brainstem.

So it's actually, I think, a rather modest claim in light of all the evidence.

It's quite a conservative claim.

It's a sort of a deflationary claim.

But so much flows from just that.

And I'll just say once more, I find it very hard to understand.

I mean, I can understand it psychodynamically or politically or what, you know, I mean, people's whole careers.

I mean, generations of careers have been built on the assumption, you know, that the

that cortex and consciousness are intrinsically bound up with each other.

So the people have a hell of a lot to lose.

And there are many of us with egg on our faces.

And I freely admit that I too believed that the cortex was the organ of consciousness.

This is what I took in like mother's milk when I trained.

And I believed it for many, many years after I trained.

So I'm not exempted from that.

But gosh, we've got to look at the evidence.

It's wrong.

We made a mistake.

That doesn't mean the cortex does nothing.

It doesn't mean it doesn't contribute anything to consciousness.

It's just not the source of consciousness.

The cortex elaborates this very raw primary elemental feeling that is generated in the brainstem.

and all we need to do is accept that and then we'll make huge progress in consciousness science.

The fallacy that the cortex is the source of consciousness is really a serious impediment to us at this point in the history of our field.

I think it's you next, Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
yes it is indeed a theme of the discussion that ambiguous evidence are continually interpreted and reinterpreted in light of our inherited or our previously structured priors and that's true in the active vision example it's also true in the scientific example where our inherited priors about scientific models influence how new evidence is not just perceived but funded and carried out and um

made me think about uh when people activate a gene or remove one gene and make claims of function might be an analogous to the brain but removing or having one node in a complex network showing that there is a single point of failure or gain of function does not entail that as a generating mechanism which is just an example of an explanation that retains

An alternative perspective.

And so I think it's interesting on multiple levels as we kind of apply this idea of updating and learning and structural learning on our theories about ostensibly the part of the body that does this function as opposed to one's hand, which is important and has nerves in it, but doesn't do this kind of engagement.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks very much.

So I agree.

That's an everyday observation that we are reluctant to accept prediction errors.

We cling to our priors, especially our most deeply consolidated priors.

And we see this in everyday life.

Nobody likes to find they were wrong, that they have to change their mind, that they have to accept evidence for review other than the one that they had always held.

And this applies even to our scientists.

I mean, who in their graduate studies, when they were doing their first research,

didn't hope that their hypothesis was right.

And then when the evidence came in and they found, oh dear, I haven't found what I expected to find.

It's not welcome.

So what I'm referring to based on what you've just said, I know this is not quite what you were saying.

I'm sort of elaborating what you were saying.

is that we don't recognize sufficiently the affective dimension in our resistance to prediction errors.

We all know about priors and posteriors and how this all works mechanistically, but just from the sort of anecdotes that I've mentioned,

I'm trying to get us to recognize that there is an affective dimension to that.

And when we get to this point about the concentric predictive hierarchy, I'll come back to that.

But I think it's an interesting and important observation that

As you traverse the hierarchy and get to what, in my way of thinking about it as a concentric hierarchy, to get deeper into the hierarchy in the traditional way we speak of going higher in the hierarchy.

But as we go deeper, further from the sensory motor periphery,

So we come upon priors which are more and more difficult to update.

And I say again, there's a feeling that goes with that, which is, I don't care what you tell me, I'm not going to believe you.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Mark.

Stephen, with a question?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I know you're going to come back to the cognitive consciousness, but

something around terminology.

We've been doing work around an ontology working group at the Active Inference Lab, actually, trying to understand how to think about the language.

And you mentioned it could be affect is generated in the brainstem.

And that's when something's like something, that's what it's like.

But I'm also wondering how you take in the dynamic with the body and environment going down.

I don't know if that's seen as another

manifestation um because obviously the brain so it makes sense because it's it's more integrated with the rest of the body's nervous system it's less distant from it but um i'm wondering whether the term um generated within is more to do with when it's connected to the the rest of the brain and when it goes down it's actually more distributed in the mind body environment dynamic


SPEAKER_03:
I would have nothing against, I mean, that way of thinking is, I'm very sympathetic with it.

I'm not a narrow localizationist.

I'm very, very happy to recognize it comes naturally to me to think about functional systems which are distributed and dynamic.

And in fact, the reticular activating system is probably the most deeply interconnected with everything else in the brain system that there is.

It has tentacles everywhere.

And not only, although it's called the ascending reticular activating system, it descends also.

It modulates the whole nervous system.

in very important ways that will come to you because this whole thing of precision modulation is at the heart of my way of understanding consciousness.

So the main thing that I'm wanting to say is I agree with you that this is a deeply interconnected system which functions by modulating other systems.

And I would be very happy if we had to leave it there and say, well, you can't quite say that affect is generated in the reticular activating system because it's really modulating these other systems.

My reluctance, however, in this case to accept that is twofold.

The one is that that's the kind of thing that people like Joe LeDoux are saying.

They're saying, yeah, this is all unconscious until it is labeled by or read out in Cortex.

You're not talking about cortex, but the principle remains.

I don't want to concede the point that it only becomes conscious once it modulates something else and that that's really where the contents and qualities are.

That's a sort of theoretical reluctance on my part.

You can see why.

But more importantly, more tellingly,

is the evidence.

When you look at these kids, they have no cortex.

So their affects can't be modulating.

It can't be the result of something that the brainstem is doing to cortex.

because there ain't no cortex, and yet there's all the evidence that they have affects.

And so I think as much as surprising as it may be, it's not consistent with our normal way of thinking about cortex, and it's also not something that I'm wedded to, the idea that anything is generated in anything.

But the evidence suggests that certainly the modulatory influence that the reticular activating system has over the cortex, true as it is, important as it is, fundamental as it is to how that system works, that the affects are not a product of the modulation of cortex.

The affects are generated in the subcortical structures.

And if you just take a step back, the implication of that,

is that, well, maybe there are affects in vertebrates who don't have cortex.

In other words, maybe affects are not the exclusive preserve of mammals.

And actually, that seems pretty likely.

It seems pretty darn likely that non-mammalian vertebrates have affects.

And again, when you start looking at the evidence, it's pretty darn good that they do.

So I'm happy to accept everything that you're saying about let us not forget that this is a system which is deeply interconnected with other systems, that its primary function is to modulate other systems.

But all I'm saying is that when it comes to cortex, the affects themselves are not generated by the modulating of cortex.

That doesn't mean that there's a disembodied brain or a disembodied reticular activating system, but you can have a decorticated reticular activating system, and it can generate affects nonetheless.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Mark.

Dave, do you want to go?

Okay, so one thought.


SPEAKER_03:
I see that the comments in the chat line, have they been dealt with?

Can I move on?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, let's try to get to at least one other of these important points.

Oh, well, this is a brief point.


SPEAKER_03:
The reason I'm making this point

about affect not being synonymous with interoceptive inference is because those few people working within the active inference framework who are not corticocentric, and happily, they are increasing.

There's people who worked within this framework

They had no reason to question all of the mainstream assumptions of cognitive neuroscience as far as a cortex is concerned.

But slowly it's become apparent that affect is an important topic that we're not only talking about perception and action and cognition, we're talking also about affective processes and about body regulating processes and so on.

In fact, the whole of self-organization has to do with the regulation of the own body and the whole notion of self-evidencing systems and so on.

So this is happily slowly coming and increasingly coming into the mainstream of the people working within the sort of active inference framework.

But the dominant view within that school of thought is that affect is to the internal body what perception is to the external world.

In other words, extraception is perceptual inference regarding things going on outside of me,

And affect is perceptual inference about things going on inside of me.

And if that were so, that would be nice and simple.

But I don't see it that way.

And perhaps the outstanding proponent of the view that affect is interceptive inference is Neil Seth.

And he's just brought out a really very good book

I have it right here.

Here it is.

Being you, which is predicated on that view.

So because I agree with him about so many things, I think that it's easy for people to conflate our views and to imagine that what I'm saying is the same as what he's saying on this score.

So I want to make clear that I'm not saying the same as what he's saying on this score.

Why do I think that affect is not the same as perception, but rather intercepted perception?

Well, first of all, because there are many interceptive perceptual states which are not affective.

So you can perceive your heart rate, the beating of your heart.

You can perceive your respiration rate.

uh rate or the the the the the inspiring and expiring of air from your lungs you can perceive gurgling in your tummy which is an unequivocally visceral state and all of these things you can perceive them indifferently you can perceive them without any affective valence or quality at all

So, if affect were synonymous with interoceptive inference, then why are these common and garden examples of interoception not affective?

And then, secondly, if affects were interoceptive perception, how come so many affects are generated by extraoceptive events?

where there doesn't seem to be any clear interoceptive driving force.

So, for example, pain, which is a fairly simple example of an affect.

You stick a pin in my finger, it comes from the outside and it penetrates the nociceptors in my extraoceptive nervous system.

And I feel this intense affect called pain.

So that's extraception, and yet it's affective.

The same applies to surprise, to fright.

You get a shock.

um well in fact electric shock is another one but these are but i i mean just you know fright something unexpected happens outside of you and you startle and there's a there's a there's an affect that goes with that a particular type of disgust is another one you imbibe something um that tastes or smells bad and you wretched up with this terrible feeling of disgust and then they're more

And they're not purely, entirely non-bodily affective states like missing somebody, you know, missing your brother.

It's clearly affective and there's nothing bodily about it.

And nothing interceptive about it when I say nothing bodily.

I mean, particularly, you know, it's not about the state of your interceptive visceral processes.

I'm saying there are interoceptive visceral processes which we perceive which are not affective, and there are affective processes, affective states that we experience which are not interoceptive.

So I don't think that we can say that affect is interceptive inference, that it's the same as external perception, except it's directed toward the state, the internal state of the own body.

I think that it's something else.

And I don't say this to be difficult.

I'm actually quite concerned that those few of us within the active influence framework who are recognizing the importance of affect can't agree on this point because there are few enough of us who recognize the importance of affect.

So I'm just wanting to make clear why I think that it's not merely a kind of mirror image reflection of of extra receptive influence.

And then I want to add one last point, which is that when you read, I mean, everything that I'm going to go on to argue about why

extra-ceptive perception.

Remember what I said at the very beginning about cortical vision having been the model example of where we will find the neural correlative consciousness, which has led us down this blind alley and got us into such a mess.

that it has to do largely, as I'm going to argue later, with the fact that cortical processes and perceptual processes are not intrinsically conscious things.

You can perceive

the world through all your extraceptive modalities vision included at the cortical level too you can perceive the world without perceiving it consciously in other words extraceptive inference perceptual inference is not an intrinsically conscious process

There's nothing about extraceptive inference or perceptual inference that requires consciousness for us to understand the mechanisms at work.

And so if interoceptive inference is just the same thing applied to the interior of the organism, it suffers all the same problems.

It's not clear why it becomes conscious.

And I said, that's going to be my last point on the school.

But in fact, I realized there's one more that I want to make, which is that the vast, vast, vast majority of our interceptive processes are unconscious.

I mean, even more so than our extraceptive processes, most of our regulation of our visceral bodily economy happens autonomically.

We know nothing about it.

So it would be, again, a very curious place to find the essential mechanism of

of consciousness, and in this case of affect, if the majority of the mechanisms of this kind, in fact, do not operate consciously, and if it suffers the very same problems as our extra-ceptive

using vision as a model example, using any form of perception, I think, as a model example of consciousness is to make a mistake because consciousness is not an afferent process.

Consciousness is an endogenous process.

It's something generated not from within the guts, but from within the core of the brain.

And that's where we're going next.

So I'll stop there for any comments on that point before I move to the next one.


SPEAKER_00:
Great presentation, important distinctions and points.

So indeed, we'll take a breath and I think we can head on to the next one.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
So now,


SPEAKER_03:
I've told you in relation to the point I've just made, I think that the hard problem of consciousness has arisen in large part from the

example that we've used of consciousness, starting with Crick, who has to be credited with bringing consciousness into center stage.

So you know, I'm not bashing Crick.

And I also have said already, I think it's perfectly reasonable that he started where

You know, it's clear why he started with visual perception as his example, where we should look for the neural correlate of visual consciousness, and then distinguish, you know, unconscious vision from conscious vision, and then there we have it, then we have the neural correlate, and then we can generalize from there.

I'm saying that it turns out that was an unfortunate place to start and it links with what I was saying earlier.

That's also why I'm saying I don't want us to make the same mistake, just turning it inwards and saying we're dealing with perceptual processes.

So let me say why all of this casts new light on the hard problem.

So here is Chalmers, the person who formulated the hard problem in the very paper that he formulated it.

And he says, what makes the hard problem hard and almost unique is that it goes beyond problems about the performance of functions.

To see this, note that even when we've explained the performance of all the cognitive and behavioral functions in the vicinity of experience, there may still remain a further unanswered question.

Why is the performance of these functions accompanied by experience?

A simple explanation of the functions leaves this question open.

Why doesn't all this information processing go on in the dark, free of any inner field?

So this is a...

The core aspect of Chalmers' hard problem is saying that our normal way of going about doing cognitive neuroscience, where we take a mental phenomenon and we say, okay, you know, let's see, you know,

which part of the brain needs to be damaged in order to disrupt this mental state.

And then let's start piecing together what this part of the brain does and how it works.

And next thing, we end up with a wonderfully complicated map of all of the mechanisms at work, in this case, using the standard example, visual perception.

Thomas's point is that you can do this.

This is standard, the standard approach in cognitive neuroscience, but it doesn't tell you why there is something it is like to see.

So you can, you know, the famous knowledge argument with Mary, the visual neuroscientist, she knows everything that there is to know about the functional mechanisms of visual perception, but she knows nothing about what it's like to see in the, in the,

In the example that Jackson, or the story as Jackson told it, she's never seen color.

But I like to extend and simplify his arguments and just say she was born blind.

She knows everything there is to know about the functional mechanisms of vision, but she's never experienced vision.

And if one day she's blessed with the gift of sight, she will learn something utterly new about vision, namely what it is like to see, what redness is like, what blueness is like, and so on.

And this is their argument.

Their argument is that the normal vision

way we proceed in cognitive neuroscience, namely to dissect the function and in this way to explain the mental thing that we're trying to explain, works very well for all of these mental functions, but it doesn't work very well.

It doesn't work at all for consciousness.

Consciousness

defined as what it is like to perform these functions.

So they're claiming, Chalmers is, and Nagel and others of that ilk, that somehow the consciousness is in a different realm from every other mental function.

Because when you've explained all the functional mechanisms, you still are left with this epistemic gap between that explanation of the function and the qualitative experiential phenomenal feel of seeing.

And so I'm saying that the problem is that they're using perception as an example.

Perception is not an intrinsically conscious function.

And indeed, cortical perception is not intrinsically conscious.

It is demonstrably the case that the cortex can perform uniquely cortical perceptual operations, like actually recognizing color.

You can recognize color unconsciously.

You can recognize faces unconsciously.

You can read words unconsciously.

So if the cortex can do all of this perceptual and cognitive gymnastics without consciousness, I think it's perfectly reasonable to say, well, why doesn't all this information processing go on in the dark without any inner field?

Because that kind of information processing can go on in the dark without any inner field.

Perceptual inference is not intrinsically conscious.

So this

statement of Chalmers's, this really strong statement where he says, there is no cognitive function such that we can say in advance that explanation of that function will automatically explain experience.

This is what he says on the basis of everything that I've just told you.

This is where he's led.

He's saying,

that explaining the function can never explain experience.

If that's the case, we're in big trouble because consciousness is somehow going to have to be dealt with in a different way from everything else in science.

But if you change that word cognitive to affective,

would charmers have said this there is no affective function such that we can say in advance that explanation of that function will automatically explain experience I'm saying of course there is the function of feeling

I am saying in advance that explanation of the function of feeling will automatically explain why it feels like something, because that is the function of feeling.

The function of feeling is for the organism to feel it, to feel its own state.

I'm saying, had we begun there, had we begun our quest for the neural correlates of consciousness with this model example, had we begun by asking why and how does it come about that feelings are experienced, I think that we would have had a much less hard time of it than we have had starting with

with visual information processing the mechanism of vision the mechanism even of cortical vision is not intrinsically conscious it does not automatically explain experience because it does not automatically have to be experienced but the mechanism of feeling uh

it you cannot explain how feeling works why feeling exists what it's there for if you have a functional account of feeling it would have to account for why it feels like something in other words why it's experienced so i think that what i said in my earlier point that um that um

that these facts cast new light on the hard problem.

This is the new light that it casts.

I just have also on the screen this slide, this famous review paper by Kjellström, which summarizes all the experimental evidence.

for the conclusion that we were led to actually a good four decades ago already, that perception without awareness of what is perceived is perfectly commonplace, and learning without awareness of what is learned

is perfectly commonplace.

Cognitive and perceptual functions performed by the cortex are not intrinsically conscious processes.

So this question of Chalmers' is why is the performance of these functions accompanied by experience?

Why doesn't all this information processing go on in the dark?

That perplexity is not difficult to understand in light of those facts.

But I don't think that this question has anything like the same gravity when you apply it to the kinds of mechanisms that give rise to feeling.

I'm saying in short that if Mary was an affective neuroscientist rather than a cognitive neuroscientist or a visual neuroscientist,

She could not know everything that there is to know about the functional mechanisms underpinning feeling without expecting that it will generate something that is experienced without understanding.

without the mechanism necessarily accounting for why it is experienced.

And this is why I think it's shifting our focus from cortex to brainstem and from perception to affect has big implications for our ability to finally come to grips with this hard problem of consciousness.


SPEAKER_00:
I'll pause there again.

Thank you.

thank you mark i'll read a comment in the chat and then you can respond then steven so dean writes pre-arousal plus awareness minimum of two not as brain geography or territory establishment effort rather a dance in an evolving relationship as we might see in an asian dancing with the environment whereas the territorial view might examine control

brainstem of the cortex, or vice versa, one in a controlling relationship, through a mechanical lens, this relationship of arousal and awareness could be choreographed, mechanized, but not necessarily choreographed.

I'm not sure what that part meant.

Are feelings a residue of arousal plus awareness revealed?

We accept the signals like we dance out a path generated.


SPEAKER_03:
Look, I think that this is similar to the point that we were discussing earlier about generated in the upper brainstem as opposed to the upper brainstem modulating other structures, whether they be above or below the brainstem in the nervous system.

I said then, I'm very happy to think of it as a dance, as something choreographed, where it's not a matter of who's master and who's servant.

When it comes to the relationship between

affective arousal and cortical representation.

I think that there's some instances where affective arousal just absolutely brushes aside any amount of

decision-making and thought processing.

Conversely, the opposite happens too.

There clearly are ways in which one can, in a top-down way, modulate affect dramatically.

I don't only mean regulate your emotions.

If you look at some of these examples of these Buddhist monks who are able to really massively control autonomic functions and the affects that normally would go

you know, with not breathing or walking on painful surfaces and so on, those affects seem to be overridden.

So I have nothing against the idea of there being a choreography between brainstem and cortex.

I've already said why I think that in this instance, the affects do not require the cortex to actually qualify for the name affect, that they actually are felt without cortex.

I've already said why, what the evidence is, both in terms of studies of, you know, here and now studies using the various methods that I mentioned.

the most dramatic being, as I said, cases where there is no cortex, and yet there's evidence that there's plenty of affect there.

But also the evolutionary implications of that, which is that we don't have to wait for the appearance of cortex and the mammalian series for the dawn of consciousness.

That if affect is generated in the subcortical structures,

then affect does not require cortex and affect can be attributed to other vertebrates.

And not only vertebrates, by the way, there also is good evidence that some invertebrates are conscious.

The octopus is the most famous example.

But I think that there's a further problem in this comment, which has to do with the word awareness.

You speak of arousal and awareness, and you seem to attribute arousal to reticular activating system, which I'm happy with, and awareness to cortex, which I'm not so happy with, if you mean that you cannot be aware of arousal without cortex.

So I think this word awareness, it's like all the other words I mentioned at the beginning, like emotion and affect and so on.

And I said, I want to use the word feeling to make clear what I'm talking about, because these words mean different things to different people.

The word awareness means different things to different people.

And to many people, it seems to mean something like reflective awareness.

In other words, being aware of what you're aware of.

or access consciousness, as Ned Block calls it.

That there's this sort of phenomenal consciousness, which is some kind of like a raw consciousness, and then there's a subject that accesses this information.

It's like the global workspace theory works, that it's a pretty similar sort of idea.

If we're going to reserve the word awareness for that higher order thought or reflective consciousness or access consciousness, then it means that we can't attribute awareness to raw fields.

You know, that's an odd use of the word awareness to me.

To me, how can you feel pain without being aware of it?

You know, and pain, you don't need to have any kind of reflective cognition about it.

You don't need to have any explanatory labeling or anything.

It's just like, shed that sore and you pull away, even if you don't have language, even if you're not human, even if you're not a mammal.

even if you're another kind of creature.

So arousal for me implies awareness in the way I use the word.

But if we're going to use awareness for that higher order type of consciousness, then I would just want to remind you that there are other types of consciousnesses

that don't possess that kind of awareness, which nevertheless have something it is likeness, and the core of that quality is feeling.

That something it is likeness is feeling.

Thank you, Mark.


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, thank you.

So I was wondering if we think of consciousness as a kind of an integration of our action expectations of what's happening, and those expectations then will, and Caspar Hesp talks about this for his work with Active Influence, is how those expectations were or weren't met can be affected.

So I was wondering within that kind of

that prediction process.

When someone gets a question right, say a mathematician, when they get it right, they get a feeling that it's right.

It's like it's a felt sense.

And you could ask someone, what's that feeling like?

And they can sort of bring out the metaphor landscape

and there's a similar thing with pain as well pain has to be expressed as a metaphor you have to say it's like a stabbing or it's a throbbing or it's a it's always some kind of dynamical kind of metaphorical embodiment so I'm just curious as these you know this embodiment is meeting in this brainstem how you

how you see that in terms of if that's congruent with you and whether this is then a sort of a reimagining, consciousness is like a reimagining of these expectations and it could go up or down in terms of how that is being kind of realised.


SPEAKER_03:
So I'd like to separate out two different aspects of what you're saying.

The first has to do with metaphor.

And I think that that may be true of being able to report or declare your conscious states in language that somehow or other you have to symbolize because language is just that.

It's a symbolic representation of the thing itself.

So as long as you use the word expressing it, yes, you can't express in words an emotion without using some sort of metaphor, some sort of symbolic system in order to be able to communicate it to others.

There can, of course, be the direct behavioral affect of display, expressing of the emotions in Darwin's sense of the use of that term, which we then, as symbolic species, we use that symbolically too.

I don't think the raw feeling itself has to be re-represented in any way.

I think it can just be the raw feeling without it being represented in any language in the broadest sense of the word.

I don't think that metaphor is a necessary component of the core feature of feeling.

Then the other thing you were saying, which had to do with surprise, if I understood you correctly, at times in my own thinking about this, there were times when I was keen on

thinking about affect or linking affect more with error signals than with inferences themselves.

I was thinking along those lines because so many people within the active inference framework were speaking

about perception.

You know this famous phrase, controlled hallucination, that perception is fantasy, that it is the upshot of the predictive process.

And what worried me about that is the very thing I've been banging on about all along, which is that perception is not intrinsically conscious.

And so this business of inferring the source of your sensory signals

doesn't explain why there's something it is like to infer the cause of your sensory signals.

So from that sort of point of view, I found myself thinking, well, it's not so much

I mean, imagine if what you perceive is just what you predict.

That would be bloody dangerous.

So the controlled aspect seemed to me to be the more important aspect.

It's the constraint on what you predict that seems to be more the upshot of what we call perception as opposed to hallucination.

And so I wanted to place the emphasis more on the error side of things than on the prediction side of things.

But subsequently, I have changed my mind on that score, which will become clearer when I get down here.

Where is it?

When I get down here, which we're obviously not going to get to today, but I'm very much looking forward to us having a second meeting where we can get there.

For me, it's got...

everything to do with the modulation of confidence in the prediction versus the error signal or the error signal that is connected with that particular prediction.

And I will just say it now because we're not going to get to it in this meeting.

The pithy formulation of the way that I see it is that it is good

when things turn out as expected.

And it is bad.

when uncertainty prevails.

And I mean here goodness and badness in the valuative sense of the word that is linked to the primary value system of all living things, which is that it is bad to die and it is good to survive.

And if things are turning out as expected, in other words, you have a prediction which actually cuts it, that that is good.

uh from the viewpoint of the organism um and that if things are not turning out as expected and uncertainty is prevailing that is bad it means you know this this is likely to end in tears and so um the the the the uh

What was it, the choreography that somebody, the dance that somebody else was talking about earlier?

I think that the crucial thing here is the palpating of the precision, the modulating of the precision in the predictions over the error signals.

And that that is at the heart of what affect's all about.

And I'm only saying that now in advance because I know we're not going to get there.

in this meeting because we've only got seven minutes to go.

But I'm going to try, if I may, unless there are any further questions and comments.

Are there any further questions and comments?


SPEAKER_00:
No.

Here are some future comments.


SPEAKER_03:
It takes many minutes.

If there are still some, then...

I think what we should do is I'll take whatever comments remain or questions, and then we'll start next time with this point because I don't think I can squeeze it in.

I don't think I should even try to squeeze it into too short a time period.


SPEAKER_00:
Totally agree.

yeah that was my comment was uh we will have a last few minutes to um really just appreciate you coming on for the 16.1 and we'll find a time to do 16.2 when we will

condense and sort of reflect on what has already transpired and look forward to these next points i think it was really great to walk through it this way so steven or dave do you have any last thoughts otherwise mark please have a last thought so dave first then optionally steven and then mark


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, in addition to Professor Seth, whose book we already have, who else can we check with as people doing AI without the constriction?


SPEAKER_03:
Without which?

You mean who else is working on affective processes within this?


SPEAKER_02:
Exactly.


SPEAKER_03:
So...

Two people who come to mind immediately is Manos Tsakiris and Katerina Fotopoulou.

Katerina Fotopoulou.

uh, they, they, uh, uh, they both great.

Um, and, uh, uh, and also both of them are very good speakers.

Uh, so, so if you're, if you're wanting to invite them onto, uh, this, this, um, seminar, what, what live stream series, I think that they would be, um, they would do well.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thank you very much, Steven.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Just to say, thanks very much.

And, um,

Yeah, we've been reading some of the work of Ryan Smith and Kasper Hesp.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, well, Ryan Smith also.

Ryan and Maxwell Ramsted.

They're also working on AFIC.

I should have mentioned them.

Ryan Smith and Maxwell Ramsted.

Sorry.

They're doing some fabulous work.

I really loved their recent paper on folk psychology.

It was just brilliant.


SPEAKER_01:
Excellent.

Oh, thanks.

We'll be connecting those dots up, I'm sure, next time as well.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Any closing thoughts?

Yes, go ahead, Mark.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just to say that I appreciate having the, I mean, it's not every day that you have two hours with excellent minds to be able to talk about only half of what you wanted to talk about.

So it's been very kind of you to give me this latitude.

I think that these issues, and I'm also particularly pleased that you're going to be in one way or another recording, and I don't just mean video recording, but also turning into some sort of written form of what we're talking about.

Because as I hope you can see from what I've said, just in half of what I wanted to go through, these really are pretty basic issues.

for consciousness science and for the science of the mind and by implication for what we can do within this active inference framework in tackling these, really, I don't mean to be hyperbolic when I say these profound

and ancient problems, I think that we have real prospects of being able to make significant progress on these fronts.

And so it deserves, is the point I'm making, it deserves the time that we are giving it.

And I'm grateful to you for recognizing that.


SPEAKER_00:
Well said.

Thank you very much.

Thanks.

Thanks very much.

See everybody next time.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Cheers for now.

## c0_Vf5_qiWk

SPEAKER_03:
hello and welcome everyone this is actinflab guest stream number 16.2

It is June 11th, 2022.

We're here with Mark Solms.

This is the second part in our discussion.

We had an awesome part one.

Today, we are going to have a recap on some of the points that were addressed in the first part in 16.1, and then we're going to head into some unexplored territory.

So Mark, thanks so much for joining for these sessions and please take it away.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Daniel.

Glad to be here again.

I was just testing out sharing my screen a minute ago, and it seems as if I'm incapable of showing you my face and sharing my screen at the same time.

So take a good look at me.

You're not going to see me for a while.

Here comes my screen.

Please, God.

There we are.

Great.

And here comes my pointer.

There we are.

And here's my title.

The emphasis is on physiological and philosophical considerations rather than computational ones.

So I'll start with a brief recap.

I made a few claims, and I didn't get to the end of this list.

So I will just remind you what those claims were, and then I will pause when I get to the point that we stopped at last time, which was here, that affect is an extended form of homeostasis.

I started with the claim, which really is the main claim,

of my presentation.

It is that affect, feeling, is the foundational form of consciousness and that it is intrinsically conscious.

I quoted Freud, who, more than anyone else, introduced the notion into mental science that mental processes are not intrinsically conscious, that much of our cognitive processing goes on unconsciously,

Even he made this point, the point that I'm making, which in his words was that it is surely of the essence of an emotion that we should be aware of it.

That is, that it should become known to consciousness.

Thus, the possibility of the attribute of unconsciousness would be completely excluded as emotions, feelings, and affects are concerned.

And I emphasize the word feelings because there's a whole lot of reasons why some people claim that there are such things as unconscious emotions and unconscious affects.

So just to be absolutely clear what I'm talking about here, I'm talking about feelings.

And you can't have an unconscious feeling.

In other words, you can't have a feeling that you don't feel.

So whatever might be meant by unconscious emotions and unconscious affects, they can't apply to feelings.

They can't be unconscious feelings.

But that might sound like a semantic point, just a matter of words that you can't have a feeling that you don't feel that's an oxymoron.

So I then went on to set out various reasons, empirical ones, why the claim that feelings are intrinsically conscious also has a solid empirical basis.

I drew attention to this discovery that was made in 1949 already, that the brain mechanisms

for consciousness itself, in other words, what wakes us up in the morning and puts us to sleep at night, the sort of switching on and off of the lights of consciousness, that this is the business of the reticular activating system.

The reticular activating system is the brain system for arousing consciousness.

for activating cortical processes and rendering them conscious.

I also mentioned the periaqueductal gray, which plays a crucial part in all of this.

together with the reticular activating system.

But I'll come back to that later.

For now, let's just focus on the reticular activating system.

To give you a sense of what I mean by how these structures, their intrinsic function is the switching on of the lights of consciousness,

I pointed out that you can make a lesion, or you can suffer a lesion, as small as two cubic millimeters in size in the parabrachial complex of the reticular activating system.

In other words, a lesion the size of a match head, and that is enough in human beings reliably to obliterate consciousness entirely.

So I was saying, let's look at these structures if we're wanting to understand something of the intrinsic consciousness generating mechanisms of the brain.

And I made the point

that if the cortex, which is where we normally shine our light in terms of looking for the neural correlates of consciousness, if the cortex were the seat of consciousness, then there's an easily testable prediction, which is that if you have a case in which there is no cortex, then the patient should not be conscious.

Not so.

Therefore, I showed you one such case.

This is one representative example of its type, that here is a patient born with no cortex.

The condition is called hydranencephaly.

Here you see in an MRI scan of her brain that where cortex should be, there is just cerebrospinal fluid, and you see that her brainstem is perfectly intact.

So on the view that this brainstem area is where the consciousness is generated, that it doesn't require cortex, this is a critical case.

On the brainstem view, she should be conscious.

On the cortical view, she should not.

And here she is, and she's conscious, as you can see.

She wakes up in the morning.

She goes to sleep at night.

In this sense, the lights are on.

But much more interestingly, she's not merely blankly awake.

Her wakefulness has a content and a quality.

The quality that I'm talking about is affective quality.

You see how she responds to her baby brother being placed on her lap.

She responds with some form of pleasure.

And so there's a content to this mental state and a quality to this mental state that she's displaying.

Why that's important is because when we first learnt in 1949 that the reticular activating system is prerequisite for all consciousness, that there's no such thing as cortical consciousness without brainstem arousal of the cortex, we had the view that the cortex provides the qualities and the contents of consciousness and the reticular activating system merely provides the

quantitative dimension, the sort of level of consciousness.

So it's as if this was a power supply like a television set needs to be plugged in at the wall.

The reticular activating system is the prerequisite sort of booting up of the system.

But the television set itself, the cortex where the contents and

qualities of consciousness are processed, could still be claimed to be the seat of consciousness and the reticular activating system merely as a

power source.

This is why it was important to point out that this child is not only conscious in some blank sense of wakefulness without content and quality, but rather that she displays affects.

She's emotionally responsive to her baby brother being placed on her lap, just as this child, who also has no cortex, is emotionally responsive.

Here you can see she's responding with pleasure to

And this is quite generally the case for these children.

Here is Bjorn Merke's summary of his observations in many, many, many such children.

They express pleasure.

They smile.

They laugh.

They show aversion and fussing by arching their backs and crying.

Their faces are animated by these emotional states.

They build up play sequences.

They smile.

They giggle.

They laugh.

They show great excitement, etc., etc., etc.

So I've highlighted all of those words to show that these two cases that I just showed you with no cortex, they are conscious and they are responsive.

And in particular, they are emotionally responsive.

And on this, I base the claim that these children

do have a quality.

They do have a consciousness, and this consciousness does have a quality, and it does have content.

Many people are perplexed as to how this could happen.

Since they have no cortex, how can they respond to things like their baby brothers being placed in their laps?

And so I just inserted this slide.

I don't think I showed it last time.

Just to point out that our sensory end organs, here the example is the eye.

Same applies to the skin and to hearing and taste as well.

The optic nerve projects to the lateral geniculate and from there to the visual cortex, but not only to the visual cortex.

It also projects subcortically to the superior colliculi of the brain stem.

which is immediately adjacent to the periaqueductal gray, which I said earlier I was going to mention again.

So these children receive information in the brainstem which is not conscious, it's not cognitively conscious perception.

Conscious perception is generated in the cortex, but unconscious sensory information goes into the brainstem where it is responded to consciously by

the emotional structures that are the main focus of what I'm talking to you about.

Now, of course, many of you, like many of my colleagues, will reasonably say, well, how do you know that there's something it's like to be those children?

These might just be reflexes or instincts.

These might be the equivalent, these kids, of philosophical zombies.

In other words, they look as if they're conscious, they behave as if they're conscious, but we can't know that they're actually conscious.

And so last time I tried to address this objection.

by drawing attention to what happens in cases who lose great swathes of their cortex and because they haven't lost all of their cortex, they are able to describe to us what it's like to be them.

This is one way of getting around the objection that because these kids have no cortex and therefore can't

declare their conscious states, we can't be sure that they have conscious states.

So I focused first of all on a case who has a massive lesion of the prefrontal cortex.

The reason I did that is because this is a favorite

part of the cortex.

For those who claim the cortex is the seat of consciousness, like the global workspace theorists, they say it all comes together in the prefrontal lobes.

All of this information that's processed in the posterior cortices is re-represented or accessed in the global workspace and this is where the sentient being, the subject of the mind, comes about.

And I pointed out last time that if that were the case, then again, we have a falsifiable prediction.

A patient who has no prefrontal cortex, like this patient of mine, patient W, he has no prefrontal cortex, but he has a sliver of language cortex.

If his sentient being was contingent upon language,

the integrity of prefrontal cortex, he should not have sentient being.

And so I showed you what it's like.

I talked to him about what it's like to be him.

He claims to be consciously aware of his thoughts.

I asked him to imagine something for me, to imagine two dogs and a chicken, to see them in his mind's eye.

And then I asked him to count the legs.

I thought this would be a reasonable test of whether he's actually got conscious mental imagery.

And please note the person I'm talking to refers to himself as I. So he seems to think that he exists as a sentient being.

And I asked him how many legs there are in total if you have two dogs and one chicken.

And to my disappointment, he said eight.

And when I questioned his answer, he pointed out that in his mind's eye, the dogs had ate the chicken.

So I thought that was maybe not a great joke, but it certainly suggested that there was somebody at home.

And I made the point last time that these patients generally, patients with massive frontal lesions, that this tendency to make puerile jokes is considered to be a rather common part of the frontal lobe syndrome or the frontal lobe personality.

And this is part of a bigger story that I mentioned last time, which is that these patients are generally quite emotionally disinhibited.

And why that's important is because, remember, what we are considering here is the question as to whether the feelings that you saw in those patients, those kids with no cortex, whether those feelings could be generated in the brain stem.

And the claim of corticocentric theorists like Joe Ledoux, for example, is that the feelings literally come about when they are registered or re-represented or labeled or even named, some people claim.

that it's only once you are able to re-represent these subcortical survival circuits in declarative consciousness in prefrontal lobes that this is literally what brings the feeling about

And I think it's quite interesting that these patients who have no prefrontal cortex don't have a dearth of feeling, which is what you would expect if the machinery that brings feelings about is absent, then they shouldn't be able to have feelings.

But in fact, what is generally accepted is these patients have an excess of feelings.

There's disinhibited emotionality in these patients.

I made much the same argument about the other major cortical area that is associated with the sentient self, and that is the insular cortex.

Of course, this is associated, above all, with the work of Bud Craig, but has been very widely accepted, that the feeling self comes about when...

when the state of one's interceptive body is re-represented in insular cortex.

And so again, we have a falsifiable prediction.

If you take a case who has no insular cortex, like this patient of Damasio's, then there should be no sentient self.

present.

And I showed you this interview where Damasio speaks to him about his sense of self, and the patient is perfectly adamant that he exists as a self.

He speaks about himself as I, I, you know, and

This interview ends with Damasio saying, you're aware that I'm aware?

And the patient B says, I'm aware that you're aware that I'm aware.

And this patient, just like my patient W, is not deficient in emotionality.

In fact, all the basic emotions are present, including both bodily affects and emotional affects and sensory affects.

And not only that, he's also a little too emotional.

And this is a little disinhibited in his emotionality.

And this is what we quite generally see with patients with insular lesions.

So again, it's very hard to sustain the argument that

that the self actually comes into being in the cortex.

Now, of course, those two cases, those examples of their kinds, patients with massive frontal cortical lesions, patients with massive insular lesions, of course, they are just examples.

But the point I'm making now

is that there's lots of cortex left in those cases.

So the argument is, well, maybe the sentient subject is generated in the remainder of their cortex.

And that's a bit of a circular argument, because remember, the children who have no cortex, we're told, well, how do we know?

that they're conscious, they can't report their conscious states.

I then gave these two outstanding examples, looking at the areas of cortex that are most bound up with sentient subjectivity, according to cortical theories of consciousness.

And these patients seem to have intact sentient subjectivity.

But now I'm told, well, you know, the remainder of the cortex

might be what's generating the consciousness.

So we can't use only lesion methods.

There's no way out of that impasse.

And so I then showed you last time evidence of a different kind.

I showed you what happens if you stimulate reticular activating system nuclei.

There again, there's an easily tested prediction.

The prediction is that if these brainstem nuclei, the reticular activating system and periaqueductal gray, as I'm claiming, if these are the structures that generate consciousness and feeling, then stimulation of these structures should stimulate conscious feelings.

And I showed you that he has a case who had a steep brain stimulator placed into the substantia nigra, this part of her reticular activating system.

And within five seconds, it generated, it produced a profound depression.

The patient was actually suicidal.

She didn't want to live anymore.

This is a patient with no psychiatric history.

The electrode was placed in her brain stem for the treatment of Parkinson's disease and stimulated the wrong nucleus.

And that's how this came about.

90 seconds after the stimulator was switched off, the depressed feeling disappeared.

And the patient generously agreed to allow for further stimulation in the

reticular activating system and out of it.

And it was only when that particular nucleus was stimulated that she fell into the depression.

So this is the kind of evidence.

And remember, again, I'm just giving you examples.

You can stimulate intense affective states by stimulating reticular activating nuclei and periaqueductal gray.

You get the greatest intensity and the greatest variety of affects from stimulating there.

And you get nothing of the kind from stimulating cortex.

So this is a different line of evidence suggesting that feelings are actually generated in the upper brainstem.

And then I showed you another line of evidence.

That was positron emission tomography.

of people in intense affective states.

Here you see research participants in states of sadness, here of anger, here of happiness, here of fear.

And in all instances, the activation is in the brain stem.

and the circuits arising from it, the subcortical circuits arising from it.

That's what we see.

The cortex is, by contrast, largely deactivated.

So this is a further line of evidence that the, you know, an entirely different line of evidence.

Remember, we've got lesion evidence, then we've got deep brain stimulation evidence, here we've got positron emission imaging evidence that

The part of the brain that's generating the feelings is the part of the brain that switches on the lights.

And this is why I'm claiming that the basic, the foundational form of consciousness, this prerequisite form, is affect.

Affect is the elemental form of consciousness.

A further line of evidence is pharmacological manipulations.

If you tinker with the neuromodulators

that are sourced in these reticular activating nuclei, like, for example, noradrenaline or serotonin or dopamine, all of which are sourced in the reticular activating system.

Serotonin is, of course, regularly pharmacologically manipulated for the treatment of depression.

Dopamine for the treatment of psychosis.

Noradrenaline for the treatment of anxiety.

Noradrenaline

is sourced in locus coeruleus complex, serotonin in the RAFE nuclei, dopamine, at least the one that's important for psychosis in the ventral tegmental area.

All of these are parts of the reticular activating system.

If all that this system did was switch on blank wakefulness, it might be of interest to anesthetists.

But in fact, it is the main target of the drugs of psychiatrists.

who are treating emotional disorders by manipulating the chemistries that are the source nuclei for which are in the reclicular activating system.

So, on the basis of all of that, I argued, remember, that affect is the foundational form of consciousness and it's intrinsically conscious.

I said that feelings, not only on semantic grounds, I'm saying that feeling is the basic form of consciousness.

The reason I'm saying that

is because the basic consciousness-generating tissues of the brain, the reticular activating system, which is prerequisite for the activation of consciousness in cortex, that these structures generate feelings.

That feeling, therefore, is prerequisite, is foundational for all forms of consciousness.

I then made, this is a sort of a sidebar.

The reason I went into this third point is

is namely the claim that affect is not synonymous with inter-receptive inference.

In other words, that it's not just an inter-receptive form of perception, as opposed to the extra-receptive forms which have been the major focus of consciousness studies over the last few decades, vision being the main focus.

I'm saying that affect is not, and why I say this is because this is increasingly being argued.

In fact, it was argued by Bud Craig himself, that affect is just interoceptive perception, the perception of the state of the own body.

is the equivalent of the perception of the outside world in the more typical form or extra-ceptive form of perception that's been equated with consciousness.

I made the point that there's good reason to believe that affect isn't just a sixth modality of perception.

And the evidence that I presented for that was of various kinds,

For example, that there are affects which are clearly not interreceptive.

For example, getting a fright or being startled or feeling pain when a pin is stuck into your finger.

These are all extra receptive forms of stimulation, and yet they arouse affective responses.

So affect clearly is not uniquely interreceptive.

And then I also made the point that there are

many interoceptive perceptual states which are not affective.

You can feel your tummy grumbling, or you can feel your heart beating, or you can feel your lungs expanding.

These are not intrinsically affective phenomena.

So, interoceptive perception can happen without affect, and affect can happen without interoceptive perception.

So I was trying to draw a line under the idea that affect is just another modality of perception.

I think that by detaching affect from perception casts some new light on the hard problem.

And so that's where I went next.

And I reminded you that David Chalmers, who coined the hard problem, said that

When we look at functions, perceptual functions like vision, which was, as I said, the model example, derived from or grounded upon the assumption that consciousness is a cortical phenomenon, cortical vision became the model example of consciousness.

This was following Crick's initiative in the mid-1990s.

Crick's idea was that if we can

If we can identify the neural correlate of consciousness in the case of cortical vision, then we can generalize from that by discerning the mechanism whereby visual information processing

gets turned into conscious vision in the cortex, by isolating that mechanism, we will be able to understand the nature and function of consciousness.

And Chalmers said that that's not true.

If you isolate, identify the mechanism of visual information processing,

like this map here, it doesn't tell you anything about why there's something it is like to see.

And he used the well-known knowledge argument of Frank Jackson,

the story about Mary, the visual neuroscientist, who knows everything about all of this.

And I slightly simplify the story by saying, well, let's imagine that Mary is blind.

Even though she knows everything about the functions of cortical vision, she knows everything about the mechanism

whereby visual information is processed in the cortex.

Because she's blind, she knows nothing about what it is like to see.

And if she were to be gifted suddenly with a normal sight, then she would learn something completely new about vision.

She would learn what it is like to see red and blue, what blueness and redness, et cetera, are like, none of which is accounted for

by this information processing flow diagram.

None of what she knew about the functional mechanisms of cortical vision would have prepared her for what it is like to see.

In other words, there's something else about visual information processing other than the sort of things that mechanistic

functionalist dissections like this provide us with.

This mechanistic account doesn't predict that there should be anything that it is like to see.

And this is the grounds upon which people like Chalmers say that an account of the functional mechanism

of cognitive and perceptual processes.

It doesn't tell us anything about why there's something it is like to perform these processes.

And this is the essence of the hard problem.

I said that I thought that this might be because they were looking in the wrong place, that visual perception

and all forms of cortical perception, and indeed not only perception, but learning and cognition more generally, that this can readily go on unconsciously.

that these are not intrinsically conscious processes, that it is perfectly possible to see and to recognize faces and to read with comprehension and even to discriminate colors.

These are all uniquely cortical processes and they can all go on

in the dark, as it were.

In other words, you do not have to be conscious of what you're perceiving in order to perceive it.

And so this casts a rather different light on Chalmers' point that all of this information processing can go on in the dark.

So, you know, consciousness isn't accounted for by our normal functionalist, mechanistic way of doing cognitive neuroscience.

So I was saying, well, that's because they're looking at functions like perception and functions like learning, which are not, these are not intrinsically conscious processes.

I drew your attention to this other statement of Chalmers' from his famous paper, in which he says, in summary, there is no cognitive function such that we can say in advance that the explanation of the function will automatically explain experience.

And my point was, well, that's because they're talking about cognitive functions.

Could Chalmers make the same statement if we were talking about affective functions?

I'm saying, no, he could not.

I'm saying that we can say in advance that explanation of the function of feeling is

will automatically explain experience, because the function of feeling is to feel.

It's intrinsically conscious, is this function.

Unlike vision and perception in general and cognition as a whole, none of that is intrinsically conscious.

But feeling, affective feeling, is intrinsically conscious.

You could not understand the mechanism

of affective feeling if it didn't account for why it feels like something, because that's the whole bloody point of feeling.

So this question of Chalmers' is, why is the performance of these functions accompanied by experience?

Why doesn't all this information processing go on in the dark, free of any inner feel?

I'm saying that that question is perfectly reasonable when asked of these cognitive

functions which are not intrinsically conscious.

That kind of information processing can go on in the dark, free of any inner feel, but that is not true of feeling, of affective feeling.

And so my claim, and this is where we got to last time, I'm now starting with new arguments, my claim is that if we can

identify the functional mechanism of affect, of affective feeling, then we will be able to explain why this sort of information processing doesn't go on in the dark.

So I hope that that's clear.

That's kind of like my main point.

My main point is we've been looking in the wrong place.

We've been looking to cortical vision and cortical perceptual and cognitive processes in general.

in order to isolate the neural correlates of consciousness.

And Chalmers has said, well, it doesn't work.

You can isolate the mechanism whereby these sorts of information processing goes on, and it doesn't tell you anything about why there is something it is like to see, etc.

And so my argument is, yes, that's true of those processes, but it's not true of affect.

Affect, the

Remember what I've said to you in my summary now today, that this is the most concentrated consciousness generating tissue that there is.

The reticular activating system and periaqueductal gray is where the lights are switched on and that you can

switch those lights off with as small a lesion as two cubic millimeters in extent.

So this is the place where we should obviously have been looking in the first place in order to understand, to identify the neural correlates of consciousness and to understand its mechanism.

And much more important than that is the fact that the kind of consciousness it generates, namely feelings,

it is an intrinsically conscious mechanism.

That feeling, it wouldn't exist if it wasn't felt.

And so unlike vision and learning and cognition in general, which does not have to be felt, affect does have to be felt.

That's the whole point of affect.

So I'm saying that if we could understand the mechanism of affect, in other words, the mechanism whereby feeling comes about,

then we might make some progress with this hard problem of consciousness.

So remember, that's how far we got last time.

And now I go on to, and I'm now going to slow down a little bit, because I'm now going to argue, try to identify what the functional mechanism of affect is.

But I thought perhaps before I do that, I should pause for a moment in case there are any questions that

arising from my summary of my argument so far.


SPEAKER_03:
Carry on.

Thank you, Mark.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Thanks.

So my, you see, I'm saying affect is an extended form of homeostasis.

And by the way, this is not my argument.

This is an argument that was first

to my knowledge, first introduced by Jaak Panksepp in the 1990s, subsequently popularized by Antonio Damasio.

So I'm just summarizing my version of what is in fact now a good 25-year-old argument.

Homeostasis is probably the most basic biological mechanism.

it could be said that homeostasis is what enables living organisms to resist the second law of thermodynamics.

In other words, it is what enables them to be living organisms.

They don't just dissipate.

They remain in an organized form.

And the basis of this is homeostasis.

That

Rather than just explore all possible states, we living things have to remain within highly specific states.

And these are called the settling point or the set point, the viable ranges of the organism.

And this applies across multiple different parameters.

Let me use the example of core body temperature.

For those of us who think in degrees Celsius,

we have to remain between 36.5 and 37.5 degrees Celsius.

That's where we need to be.

If we deviate too far from that very narrow range, then we are at risk of dying.

And that doesn't apply only to temperature.

It applies to water, to oxygen, to salt, to sugar, to blood pressure, to all sorts of things.

about our bodies, they have to remain within very narrow ranges that are viable with the preservation of our living state.

If we move outside of those ranges, in other words, if we explore all possible states, then we die.

So we have to work against that dissipative trend.

As I said, that is this entropic trend.

We have to resist entropy.

and remain within our viable states.

Very narrow specific ranges of viability across these multiple dimensions of our physiology.

And this is why I say that homeostasis is what keeps us alive.

Now, a deviation from that settling point then becomes a demand for work,

the organism has to do something to return itself to its viable bounds.

And that's the basic mechanism of homeostasis.

That's how all of those autonomic functions I was talking about earlier, like core body temperature and blood gas balance and so on, that's how they work.

If you're moving outside of your range,

you have to do something to return yourself into the range.

That is what homeostasis is.

It's the mechanism that returns us back to our viable range.

Now, what I'm saying is that affect is an extended form of homeostasis.

And how it extends homeostasis is that when we move out of our viable range, we feel it.

We feel an unpleasant quality.

That means I am moving out of my viable range.

And by contrast, if you're moving back towards your viable range, you have pleasurable feeling.

This seems to be the basic function of affect.

It enables the organism to know how it's doing in terms of its organismic viability.

So the organism feels when it's moving outside of its viable range.

as unpleasure, which means this is bad.

And it feels moving back towards its viable range, back towards its ideal settling point as pleasure, which means this is good.

This predicts my survival.

This predicts my demise.

So feelings are rooted in a value system.

In other words, that there is something good and there is something bad.

And what is good is to survive.

and as it happens to reproduce.

And what is bad is to not do so.

This is, of course, the basic value system that underwrites all of life.

This is the value system that underwrites natural selection.

So feelings are rooted in that value system.

And what they do is they enable the organism subjectively, the organism itself to know

Whether it's moving out of its viable bounds, in other words, whether it's doing something bad within that value system or something good within that value system, that's what feelings do.

They enable the organism to know how they are doing within that value system.

Now, why does this get added to homeostasis?

Because not all homeostasis is felt.

Most homeostasis is entirely autonomic.

I was mentioning earlier blood pressure, for example.

When you move out of your viable range, your heart rate changes and your blood vessels dilate in order to return you to your viable blood pressure.

You don't need to know.

In fact, you do not know anything about it.

In fact, it's clinically notorious how blood pressure regulation works.

because you can be way out of your viable bounds and know nothing about it.

And I'm just using blood pressure as an example.

There are many, many, many ways in which your autonomic nervous system maintains you within your viable bounds without you knowing anything about it.

So why do we need to feel it?

Well, what feeling adds...

is when you're in a situation of uncertainty, a situation where you do not have a readily pre-prepared reflex which returns you to your viable bounds.

So you don't need to feel how you're doing if you don't have to make any choices.

If you have automatic predictions,

which return you by reflex, like in the case of blood pressure regulation, to your viable bounds, then you, the sentient being, have no part to play in the process.

Where feeling comes into its own is where the organism finds itself in a state of uncertainty.

For example, in a novel situation for which its innate...

pre-wired, as it were, reflexes have no preparedness.

You find yourself in a state of surprise.

And now what you're going to do, if there's no reflexive solution available, then feeling enables the organism to make choices.

Choices have to be rooted in a value system.

There has to be a good choice and a bad choice.

Otherwise, it's random.

So whether you're doing the right thing or the wrong thing is announced to you by how it feels.

So this enables voluntary action.

I really must emphasize that this enables you to choose.

It enables you to decide for yourself what to do.

Things are getting worse.

So I'm going to change my mind.

Things are getting better.

I will stick with this policy.

This is working.

So these are not hardwired.

These are not innate predictions.

These are choices made on the fly by the organism here and now.

And they enable the organism to survive in states of uncertainty.

In other words, in unpredicted situations.

In other words, in novel situations.

And God knows there are many of those in life.

So just to put flesh to those bones, let me give you an illustrative example.

Normally, respiratory control is autonomic.

You don't need to make any decisions about breathing.

It just happens automatically.

So you automatically remain within your viable bounds in terms of the ratio of oxygen to carbon dioxide.

But that's only when the normal autonomic reflexes

manage the situation because you are in predictable circumstances.

Now imagine that you are in a carbon dioxide filled room.

Now suddenly you move out of your viable bounds and breathing normally, normal reflexive

regulation of your respiratory system doesn't work because ordinary breathing in this carbon dioxide filled room is going to rapidly lead to your demise.

So now you've got to do something.

You've never been in a burning building before, let alone this particular one.

So you have no

reflex or instinct, no innate prediction as to what to do.

So you feel your way through the situation.

And please note at this point, at the point when you find yourself in this unexpected situation, this is where your need for oxygen becomes conscious.

So this is a very important point.

An otherwise autonomic function now becomes

a conscious function.

You feel what we call air hunger or suffocation alarm.

And you now move about in this building, deciding which way to go.

Remember, you have no prior knowledge of what to do, and it's only on the basis of how it feels.

So if, for example, you go upstairs and the oxygen supply diminishes, you feel worse air hunger.

If you go downstairs and there there's a greater provision of oxygen, then you feel better.

You feel relief from the suffocation alarm.

And so the feelings tell you whether what you're doing is working or not.

And so your choices are based on feeling.

And so you are able to feel your way through this problem and survive.

This is not a small advantage.

The ability to survive in unpredicted environments is an enormous adaptive advantage.

And so that, we believe, is what the function of feeling is.

That's why, in this narrow example, why respiratory control suddenly becomes conscious.

that it dramatically intrudes on consciousness suddenly, your need for oxygen.

And the purpose of this is to enable you to calibrate your choices, to change your mind about your policy, your current policy, on the basis of whether it's working or not, which is exactly what feeling announces for you.

In the absence of feelings,

you would behave randomly and one in a million will do the right thing and that one will survive and reproduce and the rest of you have had it.

So this enables us to make choices within our own lifetime.

We don't have to let natural selection do it.

Within our own lifetimes, we can adapt to unpredicted situations.

Of course, once you've done that, you then also can learn from the experience within your own lifetime.

And so the next time you find yourself in a burning building, you might, on the basis of learning from experience, you might have somewhat less uncertainty about what to do.

So

Again, let me just make sure that I'm getting across my main point because this is the mechanism of feeling.

This is the function of feeling.

This is what feeling does.

This is why the organism must feel it.

Now, remember what Chalmers had said.

That, you know, why doesn't all this information processing go on in the dark and so on?

That was built upon an earlier argument by Tom Nagel, who said an organism has conscious mental states if and only if there is something that it's like to be that organism, something it's like for the organism.

Then he went on to say, if we acknowledge that a physical theory of mind must account for the subjective character of experience, we must admit that no presently available conception gives us a clue about how this could be done.

So this is what I'm trying to do in this talk.

I'm trying to give us a clue about how this could be done.

This is Nagel's way of formulating the hard problem.

Why and how is there something it's like to be an organism?

Something it's like for the organism?

My point is that that question only makes sense in relation to things like visual information processing, which does not have to be something it is like to see.

There does not have to be something it is like to discriminate red from blue.

You can do that unconsciously.

The cortex can do that automatically.

That kind of information processing can go on in the dark.

But would Nagel even have asked this question if we were talking about feeling?

I've just explained to you what the function of feeling is.

And it makes it kind of absurd to ask why and how is there something it is like to be an organism, something it's like for the organism.

I hope that you can see what I mean.

Why?

and how there is something it is like to be an organism, something it is like for the organism, has everything to do with feeling.

Feeling is what it is like to be an organism.

How you're doing as an organism, how much longer are you going to remain in existence as an organism, that's what feeling is like, and this is why and how it exists.

So if we can get to what the physical mechanism, going back to what Nagel was saying here, he said, if we acknowledge that a physical theory of mind must account for this something-it-is likeness, then he's saying we have to admit that we currently have no clue.

I'm saying it's because we've been looking in the wrong place.

I think if we look to feeling and we seek a physical theory of feeling, this will account for the subjective character of experience and we will make some progress.

This will provide us some clue about how we might go about solving this hard problem.

My next point.

Oh, so let me pause at that point.

Having said that affect is an extended form of homeostasis, that's my next claim.

Let's see if anybody wants to argue the toss or make a comment or ask a question.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So Stephen, there's no need to raise hand after each point.

We'll take any questions.

So go for it, Stephen.

And then Dave, if you have anything.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Thank you.

No, really, really enjoying this.

Um, I'm, I'm interested in this awareness that leads to the homeostatic, um, sort of correction.

And if it's where the awareness is with the actual cells or organs struggling in some way to act or enact upon the surprise or be that in the environment that they're encountering at the different scales,

So this issue of actually acting or enacting, and when that action and inaction can functionally correlate up the nested hierarchies, then it's those actions or the inability to act in the way that cells would like that then is becoming the signal of what or where action is failing, rather than necessarily a signal of

that actually contains information inherently in it.

I wonder what your thoughts would be on that.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, I agree.

If I'm understanding you correctly, I agree with the emphasis on action.

So I'll slightly run ahead of myself if I say this.

Obviously, a homeostatic deviation can also be construed as a prediction error.

In other words, what you're doing has not led to the outcome that was expected.

And there are two ways of correcting prediction errors.

You can either change your prediction

or you can change what you're doing in order to bring about the prediction that you had originally.

In other words, when it comes to prediction error, you can either update the prior and have a posterior prediction, or you've got to do something differently in order to confirm the prior prediction.

So that's where the emphasis is on action.

Now, why this is so important in relation to homeostasis is

is that you can't change your prediction about what your viable bounds are.

If you expect to be between 36.5 and 37.5 degrees Celsius on the basis of acting in a certain way, in other words, firing an autonomic reflex, and you then find yourself to be at 39 degrees Celsius, you can't say, okay, my posterior prediction is that by doing this, I'll be 39 degrees Celsius.

Because if you do that, you're rapidly on the road to death.

So the prediction error has to be corrected on the basis of changing your action policy, doing something different in order to confirm your prior prediction.

So the emphasis is very much on action when it comes to these organismic predictions, these phenotypic, the viable states for your phenotype can't be changed.

So you can't just change your mind about what you expect will flow from your actions.

You have to change your actions in order to bring about the expected or preferred state of your phenotype.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Can I just add one piece to that?

I think that's really helpful.

And also, in terms of multiple scales, going down to smaller scales, so

For instance, if I actually feel heat in my body and my body might be, my cells are trying to act to find a better state, that can be seen as oppressive and claustrophobic if I then read that as being me getting into an uncomfortable state.

It could also be me basking in the sun on a beach, you know, in the same way that if I taste something that's very sour,

There's some sort of action at the cell or the organ level reacting to that sound, so that sweetness, which could be like a nice confectionery sweet for a child, you know, like one of these gobstoppers, or it could be quite a problem.

So I think I like what you're saying with action.

I'm always wondering whether that action piece is the inaction is the prediction error.

in terms of how it can go up in terms of these nested hierarchies of physical scale?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So again, I must be careful not to run ahead of myself too much.

I mean, inevitably, you must ask whatever question comes into your mind at any point.

But I'm aware that as I go down this list of

of arguments.

I'm going to be addressing those points.

So I don't want to make all of those arguments in one go.

So I will just say that for now, that what you've just asked has, first of all, a lot to do with the fact that we have multiple needs, that there's not only one need, that they have to be balanced in relation to each other.

And also, very importantly, that we're talking about a predictive hierarchy.

that this is what you're speaking about with reference to scale, that what applies at the sensory periphery and what applies at the core of the predictive hierarchy have different implications for the way that affect works.

So I'm just saying those very kind of vague and abstract things for now, and I hope that the picture will become clearer as I proceed.

Thank you, Mark.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, Dave, go for it.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I don't know how to state this clearly.

This is some thinking that I got into from listening to a very recent interview you did with a young man in another part of Cape Town, talking about perception.

and i there i think there and maybe this has already been done i just haven't run across the research that there's a larger framework in which these notions of what can be perceived what can be perceived consciously what is a sensory modality what we don't call a sense it seems that there are on the one hand uh conditions we've been calling those homeostatic conditions

that you can't do anything about.

Your body either adjusts the blood pressure internally, or it goes haywire, but you can't be aware of it.

So we don't think about this as something that we can consciously perceive.

And we don't call the mechanisms that are sensitive to blood pressure and core temperature and other things as

Matters of sensation, matters of perception, matters of consciousness.

On the other side, the other side of the mapping, there are single object influences.

A mechanism that is sensitive only to blood pressure presents another reason not to call this a sense.

An eye spot, just...

tells a certain kinds of worms there's light around here or there isn't light around here no directionality just it's daytime or it isn't i'm under the mud or i'm not under the mud whereas even a little more information more kinds of information qualify this more as a sensory modality and in

things like hearing and vision and smell we have this very rich many to many there's many things you can do about about many things you can do about a burning smell and there are many kinds of odors out there does this tie into anything you're you've been thinking about yes um so the first thing that you're touching on there


SPEAKER_01:
is the fact that homeostasis is only part of the story.

In fact, the example I gave earlier of the person who finds themselves in a carbon dioxide filled room in a burning building, they need to maintain their homeostatic blood gas balance.

But there's nothing that their autonomic nervous system can do about that.

They therefore need to turn to action in the outside world.

So when I said that the person starts moving about upstairs and down and then feels, is this working or is this not?

Is this good or is this bad?

That we call allostasis.

It's acting in the outside world

in order to return myself to my homeostatic palms.

So that's the first thing I just wanted to make clear.

I know it's implicit, and I know I'm telling you something that you know very well, but I just want to make that explicit for our participants, that the importance of the outside world for these internal bodily states

The bridge from homeostasis to allostasis is how we conceptualize that.

So then it moves to the next point, which is that think about those kids that I showed you earlier who have no cortex and all they're capable of feeling is their affect.

They can't consciously think, I feel like this about that.

In other words, they don't know what the about that is.

They just feel things and they can't include within their consciousness of the feeling what the thing in the outside world is that contextualizes that feeling.

The context doesn't become conscious, only the feeling itself.

To be able to extend the feeling onto the context,

to be able to say, in effect, I feel like this about that incorporates the context within that terrain of uncertainty where one's navigating, one's palpating the uncertainty in order to make choices not only on the basis of blind feeling, but also on the basis of what kind of object

brings about this change in my feeling and what kind of object brings about that.

For all of that to be incorporated within the realm of consciousness, I think, is a further leap and clearly another enormous adaptive advantage.

So the first leap is just to be able to feel the consequences of your actions.

The second leap is to be able to picture, as it were, those actions within the sphere of consciousness.

and in this way to bring the context into consciousness and extend the realm of choices enormously.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you, Mark.

And I'll just chime in with a third question.

So you mentioned homeostasis is only part of the story.

And in the chat, Brock asked, what part of the story is hormesis?


SPEAKER_01:
I don't know that word.


SPEAKER_03:
So a small stress inducing, like some kind of benefit over the integrated time horizon, like an exercise stress that leads to improved strength.

You mentioned allostasis kind of anticipatory movement towards a set point, but where does, for example, induced stress, mild stress and recovery play into this extended homeostatic or generalized homeostatic framework?


SPEAKER_01:
So, sorry, I didn't understand what you meant.

So, you know, I think, again, when one gives an overview of an argument like this, one always oversimplifies, one sort of has to simplify.

And when I say that homeostasis, that you always have to confirm your prior prediction, that's not entirely true.

There are also ways in which the homeostatic range can be extended.

The homeostatic ranges, I mean, like, for example,

know what i was saying about oxygen um you can you can if you're a diver you know you can learn how to how to hold your breath and how to manage the stress uh of being out of your viable blood gas range uh in in a way that a naive person like like like i uh cannot so there are there are mechanisms

whereby these things can, in very narrow limits, these things can be changed.

But I think the emphasis there has to fall on the narrow limits.

Ultimately, there is an outer limit to your viable range.

And, you know, this is the driving mechanism of the story that I'm talking about here.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.

Of course, so much more to say and learn and add, but please carry on.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Well, you can see highlighted on the screen now my next point, and it might seem like a small point.

It might seem like an obvious point that complex organisms require multiple homeostats.

And in fact, I've more or less said this already, but I want to make explicit, and here is the same slide that you saw a moment ago, where I've just added the point that I'm now making.

the importance of this point is that we have multiple needs which must be categorically distinguished from one another.

In other words, we can't have a continuous variable called need.

That variable has to be factorized across a number of different categories.

So let me be clear what I'm talking about.

Imagine you have

If we quantify on a continuous scale how much deviation there is from where you need to be, let's say, okay, I've got six out of ten of thirst.

and I've got 4 out of 10 of sleepiness, then that means I've got 10 out of 20 of total need.

And so all I need to do is sleep.

I don't need to drink.

If I can generalize from that little example, the point that I'm trying to make is that, no, that's not true.

You have to sleep and you have to drink and you have to eat

And you have to defecate and you have to breathe.

You can't just submit all of these and and bring down the total number.

If you did that, you would die.

So we have to recognize that each one of these needs has to be met in their own right.

And that means we need to know, we can't just have a total variable called need.

We need to know which need are we talking about.

And this is why they have to be treated as categorical variables.

In other words, here we're talking about how much water I'm lacking.

Here we're talking about how much oxygen I'm lacking.

Here we're talking about how much sleep I'm lacking, etc.,

um so that they can be so that the category of need that the organism finds itself in can be addressed uh appropriately the appropriate category needs to be addressed and now i know what i'm saying sounds absolutely obvious but why it's important

is that it's because of this, because of the point I've just been making, that hunger feels different from thirst, and thirst feels different from suffocation alarm, and suffocation alarm feels different from sleepiness, and sleepiness feels different from pain, and so on.

Because each one of these feelings, the quality of the feeling tells us which need is at issue.

And categorical variables are distinguished qualitatively.

So we're not only talking about valence, goodness or badness, and arousal, how much or how little.

We're talking also about qualitative categories.

And I think that's important when we come

back to the whole point of what I'm talking about, namely qualia, namely the qualitative stuff of what it is like to do anything, be anything.

Those qualitative distinctions of the essence of consciousness.

that it has qualitative differentiations.

It's not just some total quantitative, some total continuous matter of need.

It's a matter of different categories of need, which therefore are different qualities of need.

And I think that's important in terms of understanding what an affect is.

An affect is a state of the organism registered by the organism.

In other words, it is intrinsically subjective.

it has intrinsic value valence goodness and badness which has existential consequences for the organism and in addition to that it has quality it it is inherent in the nature of affects

that they are qualitatively distinctive from each other.

And I hope that this very simple functional mechanistic reasoning that I've given you as to why that needs to be the case, why that must be the case, helps to make clear why affects take the form that they do.

Remember what we are doing here is addressing

Nagel's question about, you know, why is there something it is like to be an organism?

And how does it come about that there is something it is like to be an organism for an organism?

That something it is likeness is not just a valenced goodness and badness, but also a qualitatively differentiated state, subjective state of the organism.

So I think that by reducing the mechanism of affect to these essential features, we begin to see why it takes the form that it does, why it is a necessarily conscious something in the sense, the rudimentary sense that I'm defining consciousness.

So that's why this point is important.

That's why I wanted to make the point clearly that complex organisms require multiple categorical homeostats

They need to be treated as categorical variables.

They need to be qualified.

Each of these different factors of need, each of these different categories of need, have to be qualitatively differentiated from each other.

And this is, I think, the ground zero of where qualia come from.

Now I'll go on to my next point.

which is that these different categories of need must be prioritized.

Again, I think this is in a way an obvious point, but I want to just dwell on it for a moment to draw out some of the implications of this.

I said earlier that our autonomic homeostats run

Well, autonomically, most of the time.

In other words, there are automatic, automatized predictions, which we call reflexes, that are when the organism moves out of its viable bounds, then it fires these reflexes, which bring it back into its viable bounds.

And then I told you that

Not all of our needs can be dealt with that way.

Some of them, as we move outside of the range of what the autonomic reflex can achieve, like, for example,

When it comes to thermoregulation, you start to perspire if you get too hot.

This is a reflex.

You start to breathe more shallowly and rapidly.

Panting, in other words, that's a reflex.

These are autonomic responses to overheating.

Then they reach a certain limit.

They haven't cooled you down adequately.

So then you've got to do something.

You've got to do something like leave the kitchen.

And that is what I've just said applies to one of your multiple homeostats.

In other words, one of them now requires allostatic action.

You now need to do something in the outside world.

And clearly, you can't do something in the outside world in relation to all your needs simultaneously.

So all the time you're sliding, you know, your hydration, your water in relation to salt content of your body sliding all the time, it doesn't mean that you're thirsty all the time.

You're burning up the sugars in your adipose tissues all the time.

It doesn't mean you're hungry all the time.

So the question is, you know, what gets prioritized?

And there must be some prioritization because you can't do everything at once.

When it comes to voluntary activity in the outside world, you have to prioritize.

There's an action bottleneck.

And the point I'm making here is, first of all, just simply that, that you do have to prioritize.

And secondly, that what is prioritized is what becomes conscious.

In other words, as I gave in the example of suffocation alarm, that business carries on unconsciously until it becomes prioritized.

At that point, it forcibly intrudes on consciousness.

My priority now is I need oxygen.

And that's what you feel.

The other needs, this is the other point I'm making, the other needs don't disappear at that point.

They continue to be regulated, but they are regulated automatically.

So the prioritization of a need brings that need into the realm of palpating uncertainty.

In other words, into the realm of feeling your way through the problems.

And this, I think, is an important part of how feeling works.

So let me here, remember I said I was going to talk about the periaqueductal gray.

So, and I was going to tell you how this plays as important, if not more important role in the basic machinery of consciousness of the upper brainstem than the reticular activating system.

The periaqueductal gray, which is just a 14 millimeter long structure, columnar structure around the central canal of the midbrain.

All of our homeostatic mechanisms, in other words, all of the multiple homeostats, and we have many, all of the multiple homeostats, all of them send their residual error signal to the periaqueductal gray.

The periaqueductal gray is like a final common pathway.

of all of these homeostatic error signals.

And it seems that this is where the prioritization must be going on.

The determining

which of the current error signals is the most salient, then gives rise to, and this is an argument I must again make clear, this is not an argument of, this is not my own novel insight.

This was beautifully argued on comparative anatomical grounds by Bjorn Merker in a brilliant paper in Behavioral and Brain Sciences.

So he recognized that the periaqueductal gray together with the superior colliculi that I showed you earlier,

and the midbrain locomotor region, they form what he called a midbrain selection triangle.

In other words, this is where the need that is to be prioritized is selected, and this gives rise to a feeling.

The feeling being, as in the example that I gave with suffocation alarm, the need that is prioritized, the need that is currently most salient, the need that is going to now

colour your consciousness, qualify your consciousness in terms of its most rudimentary property, in other words, the feeling, the affect.

What state, what organismic state am I in?

I'm in a state of respiratory distress.

I'm in a state of suffocation alarm.

That's what I feel.

Why?

It's because this is where choices need to be made.

This is where the creature needs to feel, the person in that example needs to feel their way through the problem.

The other needs remain, but the other needs, the non-prioritized needs, are not raised to the level of feeling.

And I hope it's clear why.

And we need to understand mechanistically how does all of this work.

And that leads to my next point.

So before I go to that next point, let me just pause again in case there are any comments or questions about this prioritization function.

performed by the periaqueductal gray, which is what determines what affective state you're going to be in from one moment to the next.

In other words, which need is going to qualify your affective state.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you, Mark.

Dave, then Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I just want to throw out there, in Sylvan Tompkins' later work, that is after 1970,

He came to elevate reset to the status of a fundamental emotion.

And I think it's very relevant to the notion of suddenly shifting from one conscious emotion or one conscious activity or world attitude to another emotion.

uh i i i believe uh yakupangsep drew pretty heavily on tompkins and the reason that he doesn't cite him in a lot of detail is that he accepted so much of it kind of like what you said about i agree almost totally with um um

Oh, the Britisher whose father's from India.

I'm sorry, I'm blanking on his name.

He had a dialogue with him just a few months ago.

Am I completely wrong about that?

Anil Seth are you talking about?

Yes, thank you.

Am I completely wrong?

Did Tompkins simply agree?


SPEAKER_01:
No, I agree with that completely.

Tompkins, the reason that Panksepp doesn't cite him, or barely ever, he cites him usually in the beginning of a kind of a general discussion, just to say, this is the tradition I belong to, and then carries on building on his shoulders.

I agree with that very much.

Thanks.

Thank you.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I liked when you talked about palpating uncertainty and the salience around that.

So that's a nice term.

And I think that relates to what is going on, so to speak.

So what about what's going on?

And then now what happens next?

And I'm wondering, though, as well, if the idea of where, which I think is often left out, there's a lot of categorization of what things are.

Where is it happening?

That makes a difference in terms of how significant it might be in terms of prioritization.

So I was wondering how much the risk of the awareness of some sort of disequilibrium happens could be featured in this.

And maybe that's where the physicalization and the spatialization becomes much more significant than when you're just dealing with the brain.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So, well, all of these homeostatic mechanisms, of course, the physiological processes that they regulate are widely distributed.

But the control centers of these homeostats are, for the most part, in the brainstem broadly defined.

And I say broadly defined because there are some that are in the medulla oblongata and pons, but there are some that are in the midbrain.

There are some that are diencephalic.

For example, I mean, just mention the most outstanding example, the hypothalamus is full of homeostatic control centers.

But, you know, so hypothalamus, circumventricular organs, the

a parabrachial complex, the area postrema, the nucleus solitaris.

These are all homeostatic control centers, but of fundamental importance, and I think it's not sufficiently recognized, although Merck has certainly made much of it, that all of these nuclei that I have just enumerated

they in turn project to the periaqueductal gray.

The periaqueductal gray is, in my view, a meta-homeostat.

It's sort of the control center of the control centers.

And that the

The essential function there is a prioritization function.

And by being able to physically locate these mechanisms, bearing in mind where I started, I started my answer to your question by pointing out that ultimately, these homeostats regulate physiological processes which cannot be localized.

They are distributed processes.

par excellence.

But the center, the control center, can be localized.

And those control centers, there are numerous ones.

And they, in turn, they all send the residual error signal to periaqueductal grain.

That is really important.

Now, what that enables us then to do is to test models like the one that I'm describing to you.

What happens when

one or another of these individual homeostatic control centers is lesioned.

What happens when the periaqueductal gray as a whole is lesioned?

What happens, I might as well just insert that here, is you get a persistent vegetative state.

In other words, you get that condition that Magoon and Maruzzi led us to believe

is a theoretical possibility, in other words, blank wakefulness.

Remember I said earlier in my summary of what I said last time I spoke that the idea that the reticular activating system provides merely a quantitative level of consciousness and not any quality or content, that fictional state of affairs of blank wakefulness,

the thing that the reticular activating system was supposed to be producing, which, as I've showed you, is not the case, because all of those different lines of evidence that I summarized show that what the reticular activating system is producing is anything but without quality and without content, that this is, in fact, the foundational form of the qualities and contents of consciousness, namely the different affects.

If you lesion the periaqueductal gray,

then you get that fictional state, that artificial state of blank wakefulness.

In other words, these patients show non-responsive wakefulness.

They still have the autonomic sleep-waking cycle.

In other words, they wake up in the morning and go to sleep at night like those hydranencephalic kids that I showed you.

But unlike those kids, they show no emotional, no affective

no response to their situation, and no intentionality either.

And so that's what you would expect would occur if the periaqueductal gray is where the affects are actually being generated.

Because remember, that's what I'm saying.

I'm saying that the prioritization of a homeostatic

error signal is the feeling of that signal.

It is the rendering conscious of that signal.

And that is what we mean by feeling something.

It means now this need is not just a need.

Now this need is a drive.

Now this need is driving my voluntary behavior.

And that is why it becomes conscious.

Because as I said to you earlier, voluntary behavior can be defined as the making of choices.

as opposed to the executing of automatized predictions.


SPEAKER_03:
Just to add two notes on that, when hearing Stephen's questions about spatial localization and how that can refer to brain localization, as well as like in the peripersonal space, it made me think about how awareness, a-wareness, it could be without awareness, awareness could be spatially

dislocated or awareness might be a highly spatialized percept and then the other note that i wanted to make was um as a researcher of distributed physiology in the eusocial insect colony this extended homeostatic perspective leads to many interesting connections when we think about extended social homeostasis as well but just two notes and we can carry on


SPEAKER_01:
Very good points.

So you're saying we can carry on, meaning I can carry on?

Whichever way you'd like to.

OK, great.

So I'm now going to move to my next claim, which is, I see we have half an hour left.

So I mustn't.

It's really quite amazing.

Because you are so generous with giving your speakers two hours, you lull us into a false sense of security and thinking, well, I can just elaborate as much as I want to.

There's plenty of time.

And now we're down to our last half hour and I've still got three points to go.

It's like no one goes there anymore.

It's too busy.

Yeah.

Well, again, grateful for the time that you're giving me.

So let me move to this point.

And this has everything to do with the relationship between affective consciousness and cognitive consciousness.

I spoke earlier about, I feel like this about that.

In other words, the incorporating of the cognitive domain within the sphere of feeling.

And so this is the point that I'm making now.

This is a drawing, a diagram that comes from a paper that I wrote with Carl Friston.

And

And here, the important equation is the third one.

And here, this diagram basically is just trying to spell out in a visual form what these equations are saying.

So when I said earlier that we have two ways of reducing prediction error,

when a prior prediction does not lead to the sensory state that's expected, then we can either change our perception, in other words, we can change the prediction, or we can change

action, we can do something differently in order to bring about the prior prediction.

So that's what these two equations describe, that we have a generative model, which generates predictions as to what sensory state will flow from our actions.

And

So here there's an action in the external world which is predicted to bring about a certain sensory state, and to the extent that it does not bring about that sensory state, in other words, the difference here is the prediction error.

And of course, the prediction error is then used to update the generative model in order to give rise to better predictions, in order to better maintain your expected sensory states.

I need to emphasize here, because this was not the case in the early days of the predictive processing paradigm that Carl Friston and his colleagues

unleashed upon the world, sensory states do not necessarily mean extra-receptive sensory states.

So in the examples that I have been giving in this talk so far, this would be the equivalent of, for example, core body temperature or blood oxygen level, etc.

The most important sensory states for the organism are

its viable states in terms of its homeostatic expectations.

So please remember that when I speak about actions in the world, the world that we're talking about here can be the visceral body and it can be the external world.

The body, the Markov blanket, the body is as much external as

to the blanket as the external world is external to the blanket of the nervous system.

I think we're in somebody's kitchen here, which you must put your mic, whoever is doing their dishes there.

So what this equation here, which is written in words here, the rate of change of precision, which is omega in the equation, the rate of change of precision over time depends on how much free energy changes when you change precision.

This means that precision will look as if it's trying to minimize free energy.

The rate of this free energy minimization process is the difference between the inverse precision

and the sum of squared prediction errors.

So that's this equation here put into words.

And it's foregrounding the central role that precision plays in minimizing prediction error.

I want to be clear that this is precision modulation is, in physiological terms, the modulation of postsynaptic gain.

So the message passing going on here between error signals and prediction signals

is modulated by posts.

It's the reticular activating system's modulation of that message passing.

So it's the increasing or decreasing of the gain on the error signals.

That's the role of precision modulation, which is just the same thing as to say that is the role of the reticular activating system.

It is modulating the gain.

in the message passing, to speak physiologically, to speak computationally, it is a matter of increasing or decreasing precision values attached to the predictions over the errors.

So to put it into different words, if things are turning out as expected, that's good.

If uncertainty prevails, that's bad.

So increasing confidence in a prediction is good.

In other words, increasing precision in a prediction is good.

Increasing confidence in an error signal is bad.

In other words...

The more uncertainty, the more you become clear that things are not turning out as expected, to that extent, of course, your confidence in your current policy is reduced.

In other words, the precision in your current policy is reduced.

And that just is bad.

So the goodness and badness, the pleasure and non-pleasure function of precision modulation that I described to you earlier, it has this enormously important contribution to make to the whole of this mechanism by determining the influence of the error signal over the predictive model.

So to the extent that precision is reduced in the error signal and thereby confidence is maintained in the policy, to that extent, the error signal will or will not have influence over the parameters of the predictive model.

And so this is trying to illustrate the crucial role that affect plays in this whole predictive mechanism.

So this is, as it were, the role of the reticular activating system, of the modulation of the message passing that goes on.

These are, as it were, the synaptic transmission mechanisms.

And these are postsynaptic modulatory mechanisms.

And so I'm just wanting to link these formalisms to the affective role that the reticular activating system plays.

So just to go back to the statement here, the mechanism of perceptual and cognitive consciousness is precision modulation of allostatic prediction errors.

In other words, it is the modulation of confidence in a current policy.

In other words, the perceived consequences of a current... So as a particular need is prioritized,

that need is felt.

This generates a category of predictive policies.

In other words, this is what I do in this situation, in this context that I find myself in.

This is what I expect the consequences will be.

In other words, these are my expected, and there's an expected precision attaching to the error signals, of course.

All the other domains of need, remember what I was saying earlier here about the needs must be prioritized.

The other domains have monotonous precisions.

So the crucial mechanism in terms of voluntary action is, to use the phrase that one of you said you liked earlier, is the palpating of the uncertainty.

In other words, the palpating of the precision and the adjustment of the confidence in the current perceptual and cognitive, in other words, the allostatic aspect

of what I must do about this need state.

Because there's a state of uncertainty that's been prioritized there, there's a changing of one's mind on the fly.

This is what this mechanism makes possible.

So the affects are, as it were, a drive for or a demand for predictive work.

for mental work.

And this, the modulation, the palpating of the confidence in the policy over the error signals is the predictive work so demanded.

So in other words, the work of updating one's policy, of changing one's mind, it is all of it underwritten by the affective demand.

So the affective demand for predictive work is what gives rise to the predictive work itself, which is the palpating of uncertainties in the current policy and the sensory states that it gives rise to.

And so this is changing your mind, in other words,

voluntary action, in other words, the capacity for choice, this is the crucial role that precision modulation plays in that process.

So that's, oh, okay, good.

So I think, let me just pause for a moment to see if there are any questions about that, because I wanted to illustrate it with a case, which I think is going to pretty much take us to the end of our time.

So before I launch into this last case,

Let's see if anybody has any questions or comments about that mechanism.


SPEAKER_03:
I think we'll go to the case and then there's always so much to unpack with defining the variables and understanding what the edges mean and so on.

But I think the case is a good way to close this.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

So this is a patient of mine, Mr. S. And

He had a meningioma here at the base of his frontal lobes.

It was an olfactory sheath meningioma.

And it pushed on his optic nerves.

And as a result of that, his vision was impaired.

And this is how the tumor came to attention.

And it was successfully surgically resected.

Now, because of its location in relation, in fact, to the optic nerves, there was some nervousness on the part of the surgeon to remove it in its entirety.

In fact, he felt it was not possible to remove it in its entirety.

So he left a little nub of the tumor and this re-grew.

And so the patient again noticed these visual difficulties, returned to the surgeon.

and the operation had to be repeated.

Because of scar tissue, the second operation is always trickier than the first.

And unfortunately, in the second operation, there was a bleed, and that bleed was into the basal forebrain nuclei.

Small bleed, but the basal forebrain nuclei are crucial.

These are the upper end of the

remember I was saying earlier that these different parts of the ascending arousal mechanisms of the brain, that they are the source nuclei for these different neuromodulators, and I spoke of dopamine and

noradrenaline and serotonin earlier.

Well, these nuclei are the source nuclei, or there are other source nuclei for acetylcholine here too, but these are very important source nuclei for acetylcholine.

Now remember, all of these, what I was saying earlier about these neuromodulatory systems,

is that they are modulating postsynaptic gain, which is just the same thing physiologically as to say computationally they're modulating precision.

That's what they do.

They up and down regulate the precision in the message passing.

And this, as I said earlier, it dictates which messages are going to be selected and which not.

So it plays a crucially important role, does precision modulation.

in cognition, and I'm now wanting to show you this relationship, the relationship between the affective mechanisms that I'm talking about, the affective functions that are performed centrally by periaqueductal gray, and then how this gives rise to the modulation through these arousal systems of these different neurotransmitter systems.

And I'm going to now show you how this worked in this case.

Acetylcholine modulates the confidence in error signals.

And so let me just quickly tell you a little bit more about this patient.

He was 56 years old at the time of the second operation.

And as a result of the damage to the basal forebrain nuclei from the second operation, he woke up from the surgery feeling

with a condition called confabulatory amnesia.

So although the tumor was resected successfully and the visual problem was corrected, he now had this devastating new condition called confabulatory amnesia.

Confabulatory amnesia, the patient is, it's not only that they are amnesic,

In other words, that they're unable to remember particularly recent events.

But there's also quite a long retrograde extension too.

In other words, there's quite an impairment of their retrograde memory too.

Not only do they have this, but they also are not aware of their memory problems.

And so when they attempt to retrieve a memory,

The memory that they retrieve is not the correct one, and they don't realize it's not the correct one.

And so they have what appear to be false memories.

These are the confabulations.

They frequently are related in some semantic sense with the target memory, with the memory that they're looking for.

There's some semantic relationship between the memory they find and the one they're looking for, but they can be grossly misplaced in space and time.

And so these are what we call confabulations.

And the patient is not sufficiently critical of these misrememberings as a result of the damage to these neuromodulatory mechanisms.

This patient, Mr. S, just to give you one example, I mean, an extreme example, he had his operation in Johannesburg, which is in South Africa, which is where I hail from.

But at the time, I was living and working in London.

And so the surgeon who I knew well sent the patient to see me, to consult me in London, because I was doing work with this condition, confabulatory amnesia.

So the patient arrives in London on a Friday and comes to me on the Monday and has no idea that he's in London because, of course, he doesn't remember the journey.

He can't remember anything from one minute to the next.

And so I say something about, well, you know, the surgeon, whose name was Mr. Miller, the surgeon referred you

To me, because of this memory difficulty that you're having, that's why he sent you to London.

And he said, London?

What do you mean London?

And I said, yes, you're in London.

You don't realize it because you don't remember the journey.

You know, that's the whole point.

This is the kind of problem that you're having.

And he denies it.

He says he's not in London.

So that's the confabulatory aspect, that these patients, in his memory, he's in Johannesburg.

And so he believes he is in Johannesburg.

So I point out to him, it was winter and it was snowing outside.

I point out to him the wintry conditions outside.

You never, by the way, have snow in Johannesburg.

So I say, look out the window.

He looks out, he's absolutely shocked.

But then retorts, no, I know I'm in Johannesburg.

Just because you're eating pizza doesn't mean you're in Italy.

That's what he says to me.

So in other words, you know, you don't have to, you know, you mustn't overrate the evidence of your senses.

And so that's just an extreme example of what I mean by how these patients, how their amnesia, it's not just a lack of memory, it's also an excessive confidence in the incorrect memories that they draw up.

So that's the background.

And I saw this man, the whole point of him being referred to me is because I treat such patients.

And so I then saw him six days a week at the same time in my outpatient clinic at the Royal London Hospital.

Same time, same place.

He came with his wife to the waiting room.

I would then go collect him, take him up to my consulting room, spend an hour with him.

take him back down to the waiting room.

And then I would talk to his wife, uh, because, uh, he, he, he was so full of confabulations.

I needed to verify things, um, in order to get some sense, uh, of what was going on.

And there were certain themes, and this is an interesting thing about these patients, uh, the, the, these confabulatory patients, there's certain themes, uh, that returned again and again, uh, the, the patient was an electronic engineer, but, but he, uh,

In reality, he was.

But he thought the reason he was coming to me frequently, he thought he was coming to me because I was consulting him about an electronic problem.

Or otherwise, he thought that the two of us were electronic engineers together working on some electronic problem.

Also frequently he thought that he and I were in some sporting team together, that we played rugby together or we were in a rowing team together.

Now, his wife told me he had played rugby at university a good 30 years or more before.

And likewise, he had been a keen rower.

But this too was at university more than 30 years before.

And so these are, again, good examples of confabulations.

You know, the patient mislocating in space and time a memory that he draws up now and he has too much confidence in that.

He too readily accepts the veracity of the products of his own memory search.

So that's the background.

Now, on this particular day that I want to give you a little snippet of a session from,

he, on this day, when I came to the waiting room, he touched the scar on his head, the craniotomy scar on his head.

And he said, Hi, doc, to me.

So this was progress, you know, for the first time, he was associating me with medicine.

And he was associating me with the surgical scar on his head.

And so I thought this was great progress.

And so when we got into my consulting room, I said to him, you touched your head when we met in the waiting room.

And he said,

I think the problem is that a cartridge is missing.

We just need the specs.

What was it?

A C49?

Should we order it?

So I said to him, what does a C49 cartridge do?

He says, memory.

It's a memory cartridge, a memory implant.

Oh, sorry.

I should have mentioned this.

His wife told me that he had had dental implants.

He'd had serious problems with his teeth.

And these had been

for many years, but these problems had finally been successfully treated by implants, teeth implanted into the jaws.

So when he said that C49 cartridge is a memory cartridge and that it's a memory implant, it brought that operation, that dental operation to my mind.

He said, but I never really understood it.

In fact, I haven't used it for a good five or six months now.

It seems we don't really need it.

It was all chopped away by a doctor.

What's his name?

Dr. Solms, I think.

But it seems I don't really need it.

The implants work fine.

So I said to him,

You're aware that something's wrong with your memory, and he interrupts me.

And he says, yeah, it's not working 100%, but we don't really need it.

It was just missing a few beats.

The analysis showed there was some C or CO9 missing.

Denise brought me here to see a doctor.

What's his name again?

Dr. Solms or something.

And he did one of those heart transplant things.

So this is referring to another operation that he'd had, which is clearly also being referred to here.

which was that he had a cardiac arrhythmia, and so he had a pacemaker fitted, a cardiac pacemaker.

So he says, so he did one of those heart transplant things, and now it's working fine, never misses a beat.

So I said to him, which is what I actually thought, I said, you're aware that something's amiss, that some memories are missing, and of course that's worrying.

You hope I can fix it, just like those other doctors fixed the problems with your teeth and your heart.

But you want it so much that you're having difficulty accepting that it's not fixed already.

So he goes on and says, oh, I see.

Yes, it's not working 100%.

And he touches his head.

He says, I got knocked on the head.

Went off the field for a few minutes.

But it's fine now.

I suppose I shouldn't go back on.

But you know me.

I don't like going down.

So I asked Tim Noakes.

Tim Noakes, by the way, is a sports physician in South Africa.

He says, so I asked Tim Noakes, because I've got the insurance, you know.

So why not use it?

Why not go to the best?

And he said, fine, play on.

So that's the end of the snippet that I wanted to show you.

By the way, before I show you about that, so this is a case in which due to damage to one of the precision modulating nuclei or sets of nuclei, in this man's case, the basal forebrain nuclei, due to the damage to the

acetylcholine modulating mechanisms that I showed you earlier.

He has too much confidence in his predictions and too little confidence in the... He does not up the game on the Aries signal.

So he looks, I say to him, his predictive model tells him he's in Johannesburg.

I say to him, no, you're in London.

look out the window.

He looks out the window, he sees snow, clearly not something that could possibly be associated with Johannesburg, but he sticks with his prediction.

He says, no, I know I'm in Joburg, just because you're eating pizza, that doesn't mean you're in Italy.

And likewise, in the case of these memory processes that I showed you in that session, each time that he starts to feel

the unpleasure of the mounting error signals, the mounting, the things are, so just think about it, he has, he touches his head, he's on the brink of being aware that he's had a brain operation, that the brain operation has resulted in loss of memory, I hope you can see that, him saying that, he says we just need to order the specs for this module that's missing, what does the module do?

It does memory, you know, so

touching his head, speaking about operations.

So he's on the brink of recognizing that things were not as he expected, that things are in fact quite different.

My point being that this evokes feelings, that this is bad.

This is a panic-inducing situation.

And because this man has

damage to these precision modulation mechanisms that we've been talking about.

What he does is he simply upregulates or maintains his confidence in his prediction and in this way maintains his emotional equanimity rather than allowing the unpleasant affect to dominate and the unpleasant affect to update

to upregulate the error signal, which would normally update the predictive model.

So I'm hoping that in this case, you can see something of the role of affect, the feelings involved in this man's case in relation to his predictions and the prediction errors.

In other words, the cognitive business of what he

perceives and what he believes, and how what he perceives changes what he believes, and the role of feeling in all of this.

I thought this was a succinct case to be able to illustrate all of that.

Because it's only one case, I thought I should just show you some of this.

These are several papers that we've written on showing how these mechanisms work in confabulation.

It's not just this one case.

We were able to show that affect regulation, that confabulation

has a wishful quality.

In other words, it has a down-regulating of error signals quality and an up-regulating of predictions quality.

And we were also able to show that by analysis of transcripts of cases like this, we studied many cases like this, how the affect actually improves with each confabulation.

So there's an increasing negative affect, followed by confabulation, followed by an improvement in the affect.

So I see I'm right at the end of my time.

I don't have time to go into this point.

I'm sorry.

This is not such a fundamental point.

It's just a slightly different way that I see the predictive hierarchy.

If we take seriously that what we're talking about here fundamentally

We're talking about homeostatic systems and that the most important predictions have to do with maintaining your phenotypic prior preference distribution, that this has implications for how we conceptualize the predictive hierarchy.

but as I say, we don't have time to go into that.

And then the last thing is just to say that these models that I've, together with my colleagues, derived from the study of the neuroscientific evidence on the basis of this well-known statement of Richard Feynman's, what I can't create, I do not understand.

We are trying to

to instantiate these mechanisms that I described to you earlier in an artificial consciousness.

I'm working with a group of really great guys, physicists and computer scientists and applied mathematicians.

And we presented our preliminary findings a few months ago at Carl Friston's theoretical neurobiology meetings.

And so watch the space.

We are saying that if we have identified the mechanism, the causal mechanism whereby affects are generated, what they actually do in relation to a self-organizing system, then if this really is how affect is generated, if this really is how it is caused,

then we should be able to instantiate it in an artificial system.

And that's what we're trying to do at the moment.

I'm sorry to have rushed at the end, but if you'll indulge me, I will wait for, if there are any questions, comments, I just wanted to show you my...

This is, I'm saying, these questions can be, they look quite different if we look at it through the lens that I've tried to encourage you to look at it with me through.

In other words, through the lens of affect.

These questions, why and how is there something it's like to be an organism, something it's like for the organism, and questions like, why is the performance of these functions accompanied by experience?

This is Chalmers' question.

Why doesn't all this information processing go on in the dark, free of any inner feel?

I'm saying that these questions, I've tried to provide you a clue as to how we might be able to address them differently.

Oh, what happened there?

I've lost my.

Oh, my.

Good.

OK.

Ah, there I am.

Yes.

How we might be able to address them differently, but get them through this lens.

Sorry to have gone on.

My word, I can't believe I've spoken for two hours again.

But if you'll allow me, I'll be happy to wait for any further comments and questions before we end.


SPEAKER_03:
As we have actually a whole document of questions and many questions in the chat, I think it's a perfect place to end the live session.

And whenever the affordance presents itself, we're always happy to have a .3.

The numbers keep counting and we'll keep hosting the sessions because this was very fascinating and I hope people got a lot out of it and very tantalizing.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you so much for inviting me and apologies for going on for so long.

I really enjoyed

What little interchange we had over these four hours, I really enjoyed.

Thank you so much.


SPEAKER_03:
Maybe one nice future event could be picking up on those last two, which are extremely interesting and important, and then starting with those two, with the dot one and the dot two as prerequisite, and then sharing more about those two when the time is right, and having that as more of a full discussion.

Very good.

Thank you, Mark.

Thank you, Stephen.

Thank you, Dave.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Stephen.

Thanks, Dave.

Thanks, Daniel.


SPEAKER_03:
Peace out.

Take care.

Bye.

All right.

Thanks, everybody, for watching.

Hope you enjoyed that.

See you later.