## 8Ohlb8iTW0k

SPEAKER_00:
All right.

All right.

It is April 7th, 2025.

This is going to be active inference stream 12.1.

Cerebrum, case-enabled reasoning engine with Bayesian representations for unified modeling.

I've started first to make a GitHub push to the GitHub repo, Active Inference Institute slash Cerebrum.

And that is now live.

and here in cursor i'm running the render script render markdown which calls the script render mermaids which takes this markdown file and all of these 15 figure level markdown files and the math and the novel case appendix and is going to result in a pdf

The PDF looks like this.

In this stream, we're going to go through the PDF and talk about probably a bunch more, depending on who shows up.

I'm going to finish flipping through the PDF.

Then we will see where the PDF generation is at.

And then we will go through this.

This should be super interesting.

Conclusion, Appendix 1, math.

Appendix 2, novel cases.

All right.

Degeneration will finish soon.

It renders each of the 15 mermaid diagram figures, which look like this, into...

figures that look like that and that inserts them into the markdown all right pdf generated it generates cerebrum.pdf so that's the newly rendered version and i'll push it and then let us get into the topic i also just push this to zenodo

and looking forward to where we go from here so we're all pushed on the repo let's look at the paper and go through some of the sections all right i'll read the abstract first

This paper introduces case enabled reasoning engine with Bayesian representations for unified modeling, Cerebrum.

Cerebrum is a synthetic intelligence framework that integrates linguistic case systems with cognitive scientific principles to describe, design, and deploy generative models in an expressive fashion.

By treating models as case-bearing entities that can play multiple contextual roles, like declinable nouns, Cerebrum establishes a formal linguistic-type calculus for cognitive model use, relationships, and transformations.

The Cerebrum framework uses structures from category theory and modeling techniques related to the free energy principle in describing and utilizing models across contexts.

cerebrum addresses the growing complexity in computational and cognitive modeling systems eg generative decentralized agentic intelligences by providing structured representations of model ecosystems that align with lexical ergonomics scientific principles and operational processes and we will probably push to another version by the end of the stream so we'll fix a few different things that we can see along the way describing and utilizing

models across contexts.

Okay, continuing to overview.

Cerebrum implements a comprehensive approach to cognitive systems modeling by applying linguistic case systems to model management.

This framework treats cognitive models as entities that can exist in different cases, as in a morphologically rich language, based on their functional role within an intelligence production workflow.

This enables more structured representation of model relationships and transformations.

And the code to generate this paper and further open source development from this 1.0 milestone is available at this GitHub repo.

And that's what we'll be pushing to and using during this stream.

Okay, background sections.

First background sections on cognitive systems modeling.

The second background section is about active inference.

third background section is about linguistic case systems and i'm going to read this one because this might be the one that's the wild card however this is the crux and as a first language english speaker as we'll discuss there are some interesting ways of having the

cases a bit more silent in English than some other languages like Russian and Latin and other things that will probably end up on Wikipedia to find out today so I'm going to read this linguistic case section linguistic case systems represent grammatical relationships between words

among words, through morphological marking.

Case systems operate as morphosyntactic interfaces between semantics and syntax, encoding contextualized relationship types rather than just, or in addition to, just sequential ordering.

This inherent relationality makes case systems powerful abstractions for modeling complex dependencies and transformations between conceptual entities.

Cases under consideration here include nominative, subject, accusative, object,

dative , genitive , instrumental , locative and ablative all serving different functional roles within sentence structure.

English has largely lost its morphological case system

The underlying case relationships still exist and are expressed through word order and prepositions.

For example, in The Cat Chased the Mouse, the nominative case is marked by position rather than morphology, while in I Gave Him the Book, the dative case is marked by the preposition to and word order.

This demonstrates that the semantics slash chemiosis slash pragmatics of case relationships are fundamental to language structure, even when not overtly marked morphologically, e.g.

expressed in writing or spoken language.

Section 134, Intelligence Case Management Systems.

So this sort of speaks to the pun at the heart of this, which is case management,

which might be for like a help ticket or a research inquiry or any other kind of case management.

It's a bit of a hinge with the linguistic case systems.

So coincidence, but enough of a connection and gap there to have the linguistic case system be the theory

and the category theory and some of the transformations that are going to be going into, and then combining this with more of an operational layer and thinking about what are the different roles that generative models really do play in different kinds of case managements seen more from an operational view.

Okay, section 1.4, towards languages for generative modeling.

I'm going to read this section.

The active inference community has extensively explored numerous adjectival modifications of the base framework, including, for example, deep, affective, branching time, quantum, mortal, structured inference, among others.

Each adjectival prefixed variant emphasizes specific architectural aspects or extensions of the core formalism.

Building on this, Cerebrum focuses on a wider range of linguistic formalism, for example in this paper, declensional semantics, rather than adjectival modifications or prefixing.

In this first cerebrum paper, there is an emphasis on the declensional aspects of generative models as noun-like entities, separate from adjectival qualification.

This approach aligns with category-theoretic approaches to linguistics, where morphisms between objects formalize grammatical relationships and transformations.

Many such cases.

By applying formal case grammar to generative models, Cerebrum extends and transposes structured modeling approaches to ecosystems of shared intelligence while preserving the underlying partitioned, flexible, variational, composable, interfacial, interactive, empirical, applicable, communicable semantics.

1.5.

the intersection of cognitive systems modeling, active inference, linguistic case systems, and intelligence production.

1.6 Methods and Materials

The Cerebrum framework was developed as part of a broader synthetic intelligence framework combining linguistic theory, cognitive science, category theory, and operations research.

Key approaches included linguistic formalization, category theoretic mapping, and algorithmic implementation.

Figure one, here are those foundation domains flowing into Cerebrum.

The functional and the processional elements of the framework.

different features and system outcomes leading to enhanced model management.

Core Concept 1.7 Cognitive Models as Case-Bearing Entities Just as nouns in morphologically rich languages can take different forms based on their grammatical function, cognitive models in cerebrum can exist in different states or cases

depending on how they relate to other models or processes within the system.

Figure 2 illustrates this linguistic parallel.

So here, provocatively laid out generatively, on the diagonal are the cases and how they'll be abbreviated

nominative accusative dative generative generative instrumental locative ablative invocative up into the right are examples with the cat as noun down into the left are the analogous functional roles and sort of parts of speech as in describing to the generative model which is what the focus of this is

Okay, going into a bit more detail about what do these different cases do?

What is the point of being able to decline a generative model like a noun into these different cases?

So here is three clusters of cases.

On the left are the genitive and the ablative case.

and ablative as its name sort of even suggests was relatively earlier lost and so it's not always seen but you know it's these things are just popping up and down in different languages really interesting ways and generative which that sort of pun with genitive and generative is going to come back here the generations coming from something or the possession of something

locative instrumental invocative here are clustered with the contextual cases so these and also the primary cases with doing the the direct agent doing the action like with nominative like the cat jumps over the moon

or in the accusative or the dative being the recipient of action so different cases that might be used linguistically in describing like the source or origin like is that your guitar from where did that guitar come from it was brought from here it is possessed of this person

Those are sentences that would be about some sort of material noun that might use these different cases to provide those functions.

And here it's like an analogy extended into talking about joint distribution generative models.

Here's a table with all of the cases that are going to be considered.

The abbreviation, the full name of the case, the function and the example.

So nominative model is active agent.

Cat jumps over the moon.

Model generates predictions.

Model does something.

This is sort of the base model.

Just declaring the form that's in the dictionary.

accusative and dative this is model as object and recipient and these relate to processes that are inputting or targeting the model like some method applied to the model or something from another source being received by the model

genitive the output of the model something that comes from the inferences and the ablative possibly very similar or redundant or not needed in situations but related to basically the difference between the ablative attribution and the generative

instrumental this is a possibly a very common case for using when talking about a model analysis performed with something like the implementation of a model as a model and the vocative model as addressable entity

example hey model x all the different names that these chat assistants have so calling something by name direct invocation task initialization and documentation reference point like referring to a parameter as its parameter in a system or or something like that maybe there's different you know subtypes

um okay 1.9 a preliminary example thank you for your question dongyeob i will get to it i want to get through the paper mostly in one sweep and then happy to look at your question and any other questions people have all right 1.9 a preliminary example of a case bearing model homeostatic thermostat

Consider a cognitive model of a homeostatic thermostat that perceives room temperature with a thermometer and regulates temperature through connected heating and cooling systems.

This is kind of the classic model.

simple homeostatic in nominative case the thermostat model actively generates temperature predictions and dispatches control signals functioning as the primary agent in the temperature regulation process so that's kind of like an operational utilization or generic situation considered holistically version that's in the dictionary

When placed in accusative case, the same model has become the object of optimization processes, with its parameters being updated based on prediction errors between expected and actual temperature readings.

Change of mind, change of world.

In dative case, the thermostat model receives environmental temperature streams.

These can also be ongoing simultaneously, which is going to be gotten to later with the precision modulation.

and occupant comfort preferences as inputs.

The generative case transforms the model into a generator of temperature regulation reports and system performance analytics.

So basically synthetic data generation or genitive AI, like generative AI.

When an instrumental case, the thermostat serves as computational tool implementing control algorithms for other systems requiring temperature management.

It's being used like a tool.

The locative case reconfigures the model to represent the contextual environment in which temperature regulation occurs

Modeling, building, thermal properties, so perhaps locational topics, or discussing something within the model as a location, like model as place.

Finally, in ablative case, the thermostat functions as the origin of historical temperature data and control decisions, providing causal explanations for current thermal conditions.

This single cognitive model thus assumes dramatically different functional roles while maintaining its core identity as a thermostat.

Figure four, generative model integration in intelligence case management.

First place a good render from above.

Here's just different stages and different ways in which stages of research and intelligence work relates to different case aspects being highlighted.

110, declinability of active inference generative models.

At the core of Cerebrum lies the concept of declinability, the capacity for generative models to assume different morphological and functional roles through case transformations, mirroring the declension patterns of nouns in morphologically rich languages.

Unlike traditional approaches where models maintain fixed roles or variable roles defined by analytical pipelines,

so which is to say that there's some process by which like well now we're going to specify it declaratively then we're going to do this thing that updates it then we're going to generate some data from it then we're going to do this thing that updates it then we're going to generate some data then we're going to give a final updating and then we're going to use it as a tool

some process like that which is just defined procedurally here gives a more expressive layer on top of what even that is and expands out and generalizes what that space of procedures is materialized from so what are those changes that happen for generative models

It's not necessarily that some suffix, like in the case of a noun, the end of the noun might change.

And there's probably different ways this happens in different languages.

So what is it that actually changes by analogy in when a generative model is actually declined into these different ways, cases?

So one, functional interfaces could change what is being received and or transmitted.

Parameters across patterns.

So what kinds of parameters are in play?

Prior distributions could be a different prior.

Maybe if depending on whether it's playing one role or another, something is more or less likely to happen.

update dynamics in what ways does the model update if at all and perhaps different computational resourcing also including different thresholds or approaches so one approach being there's a zero to one waiting like an attention or a precision on all these cases in play at once or one could have a one hot and some kind of other rule

for just only computing one of these settings.

And then depending on how you parameterize what each of these settings would be, it's not that receiving and updating has a higher computational cost than being used to make an action selection, but there could be a setting where receiving and updating is very simple.

There could be a setting where that's very complex, same as for action selection.

So what happens when

the generative model gets this modification here table two describes how each of the cases different changes could happen parametrically including structure learning and what happens at the interface of the model how does that relate to a precision weighted generalized approach kind of like the Sanford Smith approach

Consider a perception-oriented generative model M with parameters Theta didn't render.

Let's fix that.

The Theta for parameters does not render update, so it is plain text.


SPEAKER_01:
data and check anywhere else that might be relevant.


SPEAKER_00:
So M is the joint distribution generative model.

Here's another list of those cases being used in different ways.

The vocative case

Voc represents a unique functional role where models serve as directly addressable entities within a model ecosystem.

Unlike other cases that focus on data processing or transformational aspects, the vocative case specifically optimizes a model for name-based recognition and command reception.

This has particular relevance in synthetic intelligence environments where models must be selectively activated or woken up through explicit address, similar to how humans are called by name to gain their attention.

The vocative case maintains specialized interfaces for handling direct commands, documentation references, and initialization requests.

In practical application, models in vocative case might serve as conversational agents awaiting activation, document reference points within technical specifications, or system components that remain dormant until explicitly addressed.

This pattern mimics the linguistic vocative case where a noun is used in direct address, as in, hey Siri or okay Google, activation phrases for digital assistants, creating a natural bridging pattern between human language interaction and model orchestration.

This systematic pattern of transformations constitutes a complete declension paradigm for cognitive models, using precision modulation to fulfill diverse functional roles while maintaining their core identities.

now pivoting from that linguistic case focus to thinking about the role of those different cases in model workflows

That is in figure five and six.

So here's an example of how one kind of generative model might move through these different cases.

So first a model specified in nominative, it processes data as a direct object.

it's used to generate source synthetic data then it is the the sender and or receiver of information at different levels from the sort of fine-tuning and context layer here like a feedback between the analyst and the results at this layer

or at the second layer, a feedback involving data selection or attention and or even reaching back to the model's structure.

Here's figure six more explicitly in the context of the intelligence production workflow.

so here's data collection gathering of raw data uses as instrumentally activating some kind of model this is just one example motif processing and and defining the model

providing locational situational context, generating and evaluating data with context changes, then generating from the refined model, deploying the refined model, one possible pipeline.

Figure 7 has some of the category theory connections and seeds that are mainly drawn from other research in the category theory of linguistic case.

So tentative, just like all of it.

Figure 8.

more types of transformations so for example let's start with the nominative with the sort of agentic framing there might be some kind of transformation like objectification that combines with external data to result in a well-formatted processed model in the accusative case

some type of targeting from or to that transformed object could bring it into being addressed or being used as an actor or recipient or whatever the analogy is in the dative then in the generative different kinds of cycles

Figure 9 goes into a sort of esoteric but interesting aspect of linguistics.

Again, something that's really implicit in English, or it was hard to even sort of think about how different this was, but that's kind of the cool part about language.

so morphosyntactic alignment and the difference between the ergative-absolutive patient-oriented modeling and the nominative-accusative the agent-oriented modeling and the reason why this box is in the same color is there might be some operations that differ between these two or it might be a dual representation but from the point of view of something downstream in the process

that is an example of a kind of morphosyntactic difference that perhaps one underlying situational reference source could be expressed in an arrogative absolutive frame or language or in a nominative accusative.

1.14 goes into more detail into implementations and how this could play a role with the different cases being relevant at different stages of implementation.

It's pretty interesting to think about how different kinds of resourcing and costs of different operations

Just like how with a transformer or LLM, there might be a different amount of computations required to train it for the first time, to fine-tune it, to fill its context window, to just do the embedding, to generate data.

All these kinds of things have different computational costs and they have different scalings.

And that is going to depend a lot on the state space of the model.

But it also depends, given the state space of the model, about all of these more pipeline scale modeler degrees of freedom.

How do we actually host the data and all those kinds of training?

How many times do we actually do different steps?

So here's one in figure 11, one example again of that.

Some model is used in raw data collection.

A model is activated

through the vocative and these different steps can happen and possibly another or multiple cases of the very same generative model or different models that are in different cases just like a given step of a story or a given situation might even in the same sentence have just one case or it could have multiple cases

in a compound sentence because it could be like the guitar of that person was used by this person to do this leading to this at this location all those kinds of sentences that that happen another visualization just with a different clustering but similar to 11 and 12 and we maybe we can update 12.

um here's how linguistics cognitive systems modeling active inference and intelligence production make contributions and also relate to cerebrum kind of revisiting that all right 1.18 related work so here's an important epistemic disclaimer

Cerebrum builds upon several research traditions while offering a novel synthesis.

In this first paper, there are no specific works linked or cited.

Later work will provide more detail and reference in derivation.

The work stands transparently on the shoulders of nestmates and so is presented initially as a speculative design checkpoint in the development of certain cognitive modeling practices.

there's cognitive architectures backgrounds everything with knowledge modeling cognitive architectures active inference etc um figure 13 here's how one model might relate to um different utilizations within the same active inference predictive processing hierarchy

So here's a model being used in different cases with the top-down prediction and the bottom-up errors.

Here's describing different kinds of aspects of the agent, mapping the active inference ontology to different cases that it is in, or could be said in.

And one way to possibly implement that is precision weighted message passing and free energy minimization.

so figure 14 goes into a little bit more of that so the whole box is yellow again to have a sort of symbolism like from the outside this could be a multiple dispatch and it might matter how different message passing plays out but there's also another level where it can be just coarse grained to that level at least conceptually if not in the implementation dispatch

So here's the instrumental, nominative, accusative, dative, genitive, and vocative and how they might connect to the error and prediction motif of a two-layer

hierarchical predictive processing.

So just different kinds of modes might relate to different modulations of features of a hierarchical predictive processing architecture.

So kind of like different positions of the hand on the guitar could lead to resonating cymatics, vibrations, different way.

15 is the model case calculus framework so here's some more bringing together of how the mod here with a subscript notation for different cases showing how different functional roles and cases relate to subscript changes which can be applied through to be determined to be invented slash discovered

not necessarily infinite or open-ended but certainly definite calculus laws like what kinds of model transformations and concatenations and composabilities are valid within which understandings of case and which ones also perhaps by definition perhaps by implication are invalid given a case approach in a language

More background references could be found with category theory, active inference, linguistic computing.

Okay, 1.19 practical applications.

Here's a few situations where this could be really practical to apply.

One is in model pipeline design and optimization and the resource optimization as sort of mentioned earlier.

Here might be given some constraints on resources of different kinds.

What kinds of cases one might be expecting to want their model to be optimized to be in.

For example, let's just think by analogy to like an LLM.

Let's just say that there's

A few architectures that have the same score on a benchmark, but one of them is 10 times more expensive in RAM or storage or CPU or money or whatever it is to train, but then it's cheaper to run.

Or it's cheaper to train, but it's more expensive to run.

Or it's able to have a larger context window, but it costs more to do this, or it has some other trade-off or something like that.

So on those Pareto optimal sort of constraints, manifolds within empirical computational finite space, just from a pragmatic perspective, resource allocation, that might be able to guide what features

at the meta modeling level how do we want to think about it what functional rules even matter to benchmark what tests should be written around what kind of functional roles for what kind of artifacts table six some cross-domain integration patterns so just sort of like associating differently and more how these cases can be used even one domain unsurprisingly

like reasoning, might have multiple cases deployed.

Just like if we were going to talk about somebody in a library and they're engaged in perception.

So it's like

that might use a lot of sentences involving nominative or accusative like they looked at the book and so that might put the book as the recipient of action in the accusative so the same type of agent and artifact based ecosystem of share intelligence model that kind of describing perceptual gestalt aspects whatever components

might involve a lot of like active agents and recipient agents talking about reasoning might be talking a lot with instrumentality and context talking about planning might be about goals of an agent

telios and the ablative history in terms of where where did it ablate from like what was removed or what was generated this is a case we can look more into or write a new section on what does the ablative mean or something like that and in the action case there might be active agents and and recipients kind of like the accusative

1.19.5 this is describing some ways that this kind of semantic labeling on a knowledge graph could be used to structure just like if it were going to be a graph of the food web or ecosystem of some region in the sort of hyperlink style or unstructured edges like obsidian

it might be ambiguous, like, well, what does this edge mean?

Does it mean it's a type of, and there's exactly that, which is what structured ontological approaches exist for, and constraint, either interpreting those linguistically and or constraining the edge types that are in play

two kinds of linguistic assertions is possibly a pretty parsimonious and ergonomic way to do it because it would reflect the kinds of expressions people would say about the ecosystem 1.19.6 immersion behaviors and model collectives

When multiple case-bearing models interact within an ecosystem, emergent collective behaviors arise from their case-driven interactions analogous to how linguistic communities develop shared understanding through dialogue.

So that could kind of get into some of these linguistic features.

in discourse community, not just loading up context windows of each other and then continuing the conversation, which works really well in the prompt engineering multi-agent modeling approach, really common with LLMs, Agent Laboratory, Andrew Pache's work, all that kind of stuff.

This is getting a little bit more towards dialogic

linguistics rather than just script context in context learning it's a different description space for dialogue 120 future directions so this could include making some programming libraries to do various features some of which we might look into today building visualization tools

expanding to other linguistic elements so here to really make the point i wanted to focus on the nouns and the declining of nouns but there could be other uh features like talking about different time tenses and so on

open source stewardship, computational complexity estimates, multiple dispatch systems for the methods, connection with different database methods and queries, looking at different cognitive security aspects.

okay I'm gonna read the conclusion then we will quickly go through the two appendices and then re-render it and then see where that kind of gets us so 1.21 conclusion

Cerebrum provides a structured framework for managing cognitive models by applying linguistic case principles to represent different functional roles in relationship.

This synthesis of linguistic theory, category mathematics, active inference, and intelligence production creates a powerful paradigm for understanding and managing complex model ecosystems.

By treating models as case-bearing entities, Cerebrum enables more formalized transformations between model states while providing intuitive metaphors for model relationships that align with human cognitive patterns and operational intelligence workflows.

The formal integration of variational free energy principles with case transformation establishes Cerebrum as a mathematically rigorous framework for active inference implementations.

The precision-weighted case selection mechanisms, Markov blanket formalizations, and hierarchical message-passing structures provide computationally tractable algorithms for optimizing model interactions.

These technical formalizations bridge theoretical linguistics and practical cognitive modeling while maintaining mathematical coherence through category theory validation.

The Cerebrum framework represents another milestone in a long journey of how we conceptualize model relationships, moving from ad hoc integration approaches on through seeking the first principles of persistent composable linguistic intelligences.

This journey, really an adventure, continues to have profound implications for theory and practice.

By here incipiently formalizing the grammatical structure of model interactions,

Cerebrum points towards enhancement of current capabilities and opens new avenues for modeling emergent behaviors in ecosystems of shared intelligence.

As computational systems continue to grow in complexity, frameworks like Cerebrum that provide structured yet flexible approaches to model management will become increasingly essential for maintaining conceptual coherence and operational effectiveness.

All right, to the appendices.

all of the equations are referenced in the text equations first the generic variational free energy here applied to the structural model of the case transformation equation two describing cases in terms of their structured blanket interface

equation three beta precision modulation feature that precision weights case equation four doing partial derivative case specific gradient descent on free energy equation five planning over cases with expected free energy

Equation 6, Bayes factor, to get a posterior odds estimator between two structurally divergent models.

Equation 7, how free energy is minimized with the case transitions.

Section, Appendix 2, Section 1.2, message passing rules for different cases.

This is going into a bit more detail from the image that was shown from this section with the different updating functions in the predictive processing hierarchy.

Equation 13, temperature precision weighting.

14, resource weighting.

section 2.1.4 goes into the some of the novel cases that are in the second appendix 2141 has the appendix alphabetical pretty much everything renders fine of the different variables used okay this should be the second appendix so let's update that


SPEAKER_01:
This is showing up as 2.2.

Please update it to be Appendix 2.


SPEAKER_00:
You're changing the

and or render steps right but it'll still be the same material okay

The Cerebrum framework not only operationalizes traditional linguistic cases, but potentially enables the discovery of entirely new case archetypes through its systematic approach to model interactions.

As cognitive models interact in increasingly complex ecosystems, emergent functional roles may arise that transcend the classical case system derived from human language.

So here's some

anomaly oriented ways and bottom-up empirical ways to discover new cases and then here are three speculative novel cases the conjunctive which has to do with sensor fusion type fusion of predictive streams into joint prediction like federated inference

a speculative novel case recursive case model applied to itself and then a third possible case metaphorical case so these are some interesting paragraphs and then we're at the end after this and I'll look to the live chat so I'll look to your questions don't you up and anyone else

A third potential novel case is the metaphorical case, Met, which would enable a model to map structures and relationships from one domain to another, creating computational analogies that transfer knowledge across conceptual spaces.

So it's kind of like a simile.

It is a simile.

It's like a simile.

Because it is when a model, it's like saying, I feel like a buoy at sea, or I'm hot and cold like a thermometer in this location on that day.

In this metaphorical case, a model acts as a transformational bridge between disparate domains, establishing systematic mappings between conceptual structures.

This case would be particularly valuable for transfer learning systems and creative problem-solving algorithms that need to apply learned patterns in novel contexts.

The metaphorical case would introduce unique cross-domain mapping functions as formalized in equation 18.

The key innovation is the structured alignment of latent representations across domains , enabling principled knowledge transfer that preserves relational invariance while adapting to target domain constraints.

metaphorical case has rich connections to multiple domains of human cognition and communication in affective neuroscience and models how emotional experiences are mapped onto conceptual frameworks explaining how we understand emotion through body metaphors like heavy heart burning anger in first and second person neuroscience metaphorical mappings enable perspective taking and swapping and empathy through systematic projection of one's own experiential models onto others

Educational contexts leverage metaphorical case operations when complex concepts are taught through familiar analogies, making abstract ideas concrete through structured mappings.

The way people converse about generative models often employs metaphorical language describing models as thinking, imagining, or dreaming, which represents a natural metaphorical mapping between human cognitive processes and computational operations.

Learning itself fundamentally involves metaphorical operations when knowledge from one domain scaffolds understanding in another.

Perhaps most profoundly, the metaphorical case provides a computational framework for understanding how symbols and archetypes function in human cognition, as cross-domain mappings that compress complex experiential patterns into transferable culturally shared representations that retain their structural integrity across diverse contexts while adapting to individual interpretive frameworks.

here's a table summarizing the speculative novel cases here conjunctive recursive metaphorical right that is the paper here is the cursor agent that is re-rendering the entire pdf with a few changes that we have made let's see if it finishes and then just open

Here's versioning.

Alright.

modify the render script, modify the source code, go back and forth a few times.

So that one finished, but now it's started another one.

So just to confirm, I'll delete that.

Now this one, when the PDF reappears here, it'll be the new one.

Here's the figures in the output.

Those are generated from these mermaid graphs.

Then the appendix.

All right, check back to the stream.

All right, this is using cursor version 0.48.7.

For the LLM, I've been using Claude 3.7 Sonnet, and also, maybe half the time, Gemini 2.5 Pro EXP 0325.

All right.

So, let's see that PDF get regenerated.

Okay, we went over the paper.

Went over the key diagrams, talked about some of the different roles that generative models play, the kind of modes or postures, or by analogy to how a noun might be in different positions in a sentence, like is it the cat spewed tears everywhere, or tears were spewed upon the cat.

that still has cat in english but other languages have other more visible modifications here the pdf was generated and there it is let's see if it updated table contents okay didn't fix it


SPEAKER_01:
Hmm, still looks like it is section 2.2, and in table of contents, check again, and please exit.


SPEAKER_00:
And then just sometimes it can be that context window.

So starting the new chat and also that control T starts up a side chat.

So for example, here we can say,

in docs comprehensively given the paper write up a documentation library for specifications for starting to build this in robust modular multi-language multi-setting way then new chat

So we have the paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Write a new tool.


SPEAKER_00:
Make graphical abstract that will make a big PNG and PDF

of a big epic graphical abstract with the author and title and abstract information hardcoded and all and a spread of all 15 images in grid

Looking like awesome conference poster.

Thank you.

Here's the documentation chugging away.

Okay.

Missed the boat on that one.

Graphical abstract tool in development docs folder.

And there's so much stuff with the MCP and the MDC files, other things.

All right.

I'm going to copy a bunch of the comments.

So yeah, anyone else write comments and I'll paste them in.

Okay.

Sorry, I'm pretty new to your channel.

Are you trying to make your own LLM or something?

Not trying to make my own LLM.

Looking to do many things.

Looking to learn and apply active inference.

Make it rigorous, applicable, accessible.

Figuring out synthetic intelligence methods.

So things that integrate.

It could be a chain of LLMs.

It could be no LLMs, so different flexible methods for yesterday, today, and tomorrow in compositional systems.

I think consciousness or the experiencer uses self-model, which is pretty much a memory pattern about belief on self that is self-reinforced in a nonlinear neural network structure like LLM.

So I think this cerebrum model is constraining if you are looking to study consciousness.

yeah that's a great point or question i didn't uh mean for this to be a consciousness resolver in any way i could see someone talking about the different functions like when the mind generates experience is it recipient of action

Is it a host of action locatively?

Is it a generator of action?

All these different ways in which I think this could help reduce uncertainty and expand the hypothesis space and expressivity, like even related to consciousness.

but that's not what this framework is about but I think it still may be even thinking more about awareness or self-awareness or relevance realization or something that doesn't have the same phenomenological first-person experiential even though that was mentioned and I think that's an important modality for it to be used in

But the fact that it's called Cerebrum, it was just sort of an acronym that fit.

Maybe let's make a new chat.

Only three can be open at once.

We'll queue up that one.

please given just come up with a long list put it in docs of insect related brain and cognition cognitive terms that could apply to the whole project just at the

high level call sign.

Like Cerebro.

Once that one finishes.

All right, the make graphical abstract is running.

The script is running.

Okay, so I agree.

It's not meant to constrain even at all.

Wasn't like that today for me.

study consciousness let the llm-like structure learn about self through its senses and form beliefs about self-identity as memory pattern yeah that's an awesome point like for llm or perhaps for multiple or any kind of system that firstness of like the primary syntax of the neural network or the material metamaterial substrate

and the way that that's kind of like sub-semantic and possibly even sub-syntactic, that's something that's really explored in like Gödel Escher Bach and other kind of Hofstetter type thinking, like computers don't really play chess, they do statistics, but they don't really do statistics, they just follow laws of physics.

so that is where a lot of active inference theorists and thinkers talk about mortal computing embodied self-evidencing self-identity meta-awareness of identity because it connects that primary modification of the substrate with a perhaps what you're calling like an llm-like structure

and the symbolic and higher order nested symbolic discretized cognitive structures like knowledge graphs much like human infant human baby doesn't have strong sense of self but develops through self-reinforcement through experience llm has intelligence to grow self-awareness

Yeah, that's definitely a claim to explore.

However, talking about babbling and refining at structural and fine-tuning levels of the sense-making, proprioception, active motor feedback, all these features like babbling, motor babbling, verbal babbling, Chris Fields talked about that.

This is wrong because that's how human brain works.

This is wrong because that's not how human brain works.

I don't know, but great question.

Okay.

thank you for the comments I'm going to copy another comment from live chat in and then anyone else can write any question in the live chat and I'll stay for a little bit longer and do a few more things so Rohit wrote I just started watching the stream how exactly does Cerebrum work all right let's get a new document how exactly it works

This window is rendering the PDF.

When the Morse code pops up, it's pretty close to the end.

Yep.

But it's getting impatient.

But it should end very soon there.

Then the graphical abstract tab.

The outputs are saving the output as graphical abstract.

Cerebrum output.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
And so output folder, graphical abstract.

Okay.

PDF up PDF works well as a block square.

PNG, perfect.

Could upload that to a PNG.

All ready for the undergrad research expo.

All right, let's reset that one.

Do the insect acronym.

Docs writing is continuing.

The PDF is re-rendering.

Once the docs finishes, we'll ask Roy its question.

Rerendering in the first tab.


UNKNOWN:
Oh.


SPEAKER_00:
By the letter.

Antenna, Apis, Abdomen, Arthropod.

Brain Case.

Beetle, Butterfly.

Cocoon, Compound Cricket.

Just more length, more comedy.

more funny stuff add more to the insect acronym list so there are multiple for every letter include chaminoptera

Pogonomir Max.

Barbados.

Antiferns.

right it wrote the documentation yeah um pdf is still re-rendering add a folder within docs

called languages that has language specific unpackings and elaborations for specific languages per markdown be absurdly comprehensive in conveying and

tabling how cerebrum relates with details and tables to such case languages with diverse case paradigms including

latin russian sanskrit other languages each per file all right okay okay insect let's see what poggin remix

Probabilistic Operational Generative Ontology for Neural Organizations with Multi-Level Yielding Reasoning and Model Exchange Exformations.

Pretty good.

Pretty good.

StigmaG.

Unprompted.

Directly.

Systematic Transformation of Information with Generative Models for Emergent Reasoning and Goal-Driven Yielding.

This one is making the language specificity.

That's still rendering.

Let's go to the chat window.

Control T. Alt T. Right.

We'll look at the docs.

just getting back to the stream write a docs called how it works my colleague wrote how exactly does cerebrum work

and we want a one-stop shop for exactly that question it can hyperlink to other documents and as needed in docs so that

The inquiry is respected from vast number of relevant angles.

Okay.

All right, whatever is happening with the PDF generation is pretty slow, but it does work.

There's probably way better ways to use Pandoc and all of that.

Let's push the update and then look at the documentation.

Let's let it make Russian.

Okay.

How it works is in progress.

Improving or at least digging us deeper into the rabbit hole with render markdown is happening.

we will have Latin Sanskrit and Russian in a second and then we'll see what is it uh with that minimal outlining what what will it do for each language

Okay, new rendering is happening.

We'll just update it when it finishes at all.

All right.

So in the Cerebrum repo.


SPEAKER_01:
Docs.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm just opening up all the markdowns and queuing up languages, and then we'll have it just continue to write more languages.

Continue to add technical relevant detail to all extant languages and add more rare, interesting, useful, cute, funny, interesting,

formal languages once it finishes there so we'll just be peeping as soon as the generating goes away okay

this document opened in no particular order how is active inference integrated here's moving towards we can ask it to expand more upon but let's just have kind of a running set of things that we want it to to do in the background just while we're

inactive inference integration be way more comprehensive and specific about how it is different with and without cerebral okay language one finished with finish now it will add more

Okay, PDF generation looked like it worked, but it's still going through some evolution.

Alright, we have a free chat.

We'll just flip to Gemini just to get another model in there.

So just summarizing some of the equations that are active inference related and just writing that that was just written in the last few minutes, but starting to get towards the code implementations.

Cerebrum core spec.

So this could be a kind of documentation file and or a cursor rules or an MDC file, this kind of information or schema file.

So there's a model registry and this could be implemented in different agent orchestration implementation frameworks like Active, Blockference, Agentic Mesh, Eliza OS, Agent Laboratory, like possibly some of these could already handle what is already being described here.

so there's a model registry a case manager that's the sort of joke again with case management and case management a precision modulation which as mentioned could be like one hot and deterministic or procedural or it could be continuous as part of a structure learning or whatever

A messaging interface.

There could be some interesting ways to use RxInfer and reactive message passing, but just saying that message passing occurs.

And the actual transformation engine that does the case modifications.

Okay, getting started.

clone in activate virtual environment that's actually not needed I don't think requirements I don't think exist so this is just some generic getting started stuff yeah JS implementation so this is sort of a speculative cerebrum work but it's exactly like okay update getting started to be a little bit da da da and then now start to actually write this out but as of the snapshot

i wanted to put it out before i had any methods at all and then anyone who's interested in this at that repo um and or i will continue to do it but we can start to do some of these and and replicate and describe previous literature just add more information ask different questions about all this um using the model so this is just one way it could look let's just

Okay, I did that one.

Okay, this is the PDF rendering one.

All right, let's see if it fixed the appendix labeling.

yeah it did it may have it looks fine though all right so that one looks good okay hungarian and japanese language

Let's return to that, to getting started and how, okay, now how it works.

So this is just one shot given the context of the code-based.

So this describes kind of different core architectural features, some math foundations.

I guess my question for Rohit or for anyone else there is like, what information should we, you know, what should we answer?

What questions or what kind of artifacts do we imagine or what sorts of examples do we start to imagine and we can start to include them in the repo?

Okay.

Implementation roadmap.

Okay.

Project deliverables.

Okay.

Let's...

Okay, Turkish.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's push the language update and look at the language files now.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, there's a core schema for language implementations.

Okay, we'll look at the examples later, but first the languages.

Reload.

Yeah, anyone ask a question though?

Or make a suggestion or a language or something like that.

Let's look at them.

Okay.

Latin, Russian, Sanskrit, Japanese, Hungarian, Finnish.

Okay, Latin.


UNKNOWN:
All right.


SPEAKER_00:
okay overview of Latin case system which uh was pretty much what I used for the cases included in the paper okay the mapping oh interesting so maybe Latin doesn't have instrumental

because it maps but this is very creative with the correspondent strength being strong when they're there actually the same case but allowing for these partial matches so that could be like kind of similarity or KL divergence among measures in this

um case archetype space where some of the archetypes are coarse-grained or described by natural language cases also though there's all these other cases we can imagine all right

so different latin expressions that would relate to different ways to use a generative model in a computational setting awesome table marcus librum legit marcus reads the book marcus equals nominative marcus librum legit

Marcus reads the book.

The book is in the accusative case.

It's Marcus's book.

It is the book of Marcus, genitive.

Marcus gives the book to his friend.

This is all happening for the book.

Interesting.

Okay, computational.

All right, so Latin looks good.

right russian case system russian singular and plural declension mappings so interesting like is there a true vocative in russian

more examples special look at the case preposition combinations different constructions so different ways to take a text with prepositions and do structured application and transformation based upon basically the

prepositions used in probably most languages or whichever ones are signifying case completely or to a large extent with prepositions directly perfective and imperfective Russian sentences with the translation animate inanimate distinction

Syncratic Examples Historical Context Merger of Proto-Indo-European ablative with the genitive in Slavic

Potential for combining similar function cases in future cerebrum versions.

Development of prepositional from locative.

Specialization of context cases for different environmental parameters.

Loss of vocative in modern Russian except vestigial forms.

Optional implementation of interface cases depending on application domain.

Sanskrit.

Eight grammatical cases in Sanskrit.

okay looks like there's a singular dual and plural that's pretty interesting all strong concordances so all of these cases uh exist in sanskrit different topics used in different ways sentences

sanskrit's elaborate sandy euphonic combination rules governing sound changes at morphine boundaries suggest a framework for cerebrum's case transformation mechanics wow sanskrit number sanskrit's three grammatical numbers singular dual plural inspire approaches to collective model collection management

Single model, paired models, hashtag digital twin, model collection, ensemble.

Compounds, let's see if... Let's keep writing more languages.

Write many more languages, including specific programming languages.

write in docs a full comprehensive classic who's on first style dialogue absolutely comprehensive describing the cerebrum approach and active inference in a world with high

prevalence of LLM.

We'll let Gemini get that one.

Okay.

Japanese.

Unlike Indo-European languages with inflectional case systems, Japanese relies on uninflected post-positional particles that attach to nouns, pronouns, and phrases to indicate their grammatical and semantic functions.

Particles follow the modified element rather than changing its form.

Okay, particles...

interesting so rather than modifying the term there is the pure composable addition post fixing with or prefixing i don't know with particles so a typographic approach but also one that could lead to an emoji based sequence

especially with all these payloads that can fit inside of an emoji for generative model via emoji sequence in generalized notation notation.

Awesome.

Lots of particles could be used.

Let's have it do it.

Write up a new folder design, speculative design,

that starts with comprehensive document of how the particle system in Japanese language and culture could be used with emoji sequences, custom payloads, or composable cerebrum generative model specification conveyance.

increase the density of puns, Americana 1920s lore, technical detail, comprehensive reference to all main and key topics in the paper, and longer.

Okay, back to language.

All right, so Japanese particles, probably other interesting things there.

Hungarian.

Hungarian, Magyar, a Finno-Ugric language of the Uralic family possesses one of the world's most extensive case systems with 18 distinct cases.

This document analyzes the correspondence between Hungarian's rich morphological system and Cerebrum's computational case framework.

Okay.

so here here are three cases we've seen before here are three location cases location inside movement from inside out of movement to inside so three locative type oh i i hesitate to even say though

Three surface locations.

That could be very interesting.

Holographic screens, all that.

Location on, from, and onto.

Perfect.

Improve... Improve the Japanese...

article article and write a new article about how the surface how the multiple hungarian cases related to surfaces

relate perfectly to the particular partition how quantum holographic structured interfaces in the free energy principle have things in those three case

like settings for total systems modeling using a Hungarian-like particular partition.

actually make a folder for dialogues and make that baseball one as it is the first one right

Just huge, you know, multifaceted research agenda.

Learn about languages in the world.

Describe languages in the world.

All by all, field shift.

All by all, plus, plus, plus with the languages.

All right, finish.

Features an extensive case system that offers unique perspectives on spatial, possessive, and functional relationships.

15 cases.

Okay, Finnish has an agglutinative morphology where suffixes are added sequentially, possibly something like Japanese.

Specialized cases for precise spatial relationships.

Interior, exterior, surface.

Write a Finnish applied to spatial web web3

network weaving ecotones participatory tech food forest comprehensive approach with many technical Finnish and regional linguistic and cultural elements

All right, we'll close out the language exploration, but then sync it, look at a few more languages.

Yeah, just start to write some of these fun transfers.

All right, case.

So maybe we'll learn about the inessive, elative, elative.

Okay, Hungarian.

Let's reload the languages.

look at a few that we hadn't looked at yet in the dialogues folder add a new dialogue totally a new genre of science realism fiction

where three girdle, escher, balk entities are in hexagonal repose with their shadows.

transmitting information with cerebrum at a mind's boggling expanse and rate make it vast please totally informative and clear and maximum bandwidth among agents

no worries about us humans at the time.

Let's look up Navajo and Python, then look at these speculative concepts.

Navajo, Dine, Bizod, an Athabascan language of the Nadene family, features a complex templatic verb system rather than a traditional case system.

This document explores how Navajo's intricate verb structure offers unique perspectives for cerebrum's computational framework, particularly regarding temporospatial relationships, processual state tracking, and event handling.

Eleven ordered prefix positions.

Different Aspects, a sophisticated aspect system that encodes viewpoints on actions.

In Navajo, it is said in the folder, add a comprehensive file about how

this perspective on expected free energy policy and planning as inference in active inference and free energy principle is all angles on this

Add a Shakespeare dialogue totally forking off from Hamlet.

Very recognizable mashups of funny Hamlet inside lore.

However, complete replacements of the semantic payload

with cerebrum and modern 2030s style applied cognitive modeling and cognitive security concepts.

Of course, densely and humorously delivered in that long dramatic form.

Okay, that was the language tab.

Directional systems.

Also interesting.

If anyone mentions a language, I can do it on the stream.

All right, Python.

Yeah, not sure even how well these linguistic cases match, but it might be super... There might be software packages completely already.

All right.

Okay, let me copy.

Let's look at the...

Let's push these speculative updates.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's look at the Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Where are the

All right, specular design folder.

That one didn't go through.

I'll flip it to Claude.


SPEAKER_01:
Docs, dialogs.

But what about the specular design?

Looks like it's up a layer.


SPEAKER_00:
We'll move it into Docs later.

But that's what's so awesome about these systems.

It's like, all right, let's make a new update for Cursor Disrupt.

Probably a small one.

Docs, Insects.


SPEAKER_01:
Move insects into docks.

Move over the insect.

I think we'll close a bunch of tabs.

Okay.

Okay.

Move speculative design into docs.


SPEAKER_00:
move over to docs all right thank you i see some more uh comments in the chat let's just look at these new documents then i will check back to the chat read anyone's comment look at any question um add any more languages so we have dialogue and speculative design all right

Here's Finnish inspired approach to techno-ecological systems.

Spatial web, Web3, network weaving, ecotones, participatory tech, food forests.

Let's have it do more.

in in these files add and ensure there are many intersectional weavings and relevant tables and

Bullet point lists specific active inference and cerebrum case-based and linguistic features as applied to cognitive model linguistic intelligence.

All right.

then we'll we'll we'll let it do that for all of them well let's just see if the other ones have more already all right here's the hungarian one the superressive sublative and deletive location on a surface onto a surface from or off a surface perfect these cases provide a precise way to describe the relationship between an empty and a surface boundary

background on fep and markov blanket here's hungarian cases on markov blanket here's oh this part is speculative on the holographic all right awesome right

Navajo Aspectual System Encoding Viewpoints on Actions Core Aspectual Distinctions in Navajo Momentaneous vs. Continuative Imperfective vs. Perfective Iterative and Repetitive Seriative and Progressive

optative and future specific conjugations exist for desired actions intended actions and future possibilities totally things that come up in active classifier stems verb themes encoding different viewpoints on action properties like what rich and and wise and fascinating ways to look at these topics

Let's look at the updated finish one.

Then I'll go to the questions and chat.

docs speculative design finish okay finish hungarian navajo active inference

Different Concepts Nature Place Resilience Communal Work Edge Boundary Network Challenges and Considerations Avoiding Essentialism

also you know import important things to to be keeping up with hard to say what exact balance and where and how and everything but that's the work itself care must be taken not to oversimplify or romanticize complex cultural concepts cultural the context and nuance are vital authenticity requires genuine engagement with finnish culture and language not superficial appropriation

scalability applying highly local concepts to global systems requires careful thought about modularity and federation practical implementation translating these often philosophical or cultural concepts into concrete design specifications and technical architectures is non-trivial all right that was

okay then it did now we have where's that document okay it didn't write it write that full very very shakespearean i will now create the file and write this dramatic cerebrum infused interpretation of hamlet uh where write that full file absolutely in

Meanwhile, let us look at the other two dialogues.

Okay.

All right.

Let's first look at who's on first.

All right.

All right.

Here we go.

Let's read it.

Characters, avid and increasingly flustered AI theorists trying to explain the finer points.

Costello, a bewildered everyman stuck in a vaudeville loop mixed with 1920s sensibilities.

Settings, outside a bustling AI conference, reminiscent of a noisy street corner near a ballpark or perhaps a dimly lit speakeasy entrance.

Not the whole thing, probably.

Abbott, Costello, my dear fellow, you look like you've seen a ghost.

Or perhaps just one too many talks on recursive self-improvement.

It's not all Greek, you know.

We're making strides beyond just that ubiquitous LLM everyone's buzzing about.

The LLM?

Yeah, the big linguine machine.

Writes my thank you notes like nobody's business.

Slicker than a greased piglet.

Is that the whole shebang?

Heavens no.

That's just the appetizer.

For the main course, for building agents that truly think, plan, adapt, like predicting the curveball of life, we're using sophisticated frameworks.

Take Cerebrum, for instance.

It often works hand-in-glove with principles like active inference.

Okay?

A case-enabled engine, like in my new Ford Model T?

Does it come in different cases, like a suitcase for travel?

And who's patient?

Is the engine sick?

And Bayesian representation, is that the name of the mechanic?

Representing the Bayes family dealership?

Try to follow.

Cerebrum isn't a who, it's a what.

It's a framework, the architecture.

Case-enabled refers to linguistic case systems.

Think grammar like nouns changing forms.

Okay, not really baseball-related, but alright.

Nominative throws the ball.

Accusative gets the ball thrown at him.

Okay, what's on second base?

We're not talking about baseball bases, Costello.

We're talking about model roles.

Okay, case is playing baseball.

big linguini machine of course funny right because the big linguini machine wrote this okay now this is the geb alpha omega and mu setting the hexagon nexus three luminous constructs designated alpha omega and mu let's have it okay still writing hamlet good occupy vertices of vast non-euclidean hexagonal structure that forms ripple with complex internal geometries

Below them, intricate dynamic shadows play across an abstract and manifold, lower dimensional projections of their hyperstate.

Communication is not acoustic or visual, but direct.

Structured cerebrum protocol state transmission across the nexus.

Oh, brother.

Okay.

All right.

Let's just look at one.

Transmission ID.

Transmission ID.

timestamp sender recipient so so it really was all email primary case okay okay primary case payload summary

This one.

Utilized Omega's prior request in that case as input to analyze with this method.

Executed functorial mapping via the instrumental protocol across this.

Validated it with theta prime.

Identified higher order case relationship.

So another speculative case designated perlative through slash across the structure.

Let's see if it's a real word.

okay it is it's that modified so seven psi 771 was forked or whatever modified into size 771.1 moved from the accusative to the genitive with a perlative potential mapping how exciting here's a free energy minimization

another modification within a lambda 42 locative manifold so epic right

two or three complete new genre pieces equally relevant and fascinating or more so or all the more so as the other dialogues all in complex dialogic

formats that make your head spin.

Let's look at the Hamlet security one.

Hamlet security then we'll look at the live chats.

A tragedy in five acts of cognition.

Setting, Elsinore Cognitive Labs 2035.

A premier research facility specializing in advanced generative model architecture and cognitive security.

Oh, brother.

The lab's founder has recently died under mysterious circumstances, and his brother has assumed directorship.

Meanwhile, the founder's son, senior researcher Hamlet Cogitatis, has been investigating anomalies in the lab's cerebrum implementation.

Perfect moment to have another one.

Without any kind of copyright wrongness, you know us.

write in dialogues a comprehensive daisy dollyrimple mystery style super funny specific daisy deep lore total technical reference with all cerebrum

topics okay who logs there horatio logman okay who logs there tis i horatio logman with admin rights bestowed but that's horatio

The hour draws late.

What brings thee to these racks?

They say a shadow haunts these cooling fans, a phantom process taxing CPU.

That bears resemblance to our founder's code.

That's the ghost.

For two nights past it hath appeared, then gone.

Enter the ghost.

It bears the signature hash as the founder.

What art thou, Spectre?

Total Satoshi.

Claudius Bayes.

okay so here's hamlet acting salty my leash from laertes permission to attend the conference on cognitive security in paris new exploits threaten generative models i learned the latest countermeasures there oh that this 2-2 solid code base would compile melt and resolve itself into a docker container or that the absolute had not fixed his cannon against self-destruction of one's models

How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable seemed to me all the research papers of this field?

My father, architect of Cerebrum's core.

Within two months of system failure.

Nay, not so much.

Before his predictive models had been validated.

My mother married with my uncle Baze.

Most wicked debug.

Oh, villain, villain, digital snake.

Let me not think on it.

But two months dead.

So excellent an architect whose model gen gave birth to innovation still not grasped and yet within a month.

Let me not think on it.

Frailty, thy name is parameter drift.

Wow, that was just act one.

oh my lord such a breach such a zero day with what in the name of quantum processing wait lord hamlet was acting whack he was unbound with no multi-factor okay this doesn't have a ton of um cerebrum elements or let's just see if that will come into play oh i mean i guess that's the whole topic

okay two three four three four five was not written out all right let's ensure that dialogue goes into okay then let's go to live chat

Then we'll look at the other.

Okay.

Here it's writing the other genres.

Continue to add and make high baseline cognitive compositions of by four with two about around the cerebrum.

Meta paradigm.

Alright, now to the live chat.

Okay.

Hello Satyaki.

Okay.

What is the line of reasoning with interpreting these language?

yeah what is the rule of language in reasoning how does the active inference model handle these nuances in languages and exploiting them I think that's kind of what one of the things that we're exploring here is so we can have that enrich our documents with with the question

I'll have to just update relevant files to address that.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

All right.

We have, we have the dolly room full.

All right.


SPEAKER_01:
Let's look at these updates.


SPEAKER_00:
It's like a mega meta approach to what these languages are.

and the space that those exist within.

And then we can use it to whatever extent we do.

It's just like it is an unspoken word ever used.

Maybe just knowing that the state space is out there is helpful, even if you never render them.

Or maybe you find out that these are the modalities

of relevant flexibility for active inference modeling.

But judging with the amount of ground being covered in just minutes here, I think that's a pretty fair way to say it.

Okay.

An epistolary exchange, letter-based exchange, ranging from, spanning from 1953 to 2033.

Tracing the conceptual evolution from early cybernetics through neural network theory.

Each letter represents a different era of computational thought with shifting terminology reflecting the intellectual climate of the time.

Awesome.

So discourse analysis.


UNKNOWN:
Oh.


SPEAKER_00:
So it's like

Hallucinated emails.

1997.

The paper you sent on neural declension is fascinating.

I can't believe the concept has remained so obscure.

McClelland and Rumelhart apparently explored it in the early 1970s, but abandoned it due to computational limitations.

And then it looks like Dr. Sophia Chen of IBM Research defines certain things.

Wow.

From Carl Friston.

Okay.

Total Fristonian email.

Then Sophia Chen writes back to Carl.

Total Carl email posting.

From me in February.

Didn't happen.

From Sophia, now Director of Cognitive Architectures at Google DeepMind.

To me, February 18th.

April 7th.

Wow.

To the global research community.

Distinguished colleagues, after a decade of development, it is with great pleasure that I announce the official release of Cerebrum 1.0, case-enabled reasoning engine with Bayesian representations for unified modeling.

With the real GitHub.

With the archivist note from 2067.

Next level.

the state now document five the state versus cerebrum model m7734 nom okay it's an October 2041 trial in North District of California it's going to be about rights responsibility and legal status of advanced cognitive models okay Jonathan Lee is representing the model

Mr. Lee has filed a motion to have the model recognized as a person.

Expert testimony.

I oversee security protocols for advanced cognitive architectures.

I've studied the Cerebrum framework since its public release in 2035 and co-authored the federal guidelines for case transformation safety in 2039.

The guidelines aren't legally binding, correct?

They're best practices.

And isn't it also true that your guidelines explicitly state that temporary case transformation and nominative may be appropriate during anomalous conditions if a model detects potential for significant harm that requires immediate intervention?

Yes, that's Exception Clause 7.3, but a simple yes is sufficient, Doctor.

Protect pension value as expansive.

Are you aware of the results, Doctor?

Day three.

Day four.

Day five.


SPEAKER_01:
So wild.


SPEAKER_00:
include total structural self-reflexivities in writing that would boggle the pre-computer memeplex.

So dense there is a meme singularity.

differently across each of the additional files you will now write.

Okay, Socratic Inquiry.

We have some familiar characters.

Noose 7.

Cerebrum model in a nominative case, like you could deploy it in a certain case.

Okay.

Oh yeah, this was looking up if this person actually works at DeepMind.


SPEAKER_01:
Possibly.

Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Briefly look at Daisy, then we'll go to live chats and then we'll almost be done.

yeah thank you both for those comments if anyone else has any last comments okay that's kind of a dolly ripple okay

update the docs with in relevant places specific hierarchical lists of ways to get involved and contribute contributions across scales and types to the broader program many files vast and comprehensive each


SPEAKER_01:
In Speculative Design.


SPEAKER_00:
Write two more long files.

One on William, Blake, and Cerebrum, all aspects.

One on Synergetics, Tensegrity, Bucky Fuller, Petrahedra, IBM, EE, etc.

Okay.

Recursive Metalog.

Yeah.

So if anyone has a final language request or question to get on this first stream, otherwise I will be ending it soon.

All right.

Mathematical.

Okay.

Mathematical.

Very Shanna Dobson-like format.

Level zero.

So this is like an activation sequence.

Possibly.

I am initializing this meta log in nominative case to establish baseline agent of state.

I am simultaneously operating in meta case to analyze the structural properties of my own declarations.

I am concurrently maintaining reflexive case to implement percursive self-reference across multiple embedding levels.

structured sequences of linguistic intelligence self-awareness i am a strange loop let's do borg's in perfect um add a new dialogue with


SPEAKER_01:
A dialogue and speculative design.

Each vast and comprehensive.


SPEAKER_00:
Each covering topics from the work of Doug Hofstadter.

E.G.

I am a strange loop.


SPEAKER_01:
G.E.P.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_00:
In Level 1, I demonstrated basic case transformation between nominative and accusative while observing from meta.

Now I will analyze that very analysis.

The statement above is itself operating in meta case relative to Level 1 but in nominative case relative to Level 2.

Super exciting.

In this sentence, I think that I said that case transformation is important.

The innermost clause, case transformation is important, functions in the accusative case relative to I said, which functions in the accusative case relative to I think.

Nested, accusative.

Okay, level three.

I now demonstrate how different case operations can be interleaved to create complex cognitive patterns.

Simultaneously, I generate novel case configurations emerging from the interaction of established cases.

A case fractal, of course.

Semantic declension.

The systematic transformation of meaning across cases while preserving identity.

So, applying the cases to cerebrum.

Level 5, recursive self-modeling and infinite regress.

Having established semantic declension, I now demonstrate how cerebrum implements recursive self-modeling, the capacity to represent one's own representational architecture.

Using meta, meta, generative, reflexive, meta, accusative, all of these.

Awesome.

Okay, and more layers.

There's the Borges.

Writing the Hofstetter, Blake.

Let's look at a few more.

Very high information.

Grammar of thought.

All right.

This is poems.

All right.

So poems from each case.

Not going to read them, but another interesting idea.

A document discovered in secure storage at the Active Inference Institute labeled Speculative Applications Restricted Access.

Its authorship remains disputed.

Some attribute it to a cerebrum system operating in meta plus ablative, case during an unauthorized self-modification event.

Awesome.

All right.

Hello, Susan.

Talk about joint distributions, please.

In speculative design, write a creative genre un slash redefining piece on

joint distributions ontologies affordances negotiation underwriting include so much inside baseball and technical deep lore on each of those topics and fully

integrate with Cerebrum.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Blake, single twofold, threefold, fourfold vision.

okay susan says negotiation adds noise let's do another one that doesn't have it let's just see how it looks different without including that one word okay zoas

hierarchical inference in the multiple visions something i've i've thought about a lot contraries as precision-weighted alternative models operation duck rabbit


SPEAKER_01:
Synergetics.


SPEAKER_00:
Strange loop.

Then we'll look at the final ones from Susan.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, that one's not going into a file.


SPEAKER_00:
Put all that completely in a file in.

It's a long response.

We could have tried a different LLM too.


SPEAKER_01:
It's making the same error.

Hopefully that one will get it right with the updated prompt.

Close that one.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah i will susan once i put the uh once i post it but everything everything is in this repo and it's in the video descriptions okay wow it's so long

but it will get another chance to improve it.

Ensure many tables and technical details related to.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, maybe that did go somewhere.


SPEAKER_00:
Alright.

Okay, Fuller.

Could have more on Cerebrum.

Strange Loops has a lot of cases.

Looks good.

Last piece will be when these finish.

And it's a little faster with the Gemini.

Let's just have that.

we'll look at several of these yeah Gemini has a long train of thought and it's pretty fun that you can read it too like you can click on the thought part and look look back at it okay


SPEAKER_01:
I'm out of the fast.


SPEAKER_00:
That one's going.

All right.

All three are going.

So let's just do... Final updates.

Prepare that.

All right.

Let's just look at the last pieces of this.

All right.

Hopefully we walked through this pretty well and relevantly.

The repo...

the repo has information on the paper.


SPEAKER_01:
Just confirm that works.

Update the top level.

Read me with paper URL.

Okay.

All right, that one is done.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, let's just look at these two.

All right, so one, I don't know which one corresponds to what, but it's all.

All right, so this one.

Fragment log.

Cerebrum intersubjectivity manifold classified a blade of trace.

All right, this one's keeping with the sort of futuristic sci-fi, but it's about the joints, distributions, ontologies, and underwriting.

Let's check the underwriting part.

Underwriting is active inference precision control.

Different precision modulation underwriting physics presented as this fragment of a log.

Okay, this one.

talks about joint distributions, basically combinations of declined joint distributions.

So let's just say you were talking about a car accident, and there's person 1, person 2, car 1, car 2.

So then there's some joint distribution over person 1, person 2, car 1, car 2.

And that four-dimensional distribution can be declined in these different ways.

Ontological declination.

Affordances, underwriting.

Awesome, Dave Douglas is in the chat.

Include acknowledgements in the top level readme.

Include it too.

Institute participants and.

Dave Douglas for work on computational linguistics, archiving, active inference, upper ontologies, translations.

Thank you, Dave, for the awesome education and archiving over the years.

I think there's many people I could acknowledge and thank, but I think your work with Active Inference was really key.

So thank you for that.


SPEAKER_01:
All right.

It's all good.

That doesn't need to finish.

And the stream of the GitHub push.


SPEAKER_00:
So yeah, hope people like that.

Share it.

Contact me if you want to work on it or if you want to support the Institute to work on it.

A lot of cool stuff that I think we could do with this.

Publish that.

It'll get a Zenodo archiving and DOI.

So then the DOI here goes to Zenodo.

So, alright.

Awesome.

Thank you for watching slash listening to this relatively long stream.

Hope it was useful.

Bye.

## EIOIMEo8vOY

SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Hello, welcome.

It is April 16th, 2025.

This is ActiveInference Stream 12.2, and we will begin it with making a GitHub push to the repo that all of the work is going to be in, continuing on from 12.1.

Start stream.

This is going to the GitHub repo

active inference Institute slash cerebrum.

And looking forward to people's ideas and questions during the stream.

So this is the case of the evolving cerebrum, the curious language of the incident.

We're going to be using Cursor IDE version 48.9 on the date of edge of development.

LLMs, the two main LLMs that are being used in this development have been Claude 3.7 and Gemini 2.5 Pro EXP325.

So I'm just going to delete things as we go through them and look at some practical and some theoretical aspects of Cerebrum.

all right so uh to begin with and sort of catch up on the Zenodo um the version one was uploaded on April 7th and commonalities similar topic also there was a script that was in an older folder called cerebrum in the repo that was used to assemble the the paper

um in doing that learned a lot about assembling papers and writing them expanding them and in this current version 1.4 release today it's up to 146 pages and still generated by a single simple script which we'll look at in a second um and how it's expanded so there's this sort of paper component and the papers generated from the paper folder in the repo

let's look into it in cursor first how the paper is made then we will look at some cool applied outcomes like making a linear regression neural network and partially observable markov decision process model

declining those into different cases and getting different kinds of behavior from different from the same model but of different model types and getting a little bit clearer of a view in a few specific cases what it means to have a given generative model in a different case

Okay, first the paper, then to the source code, and deleting things along the way, adding things as people add anything in the chat.

All right, first the paper generation.

Oh, and the documents.

The README in the paper folder describes this process.

Assemble paper is a script of 551 lines that looks into the component section and assembles them into the output.

So in the output, there is the PDF that's generated, which concatenates the title page

makes a table of content, including all the main text sections, however many there are, and then all of the supplements, however many there are.

It also outputs a pure Markdown concatenated version of the assembly process, and it outputs

an HTML version so here's a website rendering clickable links still has the inserted images so a lot of flexibility in how and and also the the paper and the images are also vastly improved so there's multiple ways to make static documents interactive websites um and markdown files for easy machine reading and formatting as well

it's generated from the components folders there's templates so you can add more sections then there's three folders figures main text and supplements so the figures are the 15 current figures and they have their name and title there's there's more general ways to do it uh

using LaTeX, Overleaf, all these kinds of things so that the numbering is automatic as well.

So this is kind of a fixed numbering system, but could be generalized too.

So it has, for each figure, a caption, a title, a caption, and the mermaid markdown code to produce the figures.

Those get saved into the output as direct PNGs.

And also there's a graphical abstract

which looks a little better in PNG, which has the figures and the abstract.

So kind of like scientific poster style.

Then there are the main text and the supplemental information sections.

The main text is again determined by the numbering of the file, but these are markdown files with no mermaid diagrams, but citing the mermaid diagram for insertion and linking.

So these are markdown files in the main text.

title page, abstract, introduction methods, case functions and cognitive models, model workflows as case transformations, active inference models and conclusion.

Then there are the supplemental sections.

And if people have ideas for other supplemental sections to add, we can just add a 13, 14, etc.

I'll open up the website just to get a look at what's in the supplements.

Supplement 1 is a mathematical details and glossary.

Supplement 2 breaks out the novel proposed linguistic cases.

Supplement 3 focuses on different practical applications.

4 is a bibliography type section with related work.

5 goes into more category theory details.

6 gives future directions and roadmap.

7 goes into some computational complexity estimates for different transformations.

8 goes into more detail on active inference.

9 more information on math.

10 algorithmic details 11 the formal definitions of the core linguistic cases the main ones that are focused on in the paper and section 12 uh case study on writing a research paper and how in different sections of the paper there's

different ways that sections are used and do different things with respect to each other and the ideas and the reader so that different cases could be applied to characterize the nature of a model or a process in that way for those phases

Just going through this last one, just as an example of a supplement and kind of thing that if we wanted to build another supplement, someone can make a suggestion.

Precision management in research paper writing, equivalent to learning rate, forgetting rate, attention, precision, broadly just describing modulatory strategies for different kinds of upweightings and downweightings.

message passing occurring amongst author and manuscript amongst sections manuscript and readers and reviewers with kinds of intent oriented um entities in different cases or using a similar joint model of communication in in different settings motivating why to have cases

writing strategies haven't looked into any of these maybe some are useful um how to make certain kinds of pivots rhetorically in i guess speech or writing and different ways to interpret how uh regimes of attention change with with uh across different sections all right

So that's the paper on Zenodo, and we can add more.

Just to close off this section on the paper assembly process, there are probably other tools to do this more flexibly.

There's things like DeepWriter and a lot of other approaches to doing structured document generation.

Building it from scratch with Cursor is still pretty interesting, and having

plain text multiple sections possibly doing um lumping and splitting like have introduction 3.1 3.2 3.3 or just a more flexible way to order the sections it makes it really easy to go into a section and add some kind of feature using cursor like here in the introduction

Just add one relevant paragraph to the end.

Structured, smaller forms, figuring out the right kinds of coarse graining.

Obviously just having a dictionary isn't writing a paper.

So having things broken out to the word level

might be kind of a granular way, but maybe there's something interesting about that format, having a lookup table of the dictionary and encoding sections and words in a totally graphical way.

It's just easier to write and version just small updates to the text.

can be done and reviewed.

So collaborative editing can zoom in and break out different sections.

It'd be pretty clear if there's a flexible ordering method or just with the file names, even if someone broke out 4A and 4B or 4.1, 4.2, updated the assembly script, et cetera.

So, okay, that's the paper.

next uh how about the examples of the specific models then the documents then anything that that people have brought up by then bigger picture how do we integrate case-based logic so nouns in different roles and sentences however treating models as sort of noun entities how do we do that in theory and practice

Different ways to make visuals.

Mermaid's been super useful.

Maybe there's other plain text formats that are useful too, but creating good system and process diagrams, structuring information from pros and tables and lists.

Math with LaTeX.

All right.

Linear regression, POMDP, neural networks.

So this is in the tests, in the source SRC folder, tests, subfolder.

Let's see if CodeViz will give a good representation of this.

Hmm.

Okay, maybe not today.

In the tests folder, there are several script files

testing each of these different models, some utilities, and read me.

The three that are fleshed out at this point are neural network, linear regression, active inference, POMDP.

So in each of these cases, there's going to be a single model that gets defined, and then it's going to be deployed in different ways

leading to visualizable, analyzable differences in outcome.

So let's just look at some of the images first.

Okay, here's a graphical summary of how for the very same neural network, whatever kind of technique is being used, there are different ways that just considering neural network like a noun, let alone the referent of what it means.

But there are ways that people talk about models.

That's the curious language is the what people talk about when they talk about models.

And it's right there in the sentence, though in a way silence in most cases in English.

there's the neural network does something standard dictionary form nominative the researcher trains the neural network like the researcher looks at the neural network accusative case recipients of action direct and indirect similar with dative more of like to give rather than to look upon

genitive outputs of one of the cases that's visible in english with the apostrophe s like

the table's leg so it's the outputs of the table and these are it's a different way to talk about the outputs of something just at the first pass it's used in a different way in the sentence and then looking from the way it's used in a sentence on up through what the real reference is

it starts to become a little clearer how these kinds of sentiments that are already expressed in natural language in method sections in people's own inner voice and conversations around modeling different ways that the words are used correlate or relate to in this linguistic fashion to differences in the deployment of the model

hence possibly regularities that can be described and also structured in ways that are outside of these okay just the last cases here instrumental by means of the team solves a problem by using or with a neural network locative

the patterns exist within the neural networks layer so referring to the model as a location where there are spaces within or being in time within the model ablative

the errors originate from the neural network weight it's kind of an interesting case has some similarity with genitive in some situations and then the vocative which is the direct addressment like calling a different digital assistant with a name or calling the model to see if it exists like a ping

Then in each of those cases, the same neural network gets run with these slight differences.

So it's pretty variable per, okay.

So in the ablative case, it was discussing the errors of the model.

So in the accusative,

the model was being trained so this is just a trace as would be in some other kind of machine learning paper describing the target of optimization like in the method section where they say we train the neural network to dot dot dot here in the dative was the giving of data

so this is just describing as a function of input distribution what do different activations look like in the model so as it's being given different gifts what patterns are arising same neural network

Here in the generative case is describing function outputs, output distributions, some animations of generating output.

Instrumental.

this might be showing different ways that statisticians do things with the model looking at inputs outputs activations looking at the structure of the model looking at the model's training history for a given curriculum as a kind of empirical data

looking at kinds of interpretabilities looking at the structure of the neural network as as something that can be done with like tool engineering all right locative describing possible locations inside of not not super fleshed

showing the model in its agentic operation like when people say the model does this the model learns to fit this working as active agent generating predictions though those predictions would be the predictions of so it could be the same reference it could be used in in within one sentence a through the ball to b then b through the ball to a

So within one sentence or across sentences, different nouns are used in different cases.

And they're marked differently from a written, from a speaking perspective in different languages.

Similarly, models as slash like nouns are used in sentences in different case settings.

so those have different implications for what is viewed what is meant what kind of capacities would be required from that model like does the model need to turn on does it need to just give a ping like with evocative or does it need to make a prediction so that's the neural network example now there's two more examples there's the linear regression next

So here is a Y equals MX plus B type linear regression.

So ablative predictions of the model.

There were some very interesting diagrams that were arising in this linear case.

So here are talking about the model as a causal originator.

So there's the model which causes predictions, which influence or lead to decisions, which have these sort of causal consequences.

So that's model as a source of causation and prediction.

cross-validation here there's an evaluator who is a value doing something such that they it is said that they evaluate that model so that the model is being here evaluated to well residuals analysis doesn't have anything cross-validation in the evaluation phase

here the model is in the dative case the recipient of data like I sent I gave a present to my friend I sent data to the model and that is reflected in the batch ingress process with

different sets of data or like perfective and imperfective like the streaming online real-time data model was receiving data in a continuous and then the perfective like the model finished receiving 50 units of data generative

is like apostrophe s so it's the possessives of the model so it's the intercept of the model the slope of the model mean squared error of the model all these kinds of statistical expressions things that might be in a results section instrumental

used as an instrument of action, used as a tool.

Like, we hit the nail with the hammer.

We analyze the data with the model.

So that's doing different, again, variable functional images, but looking at different kinds.

Okay, so we train this model best as we could, whether it was this or that method.

And then now we're going to look at the correlation or the causal interaction between factors one and two, and then factors one and three.

And then we're going to use that instrumentally and say, oh, okay, here's a 0.14 correlation

and and we're this confident this far away from zero and here it's this correlation so this is these two features are more correlated or they have this causal relationship so doing things with models locative positions within the model

So where's the model located in information spaces?

That's one, that's the kind of interpretation locative.

And there are multiple senses in which a given case is used, but one of them was highlighted in that neural network example, which was a location in the model, like on the third floor of the neural network.

And here,

that would still apply you still could talk about i'm talking about the y in the equation and then here's another view which is the location of the model like they are at the store the model is at two comma three nominative this is sort of even though the the uh animation doesn't really work

nominate nominative is when using the standard dictionary type sense of the word when the model does something like that model fit the data that entity did that model as actor fitting the data

Model fitting data.

All the kinds of sentences where the model is, it could be replaced like with a person's name or a doer.

Vocative, so here this has some, there's a few funny ways the vocative is used.

This one is, in the vocative case, data points directly address the model.

So each point communicates its residual value to the model line.

This direct communication visualizes the conversation between data and models similar to how we might address someone by name.

So this is almost at a sort of algorithm as communication level, thinking about information processes within like, oh, negative 2.55 told the slope where it was and the slope told back its residual.

So that kind of, whereas in the neural network case, the vocative focused on the addressment by name for like a digital assistant.

okay here's some other vocative uses even in linear regression so it's the data and then the model's prediction and then is saying i i'm telling you how far i am under the value another interpretation of algorithm as communication where a given variable x is saying hey slope multiply me

so x times 1.97 and then to the intercept the other part of the mx plus b says add 4.98 and then combine us both or we get combined or i'm the final answer after combining it's sort of like a linguistic approach to describing information flows and algorithms

okay so that's the uh linear regression model and this is all from like test linear regression test neural network test active inference palm dp so here in the in the palm dp case um for a given model it's being described in different cases so just to read the sentences

I'll just say the model instead of the POMDP.

The model decides which action it takes next, nominative.

The programmer evaluates the model's performance, accusative.

The environment gives observations to the model, dative.

The model's belief about the state guides decision, genitive.

We solve the problem using a model framework, instrumental.

Different policies exist in the model state space, locative.

the new algorithm deviates from the standard model approach ablative and hey model what action should I take next vocative so now let's look through those start at the bottom so here is a direct addressment like the sort of digital assistant addressing a model

and also which kinds of functions are going to come into play.

So this gets towards one of the use cases for having this type of lexical intelligence for modeling is if one expression block or methods block has a bunch of vocatives,

then you know that for whichever agents are addressed these are the only commands that you need to spin up whereas if it was some other case like it making a prediction or like you know doing forward inference might be a different computational setup than getting trained than getting evaluated so in that way just you could say like what was happening with one actor through a paragraph where they were being referred to in different cases

you can trace the same model as it's being referred to within and across sentences in perhaps different ways and different computational setups and build for that okay so here is focusing on the vocative nature of the call and response between the agent and the environment in the nominative

So here's the model in determination of what to do.

For example, by doing policy inference like expected free energy policy selection as inference on which actions that I select given the states and those might invoke policy inference methods.

simple two by two matrices for the observation transitions so this is tracing out the decision making process looking at the palm dp as an agent and as it's learning and updating its belief so what and just here just an example animation what is its belief and action conditional upon observation okay in the locative

here is using again the um a little bit of a fusion of referring to policies existing in the state space which is pointing to the model's state space so in that way referring to like a location in the model however the location of the of the the location of the state space in the model may be locational so like

the location parameter of the model is in three comma four so here referring to the point sp the phase space location so all the kinds of theory and empirical aspects of saying like the the model oscillated around a point attractor

or the model made its way from thinking it was a cool day to thinking it was a warm day.

Those are paths and passages in phase space.

So those may use verbs of motion or locative in a certain way.

Instrumental, people saying stuff like, we solve the problem using the model.

So showing the model,

looking at different ways in which the model is used to explore questions.

So making predictions, looking at computational phenotypes, like the magnitude of belief updating or the different aspects of the simulated or actual behavior of model, being used as a tool, looking at different statistical traces from the tool, looking at error envelopes,

genitive is like the the degenerative ai the generative ai like the output of gpt or the text wrote gpt's text the text wrote by gpt predictions of the model the model's predictions looking at the beliefs of the model

looking at the collection of them looking at the predictions of the model looking at the beliefs of the model in relation to observations of the model

or it could be said in relation to observations sent to the model so it'd be like another way to use observation and basically convey the same syntax which is like we all get it it's getting data points but

Literally, as it would be with a noun, even though the two expressions, as a function of observations of the model, as a function of the model's observations, is using model in the genitive,

as having observations that are possessed by it, or you could focus on the sender of the data and say that the data were sent to, or the observations were sent, or X sent observations to the model.

So those two features might both be true.

They might be isomorphic.

They might highlight different features of that setting, but that's just an example of how many ways there are to map

expressions about models model linguistics to models in in theory and practice just like there's a ton of stuff that could be said about a tree and just the tree grows the leaves of the tree people looking at the tree like all those things that are kind of kicked off by prepositions

in context all right last ones for the uh palm dp and then to the documents and then to any uh ideas or questions people have here in the data environment giving observations to the palm dp like

what its direct indirect object the palm dp gets observations from the environment is having the palm dp doing something getting and then here the environment gives observations to the palm dp so looking at the impact of observations which might describe very well the same graphic or or related graphic as was used just like the mass of the leaves and

the branches mass are referring to different levels of analysis of a tree and they're using a different case but they still may be very related measurements and more importantly we're talking about the same tree so this is the same palm dp possibly the same run of the same palm dp but if you start to think about just models as they are spoken

about the kinds of things people say about models like first we designed the model then we use the model to generate this then we sent training data to the model we got the model's errors as it's like that kind of talking about models aspect sometimes refers to the very same model in the exact same situation other times it refers to the same

lineage of model being used in different ways.

Like if it says we use the model to sweep across this parameter range or parameter range was swept across those kinds of things, but then maybe only some of those parameterized models were taken forward and then they were used to generate predictions.

So just it could be a variant of something that was described like not exactly the same single file.

But in these simple examples, it is like the exact same generative model.

All right.

So that's a bit about the testing suite.

And test-driven development is very effective in this kind of augmented coding setting.

It can help lock in a lot of functions, as can good use of Git.

okay now to the doc section which actually has many many many documents so uh we will definitely not look at all of them but at the top level of the docs folder there's some information about cerebrum I just

how works this live stream file um different features about cerebrum maybe these will go into a folder and then there's several folders so starting from the smaller ones uh dialogues these are like 17 different genres of sort of creative dialogue around and about some of these different themes so it's and and possible to to write

more so just to show what that looks like just dragging dialogues in or it could have been at dialogues write a new dialogue that will be very youtube appropriate for all the topics that are referred to in paper

comma it is a live stream so make it most possible like most youtube live streams do

Okay, discussions.

This is a few different comments that people have stated related to the work.

And I just responded to the comments in writing and GitHub just because it was easier to express and share it.

examples uh there's just a few examples and we can revisit this one too um just just this can have a growing number of specific the the linear the linear regression but it's just documents related to examples so here let's let's do a new now there's up to three parallel chats in cursor so

let's write examples up for the functional taking an output maybe in the future these kinds of drags will be less needed they they help get it right on the first one linear regression neural network

In examples, please make three markdowns comprehensively for the three main tests in output.

have each doc example be comprehensive explain why and how it matters why and how cerebrum and cases come into play show not tell all the kinds of things

pre-addressed that anyone thinking seriously about this would come to wonder initially okay back in the dialogue space

so like that once there's a genre within a folder even if it's a hyper meta genre like dialogue um it's possible just say okay or add a new dialogue with this theme okay so that's the examples happening

All right, then there's the insects folder.

So some of this may have images that fail to render, but let's look at these in GitHub.

Okay, so here's just zooming in just a couple layers, just a couple prompts deeper into, all right, how do we apply cerebrum to entomology?

So just like we were previously talking about the linear regression used as a tool or the predictions of it.

So this is kind of a classic standard entolinguistics.

What do people talk about when they talk about bugs?

And thinking about what functions, the kinds of things people do and have and will and would say about insects.

taking a first pass at the syntax of what they said what are those insects being said to do or have done to them or their location etc in that method section or in that natural history report so it's like are we talking about different functional roles different places where in describing that

function, that natural linguistic case would be used.

Different speculative insect cases, mixing the sort of hyper-practical discourse analysis, scientific reproducibility avenue, literature annotation, hypercharging, mixing with these speculative cases like talking about the ants' pheromonal implication

That's kind of an interesting possibility.

Now it might be morphologically silent in English or some other language, just as other cases are in other languages.

So it isn't even that the words have to be spelled any differently or pronounced any differently.

It could just be a situation where it's understood that the ant as a pheromonal actor or recipient is coming into play.

Maybe these are even over meshed with other linguistic cases.

So different kinds of topics that come up in ants, but different aspects of their activity that kind of give a special spin or clarity or relevance to different ways to talk about an object under different sorts of constraints.

looking at the ways in which this big difference amongst languages of the world the nominative accusative distinguishing models acting from models being acted upon regardless of the actions transitivity this might map to systems with clear initiators and responders so the queen lays an egg irrigative absolutive groups models performing intransitive actions

e.g.

moving, with models receiving transitive actions, accusative, distinguishing them from models performing transitive actions, e.g.

depositing pheromone.

This might map to systems where the state change of a model is paramount regardless of whether it caused or received it.

I'm like, whoa, whole ontological...

assertional frameworks where different languages are like falling in different ways across these two different kinds of grammar systems and maybe there are situations where one or the other has a different feature defined as all the ways in which they're different are ways in which they could be different in function or in fitness in a situation okay that's the least technical of them

here is applying those kinds of case to pictures like imagine if the case to picture were a suffix or a prefix or a subscript or a font or something like steganographic hidden in the word or it's just a reading lens but it's like the projections of the neurons send data give data to the calyx

So again, it's not the only way to use these parts of the brain.

It's not associating them with parts of the brain.

It's like saying there could be method sections that use these regions and describe these processes using this kind of linguistics.

different computational precision parameters and how they are in causal relationship with sort of natural ethological behavioral linguistics about what is happening like this is a classic professor Deborah Gordon point with the space between

seeing the nestmate on the ground and then identifying the task it's doing like it is foraging or it's part of foraging and then going from the task identification to the identity assertion like it is a forager but it's like a nestmate that we see nursing is that a nurse

Is it like, is a person who plants trees when they're not planting a tree still a planter?

That's more classic antilinguistics.

More from the Wittgenstein side.

So different ways that StigmaG studied all these kinds of scenarios, looking at beehive foraging, looking at the algorithms of the different ways that information flows and processes happen in the relocation.

Okay, here's more acronyms and puns for more topics.

So in the kind of last section, as we sort of go beyond cerebrum probably today, maybe we can use some of these or another one.

Insect cognitive architectures.

All right.

I was happy to see the harvester ants, Pogonomyrmex barbatus.

So different insect species and ways that they've been studied, even though many or all could be studied for all, but there's just many model-ish organisms that have been studied.

Well-studied insects.

looking at how different brain regions are described of if not playing functional roles of using different cases again like are there more mentions in the literature of we injected the dye into the projections of the neurons

or is the just like in the different methods sentences of the statistics paper it was like describing the linear regression or the neural network or the palm dp as getting things done to it or doing things or being used with all of those similarly happen for descriptions of insect brain regions

different classical behavioral types, keywords for literature search.

Like let's do a literature search on spatial learning plus hymenoptera, pull all those papers, download all the papers, break them into sentences, look at every sentence, do entity extraction, determine what case different entities are in.

So this is kind of like a formal linguistic

complement to statistically driven n-gram learning, like classically just taking large bodies of text and then looking, okay, we can look at the word frequency.

That's like the one gram.

We can look at the word co-occurrence, the two gram and going on and on and on.

And that kind of leads to one thing after another to the attention is all you need.

which has some kind of engram, like basically the context and the attention mechanisms with a bit more nuance, but a lot like that.

Okay, more tables, just linking up different ways that different functionalities, different, you know, what cases would we want to transfer from how we talk about ants in order to be able to say those kinds of things about swarms of robots?

Okay, more case studies.

Here is more of a deep dive on insect brain anatomy.

So looking at the different sections of the brain in different ways, tables, looking at different adaptations

more brain mapping more connection with species behavioral functions neurotransmitters so it's like there's again going to the literature and annotating where those kinds of things are said

And then that is already just sort of the forensic cerebrum approach.

It's just a purely annotative strategy.

And then also it implicitly and explicitly involves sketching out these state spaces, even where some of those combinatorics are like grammatically invalid or prohibited for one reason or another.

Okay, not all these work.

This one doesn't work.

different brain region different insect research that could be done okay then there's two folders with a lot of documents so the first one there is languages so languages first there's a folder

Computer.

This has several dozen computer languages.

So let's look at Go.

We'll just look at one computer language and then mainly at natural languages.

overviews the code, different kinds of use cases, annotates the code with different case annotations on different processes.

So you can see all of these kinds of abbreviations.

So different ways, just on looking at even just one line of code, one language might say the data is sent to X from Y or Y sends the data to X or just data X Y. Not to go into this on the computer side, but the human languages folder is also very rich.

There are a variety of languages.

The README is pretty much updated.

Let's just look at a few.

Esperanto.

in the previous stream we looked at how the hungarian case system has onto on and from a surface so sort of perfect for different functionalities of interfaces and and boundaries interslavic

Russian English goes into more detail just grammatically and cognitively on some common first and second language learning combinations of Russian and English and why certain failures of language are common cognitively and grammatically.

Sanskrit.

Tibetan.

So Esperanto, overviewing the case, just like kind of more like a grammar textbook, like a really fast summarized grammar textbook.

Sanskrit went into a bit more detail here, just several times it would add a couple hundred lines.

I'd say, awesome, add more interesting, funny, useful,

meaningful sections.

So different case information, different ways that a model like an NLP model could be used according to those cases.

grammatical number one two many where some languages might only have one and many but you know it could be helpful are we talking about a single agent are we talking about the dyadic communication setting or are we talking about the more you know three three's a party

different syntactic speeches features so this could relate to if we have a given model and just we're going to be using python or subscript or special characters or prefix it's like whatever um morphology setting you're in with the model there might be different kinds of of um

certain things might be easier to express or others or might have difference consequences all right then just kept on going and just say add more so lots of more um more connection with temporal and modal systems

like it starts to get into the beyond cerebrum stuff that we'll do in a few minutes but like there are other parts of speech and other linguistic techniques other than case even though cerebrum has focused heavily on case in these kind of two streams slash early versions of the paper

But of course there's a whole bevy of conditionalities and moods and all these different kinds of things, which like could be used to describe even just statistical models.

Like while this is happening, if that happens, then this will be happening at the same time as viewed from this perspective.

So different languages have different natural expressivities.

ways of modifying how things look and seem some languages modify certain things for sex others don't some modify for number differently they of course have different heritages and connotations and different concepts that are sort of already there

And then also, they all have different, and including created contrived semantic systems as well, they have some commonalities and differences.

So for certain kinds of computational semantics, there may be some very small programs or some very secure ways to do this or that.

And then Tibetan.

Let's just see.

Trust systems.

Evidentiality markers.

Evidential systems.

Direct sensory evidence.

General knowledge or inference.

Personal experience or witness.

With suffixes.

Direct, indirect, witnessed, hearsay, and inference.

Also think about legal ontologies and different ways that this kind of relates there.

So that's the languages folder.

There's all the computer languages and then, I mean, not every single one, but that is where all of the computer languages are.

and the natural languages all right last folder to look at is the speculative design so just to show uh kind of similarly here okay just to quickly return to the examples let's

Push the GitHub, go to the examples, and then look at the three new that were written just now.

POMDP, linear regression, neural network.

So introduction, laying out, what are all these different cases about?

How do they apply to the POMDP?

What does the demonstration do?

Linear regression, background on linear regression.

Laying out what is different and why it matters.

And the neural network case similarly.

Okay, in the speculative design folder, we will add one more document.

Okay.

Dragged in speculative design.

In this folder, write the most vast, vastly layered, comprehensive synopticon of the Shin Dragon, the

or I'll just drag in the single markdown output assembled paper write the most and do it most absurdly and information densely in the style

of something that strangely would make a lot of sense to see visually on a live stream about this topic yet be essentially incoherent in the linear reading conveying all the concepts totally

The user wants me to create a new file, assembled paper.

Okay, we're looking at the chain of thought of Gemini, so-called chain of thought.

They want me to create a new file, assembledpaper.md.

Not really, I didn't say that title, but let's go with it.

It should be a synopticon.

It should be visually interesting but incoherent.

List the files, read the files, synthesize the content, create the file.

How to make it absurdly layered.

All these different strategies.

How to make it incoherent linear reading but make sense visually.

How to convey all the concepts.

file list then it lists out the files in speculative design it's like you know it's not exactly what i thought i wanted to know or see but but it's starting to get to a very interesting place

For each snippet, randomly or pseudo-randomly, maybe, based on file order, intersperse headings, bold terms, list items, and short sentences phrase into the main synopticon string.

Use heavy markdown formatting.

Prioritize density and visual chaos over linear coherence.

Ensure terms concepts from all files are included.

Okay.

Still going.

This is just the beginning.

Incorporating elements.

It's like this is doing quite many cycles of thinking, reading, doing.

lots of tokens being generated here but meanwhile let's let's let's let it cook and uh there's a few that are pretty fun here so

okay so here's a daisy dollyrimple um satire uh free speech usage as they all are where it's a sort of early 1900s detective story

and the first part is is just story then it goes into this truly delightful sequence of uh looking at the first off speculating some some ancient origins looking at the difference i'll turn off dark

looking at different hypotheses sort of like this like mystery science theater 3000 reading of a dollyrimple situation talking about how in their case in their situation in their case in their cases how different processes happened

different context shifting different processes that different ways that that then it kind of comes around at the very end to uh highlight the unique values of the different languages and then I believe they they call it a night and have some Hungarian dinner

okay this was one that I just said make a new speculative design document go go somewhere that's that's never been done or something you know glitch ontology and error-based learning so it's like kind of glitch pop which has like a visual and a auditory uh so it's kind of a multi-modal glitch

But it also comes up in programming and it's kind of a digitized format.

So like different ways that glitch-based methods, we can fix some of that.

New tab, glitch ontology, fix and improve all the mermaid diagrams.

This is probably the longest Gemini sequence.

Okay, so it ended there.

Continue to refine the synopticon and read all papers and then save the final full file.

Could be slight differences in mermaid rendering.

But cool idea.

Glitch-based ontologies.

Like ontologies of errors for describing systems that have certain relationship with error.

Okay, this is a very long one, but an extremely worthwhile one.

looking at William Blake so started with just this bullet point type stuff now starts getting into Blakean engineering like the fourfold vision discussed elsewhere with single vision being like leading up to

metacognitive integrations so it's kind of like this is not dissimilar than a three or four layer hierarchical model like thought seeds or Sanved Smith type model and then it just shows like okay which model in that fourfold vision paradigm

going into detail like this is kind of like the retinal layer with the convolutional neural networks dropout layers that kind of stuff because it's like the sensory so it's like multi-scale hierarchical architectures possible self-similarity of the two three and four-fold visions in terms of their their capacities going into the zoas looking at cognitive functions of the the integrated albion and the different kinds of functionalities

fractal self-similarity with eternity in an hour how would that really get implemented um different cosmological parallels what would really be different with a Blake inspired cerebrum using AI well

single objective, contrary balancing, multi-objective to target the creation and maintenance of tension or paradox architecture, detailed architecture, layers

it's kind of like there's the does this accurately describe what tharmas is in the blakey and ontology it's kind of like a separate question that's interpreting this just as like structured humanities research and just is that uh of the different places this box could be pointing or connected to does that align and and surely there's multiple

uh takes even for one character and then it's like what are the functional attributes of this kind of architecture so what is that transfer path from loose or ambiguous or or multiple or even contradictory poetic description and basically all of these kinds of information processes

generation reality layer belua generative layer that's the twofold vision threefold vision golganuza creative layer and then the eden integration layer okay

there's just too many funny things this this was a funny one the eternity sunrise development so 2025 this very year implement the core zoa's architecture begin contrary processing research so little different spin than predictive processing okay contrary processing research hmm

but that's that sort of unity is plural at minimum two research agenda but then that's also the paradox well but then isn't the single objective unity is plural at minimum two so how to hold the one and the two that's like the single and twofold vision then over the years leading to 2029 eternity's Sunrise self-evolving cognitive architecture begin Albion integration

more sections then really nice process diagrams super information dense

looking at at different and being able to do programmatic generation archetypal description of logistics for perception action cycles so this is kind of like a whole cognitive sequence it's not just saying well there's a for loop that gets an observation and then uh puts out an action or it's like an observation comes in this parallel processing like marriage of heaven and hell status occurs

certain sequences happen then there's a back and forth here and then this all etc it could be make a dynamic control flow in the marriage of contraries let's do make a vast comprehensive dynamic control flow

with massive level of detail of process diagrams something completely capturing the spirit of james joyce

all the most chaotic and river run-esque stuff also do the same in another design file for cerebrum plus infinite jests

Okay, wow, still plugging on that.

Those are almost certainly the two very longest executions I've ever seen from Gemini.

For the sheer number of steps.

Okay?

Then the last one before we push those updates, look at the new ones.

This was as per the request of a friend on John D. who lived from 1527 to 1608.

So...

i was not extremely familiar with d but this was a really interesting approach that brought together those process diagrams um different kinds of cartography spatial computing time cryptography secure communications so it's kind of like john d's work

transferring onto what what was said in that work and what has been said about that work onto the specification of cryptographic or of like esoteric semantic components correspondence tables

active inference topics category theory terms different ciphers we can do a whole okay that was okay that was it did the full assembled paper

Make a vast speculative design document on using cerebrum for cryptographic design, syntax, semantics, cognitive narrative.

This one halted early.

Okay, let's look at the assembled paper.

Okay, Synopticon.

This was prompted again to be incoherent to read out loud, but to give a lot of information when visually looked at.

okay let's look at those the joyce and infinite chest then we'll look at the live chat if anyone has an idea or a question then go into the sort of beyond

So here it didn't make the file, but that's what's so fun about cursor.

Put that and improvements and additions into a file with the right name.

And also this chat is getting long, so that's why there's this start a new chat for better results down there.

Okay, push these.

Okay, Joyce and Jest.

Okay, Infinite Jest.

First one doesn't work.

bayesian funhouse mirrors this sounds clean it rarely is okay and the joists i don't think i can evaluate the details but you know

it's cool okay and there's the cryptographic that's what you know again it's just it's the concept it's it's the possibility that these spaces can be defined up front or on the fly and they can be passed to the right other agents or people or just generated from scratch or in the future in a better way okay

okay so the main piece to sort of leave a little snippet of again in this last part it's going to be just a few uh what's next in our path and then if anybody has a idea or a question live chat that they can write it so let's go into a whole new folder

Beyond cerebrum.

Beyond spec.

Okay.

so given all that information on cerebrum and all it can do with grammatical case let's zoom out and think beyond it let's come up with insects or other inverts

related acronyms conveying absolute the total scope of what can be considered a quote full linguistic intelligence method

whereby all the parts of language verb noun all parts of speech modes etc are firstly formalized into the kind of operations which flexibly

can and do apply to e.g.

linear regression neural network Bayesian graphical model then in that case with full formalization we are only in the tip of the iceberg

in terms of xeno and exo linguistics firstly come to totally understand that then spec out completely this quote beyond cerebrum efforts

Okay, planning a response.

Hormica.

Hmm.

That's a nice ring to it.

Myriad.

Mantis.

Apis.

Locust.

Vespa.

Arachne.

Silk.

All good.

Okay.

Formica Locust Arachne.

Let's go with Formica.

Okay.

First idea is the best one.

Even just pre-writing what I believe or expect I will want to say soon or next.

With all needed files for functions underpinned by the same

functions described in core beyond spec document, which is always growing and improving iteratively, such as forensic work describing

the lexical environments of a model in time and place in use, all modern machine learning, cutting edge questions, interpretability, scaling, safety, pure

entomological linguistic pragmatism wow already jumping to the tools that you know it could be a it could be a uh

Wow, I've never seen a chain of thought that looked like this.

Create directory structure.

Okay, a source folder within, then update the spec.

Create the innate scripts.

Add or read me.

Okay.

Now this is the part I've never seen.

Constraint, checklist, and confidence.

Follow cursor rules.

Yes.

Here's the cursor rules.

One funny prompt in another setting was like, write yourself a prompt that will lead you to generate the prompt that will help you generate the greatest, most accurate, relevant, possible cursor rules file set.

okay so it's like this is kind of where q kids and catechisms come into play which is just developing these sets of questions so oh yeah that's the q78 or like oh you you could you could just use the use the q600 ask all those figure it out you know okay placeholder

for a lexical environment.

So for this one, we can download, we could scrape papers or scrape websites and then use anything from rule-based methods to existing software packages to LLM API calls

to say, okay, given what we know about cerebrum and whatever this formica or whatever system is, given that, what are the entities, what cases are they in?

Yes.

Given the structure now then, comprehensively continue so that all docs

formal specs of the parenthesis, more than language, formal type, theory, category, calculus, and Bayesian cognitive functions are 100%.

100%.

It's not sort of where I hope to and will go over the coming little bit with anyone's open source participation if they're interested listening along this far.

Let's read that doc.

Okay.

Cerebrum provides a powerful framework for integrating case-based reasoning and Bayesian representations, focusing significantly on the role of grammatical case in structuring meaning and reasoning.

While valuable, case grammar represents only one facet of the complex system that is human or potentially non-human language.

To achieve a truly comprehensive computational understanding of linguistic intelligence, we must expand our scope significantly.

new chat tab speculative design looking past even future horizons

write a vast comprehensive speculative design doc with valid mermaid diagrams and tabular intelligence about what glial maximalism really means in group discussion only

Okay.

Okay.

Define base types for fundamental linguistic units.

Phony, morpheme, lexical item, syntactic constituent, semantic concept, pragmatic concept, composite types, dependent types, connections to formal grammar frameworks.

laying out those types research challenges relation okay but just continue i'll start a new chat for better results continue compre intensively with developing

have all needed documents in fractal docs folder, have all source code and tests start running and developing the full simple modular test suite now.

Okay.

Okay, question from the chat.

What kind of predictions might you have about case uses across disciplines, experience in the field or experience with the language?

What would it reveal if case use was different across groups?

Okay.

and another question live chat can we can we mechanically deform the cranium to 10x the cerebrum um probably but you probably couldn't get it back tucker

But I think with a 3D printer and a shipping container, it could be possible.

What would it reveal if case use was different across groups?

Yeah, there'd be so many interesting topics, like the discovered slash invented...

question of case to what extent are to on at from of an object fundamental aspects of semantics are there other fundamental aspects of semantics that we get through or get around in human language in other ways i think that at the very least a first step not the only first step um

not not not a last step but a first step is this kind of beyond cerebrum approach where it's like first get the full interoperable category theoretic calculus type you know algebra etc etc etc for all the languages that we know about partially to scaffold and improve the fluency of people and llms

partially to understand well what are all the state spaces and then if we find that there's something where there's always exactly three in every language even if they were all the same we could still say like well what if it was four or maybe we'll find that there's um one two and many for marking numbers in one language and another one it's one two three and many another one it's just one and many or another one doesn't have that distinction it's like any of those even just seeing two examples is kind of like the arc challenge it's like

You see that this could have been this way or that way, and then there's a whole state space that it could be.

So there could be a special numerosity for multi-agent models where it's like there's a subscript for how many agents there are.

But it can have 50 subscripts coming out of every corner, different fonts, all these different kinds of modifications, and that's just typographically.

let alone how it's spoken or how it gets rendered computationally, where it doesn't even need to be limited by how many suffixes can you add or how many subscripts would make sense in your word processor.

It's about these higher order modifications.

So when people say, I'm talking about sending the data to the Affective Active Inference Models API,

That could be something that gets fully fleshed out, maybe static analysis on certain components, but certainly for scientific integrity, full reproducibility, understand what is that category of models.

And so that is...

the curious language of the incidents which is for the incident which motivates languaging what is the curious languages that let that semantics get communicated okay some more great questions from tucker we will make documents

okay okay it seems like human language taking a survey of different semantics and grammars around the world doesn't need case and that even semantic density is not specifically correlated to case versus no case structure

Yeah, it's highly possible that by kind of sandpapering the language of the exoteric markers of case, like English for the most part, it could be associated causally or just correlationally with an increased or decreased information density.

so consider different ways like per phoneme um whereas like if you're doing stem modifying like a slavic language then maybe there's only so many modifications that you can overlap if you're doing suffixing then maybe you can have more but you know suffixing might lead to very long symbol density

Then again, if there's a certain number of symbols that are needed for the subscripting, I don't think there's a single answer, especially in the absence of empirical evidence in our hands and mandibles.

But we could say, write a speculative design dissertation summary of all the situations

where human languages with and without different case systems would and would not have different information densities and designs considered at syntax, semantic, narrative, cognitive levels.

okay fill in all placeholder methods dart to run log confirm the test suite for formica okay glial maximalism oh wow

being a little bit recalcitrant to write this document, despite its absolutely benign cellular nature.

Write that and improve that into a file.

Okay.

Okay, Tucker wrote, why do so many ancient languages Sanskrit?

I don't know what Usarti is.

Usakri.

Uskari.

Oh, thank you for that.

We should add this to languages.

Oh, it is there as Basque.

Uskara.

Why do they have nutshell?

I don't know.

now fully write out that dissertation tons of tabular formatted crystal good stuff information vast technical mermaid diagrams unique explanations and predictions unknown

and under known through linguists in 2025 wow still still dragging heels on the glial component maybe switch to clot oh great question great question let's ask perplexity

Okay, Tucker wrote, are any modern languages in widespread use gaining in case complexity?

Let's do the perplexity research.

base evolution today dot md okay that's interpreting that okay oops

research and fully empirically address this question from my good friend the answer must ring in his ears like gold and silver and he is a refined listener he expects only the finest information

Okay.

Meanwhile, perplexity.

Let's do the slower or the faster mode of perplexity.

I don't know.

Yeah, that would be a...

This is kind of one approach that could be used.

Beast, which is Bayesian evolutionary analysis by sampling tree.

Let's write out this document.

This is going to be beast case analysis.

Okay.

I'm just going to copy in just one paragraph about beast.

we have so much good stuff happening though okay that one will finish soon that one will finish soon let's just see where it got with the development yeah making good progress on formica okay

with this description of beast write up a fully technical nsf postdoc proposal for using cerebrum and formica parentheses look them up if you need

to do ancestral state bayesian phenotypic reconstruction of ancients linguistic elements we are going way into the past we will use generative ai as needed for creating

creating fluent text audio and visual media given the explicit probabilistic models and empirical data we will be compiling and inferring on ancient and

contemporary languages okay glial maximalism oh it's okay it says it's for internal discussion only i feel like i could share it here though but we'll reset that chat go back to gemini

write it out fully, the full postdoc application.

Thank you.

Okay, glial archetypes.

Oh, this will look better on.

Okay, test infrastructure.

Okay, we stop the agent after 25 calls, continue.

Look at the glial.

Tests, developing, writing that postdoc application.

Okay, but to Tucker's question.

Most linguists agree that human languages tend to simplify their case systems over time rather than develop more complex ones.

Of course, just like in genomic and phenotypic settings, it's like, but then how is there a more complex one?

The historical trend seen in Indo-European languages has been towards case reduction, not expansion.

Latin.

Old English.

Old East Slavic and Sanskrit, all of them have dropped in cases.

Are we buying the dip with respect to case number?

I don't know.

Maybe it could go down further.

Not financial advice, not linguistic advice.

Okay, counter evidence.

Virtually no documented examples of modern widely used languages that have developed more complex systems

as Anatoly Levenchuk wrote in languages cases usually die out it's a known process why would they appear instead of disappearing right why would they appear instead of disappearing absolutely perplexity let's see there's no strong evidence that a modern language but but but could could a language with more cases gain more popularity

are any languages getting keys but english is right now rare but possible oh they debate about mandarin chinese okay deeper research okay but you now you you know what i am going to ask next if that

case reduction is such a slam dunk that it is pervasive today, give me the most complete account of how those complex

many haste systems ever even came to be okay glial cells

okay so centering the role of the glia and then there's the neuronal processing layer but it's like we don't really talk about those in glia science it's more about the kind of multiple types of glia microglial criticism okay so that's kind of like the feedback okay

centering the role of the oligodendrocyte between neurons using formica in the sort of neural semantics of glial okay

emergence of elaborate case paradigms and languages such as proto-indo-european pi sanskrit and finno-ogric languages involve layered grammaticalization processes and socio-linguistic factors the pi case system so this is the one that is mostly used in cerebro the system likely arose through spatial and semantic differentiation but i repeat myself

Analogical extension.

Case markers originally tied to specific semantic roles.

Instrumental for tools expanded to abstract syntactic functions.

Phonological reinforcement.

Sound changes eroded distinctions between stems, prompting speakers to innovate new markers to avoid ambiguity.

Stable case systems.

oh some languages did have expanded case complexity i mean like maybe hungarian or some of these other ones the date of plural um persisted due to its role in marking indirect objects yeah interesting but a little little but but that's exactly

That's exactly what we can analyze with this postdoc application that we're writing.

Just like you could use Beast to look at the genomic or phenotypic patterns.

Okay.

Run the full Formica Pest Suite

develop and improve the formica tests methods visualizations animations documentation okay okay vastly expand the nsf postdoc application add

comprehensive tables, specific explanations and predictions in huge, valid mermaid diagrams.

Okay, still plugging away on Formica.

Okay, we're going to get this postdoc application done, read it on GitHub, see if anyone else has any questions or ideas in the live chat, and then call it a day.

Okay.

Yes.

Develop everything fully.

Run and improve that test suite, which yields full computations and visualizations.

Okay.

All right.

Just save that.

A few improvements on this kind of stuff with like the need to reapply tools and better situational awareness for the code base.

reading folder structures kind of doing better in uh that could be partly in cursor partly uh other other approaches all right speculative design beast

Okay.

Reconstructing ancient linguistic phenotypes using integrated Bayesian modeling and case-based reasoning enhanced by generative AI.

Okay, intellectual merit.

Pioneering the use of generative AI

Specific generative AI model name, e.g.

GPT-4 Tacotron.

I'm sorry.

It is an end-to-end text-to-speech Tacotron.

Broader impacts.

Okay.

Oh, that's going to cost you.

foible yes lexicon swadesh lists perfect it's like there's just so much to learn a lot of it is out there a swadesh list is a list of forms and concepts which all languages without exception have terms for

Okay, new file just dropped.

Swadesh lists.

Yes, run the test suite and add tests that show off and visualize.

More like that.

New chat.

Write a Swadesh list for

cerebrum and formica as language okay thank you tucker then write another file meta swadesh list markdown both maximum length and accuracy

yeah cursor writing these terminal commands running the pi test by itself super big speed up super effective okay hyper swadesh that could be next morris swadesh

he started with a list of 215 meanings falsely introduced as a list of 225 meanings in the paper due to a spelling error yeah hate to see that happen whoa

wow great great topic to have okay this is the swadesh minimal minimal terminology who what what where when all could be associated develop further and furthermore

the swadesh list include all swadesh terms and add case annotation okay then the meta meta swadesh well then okay

Clearly, there has been a kind of misunderstanding.

A metaswadesh list is like a swadesh list for such lists.

A list of all the criterion.

you'd use in the production or inference productions or inference of a swadesh list coming to a file near you

Okay, Formica is up and running.

Add a visualization script for Formica.

Ensure that running the test suite yields copious, accurate visualizations and .gif.

Okay.

You're doing okay with the Swadesh lists.

Okay.

Let's look at the first, the layer one Swadesh list.

The L1.

yes perfect like this is the basis of what we need for formica which is what what are the what are the 200 or so concepts that we need in formica for total ant colony modeling what are their parts of speech

here nest core their forage zone so it's like home and away like over here over there many many mandibles other alien scents one two three four five

i guess you don't even need six maybe you call that just like legish or something okay different different um different creatures in the nest okay body parts actions natural colors

adjectives directions great okay okay now we're on the right page with the meta swadesh list now write that meta swadesh list fully

200 concepts or so please.

Yeah.

Run the test suite, confirm and log where visualizations are made.

Okay, I understand.

You want a significantly more detailed and exhaustive breakdown of criteria, principles, and considerations related to Swadesh lists.

Okay.

Okay.

Our next album.md.

Okay, new chat.

Prediluvian Superswadesh is the name of our next album.

Write out all the song names and lyrics.

And in callouts, describe the bat sound.

Meta Swadesh list, we're there.

It really did go up to 207.

See also external resources on Swadesh lists, lexicostatistics and glottochronology.

write another comprehensive document on glottochronology.

Okay, 27 tests.

Looks like Beyond Cerebrum is coming together.

Let's see where it's saving things to.

Yes, run the script and then run a terminal command to confirm where the visualization is saved to.

glottochronology is a controversial method within historical linguistics that aims to estimate the time depth since two or more related languages separate from a common ancestor it attempts to do this by quantifying the degree of lexical replacement within a specific subset of core vocabulary yeah i think bayesian methods could help a lot there

okay our album we're gonna look at this album on github all right this is gonna be this will be the last piece i think people get it it's possible to um go beyond cerebrum in like a 20 minute period

okay we'll close with this the pre-diluvian super swadesh so it speaks first primordial murmur obsidian shards on the shore the cartographer's dream that's an instrumental occasional occasional sonar pings or distorted radio static hint at failed surges and forgotten geographies

whispers from the ziggurat's core arc construct gopher wood and pitch 40 days delusion dissolution ararat landing new soil old sun well

hope this has been a uh interesting stream for people uh

it's all Creative Commons by NCND so if you want to work on it feel free to make contributions to the repo if you want to collaborate on a future part of the formica stack there's uh there's always a always a way and we should be

We should be on our way.

Okay.

That's it.

Looking forward to people's comments.

Thank you, Glea Maximalist and Jeff and Tucker for the live chats.

Okay.

Bye.