## WKjqw3My_xM

SPEAKER_02:
all right hello and welcome everyone this is actin live stream number 47.0 it is august 3rd 2022.

Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.

We are a participatory online lab and institute that is communicating, learning and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at some of the links on the slide.

This is a recorded and an archived and transcribed and published live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

All Active Inference Institute activities are participatory, so do let us know if you want to contribute or get involved.

Head over to ActiveInference.org and click the links to participate directly and to learn more.

Well, we are about to set off on an odd-numbered and unique adventure in 47.

We're going to be discussing and juxtaposing not one paper as per usual, but have a multiple eyes open approach towards two papers in this situation.

We're going to be learning and discussing in a juxtaposed fashion two papers, Active Inference and Abduction in 2021 by Ati Vaiko, Pia Terenin, and Majid Beni.

Also, we'll be discussing An Active Dynamic Social Cognition and Active Inference by Ines Hippolito and Thomas Van Es, also from 2021.

All videos, .zeros and otherwise, are introductions to these ideas and additional context, not a review or evaluation or a final word.

And we are going to consistently, we hope, use this coloration of a light red for the abductive paper and a light blue for the inactive, leaving the space open for new colors and combinations to arise that demonstrate some areas of synthesis.

And we're going to talk in this dot zero,

with some big questions and go over our aims as well as reading in between those aims, which is a little bit different than many live streams.

We're then going to provide overview information on each paper in terms of the aims, the claims, the roadmap, and the abstract.

We'll then move to a background and context section that will include a lot of information on inaction, semiotics, abductive logic, and so on.

we'll then move into a juxtaposition of the two papers and we're going to have a lot of time to discuss with hopefully multiple authors in the upcoming discussions dot one dot two and maybe beyond so today we wanted to bring a big picture context

talk about some very interesting threads, provide a little bit of background that helps one enter into this space, and then provide an initial juxtaposition and run through these papers that, again, will just get somebody excited to read the papers, dive in more deeply, and bring their own perspective to bear on these very interesting topics.

So we'll move to the introductions.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California.

and I'll talk more about what's exciting in the coming slides.

I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Good morning.

My name is Dean.

I'm in Calgary, and I guess I was maybe the warped mind that tried to put this idea together and maybe change a little bit the way that we look at active inference by trying to pull two different papers of seemingly different focuses

And then both of those also incorporating the use of active inferences as a methodology to situationally analyze.

And so what are the implications for that?

So I find that really kind of exciting.

And I'll pass it over to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
so thank you dean yes stephen here i'm in um toronto canada um and i'm really interested in about both of these papers because they both speak a lot to kind of participatory approaches in general and the idea of how people are engaging in the world um so the the questions around

um inaction is is really relevant as is the abduction piece so um while they're both quite different papers they're both speaking uh to me quite strongly so that's really interesting so i'm looking forward to being able to

sort of explore that.

I work with participatory theatre, community psychology, community development and multi-scale development processes and I'm really excited to just see how this scientific take can meet a more, what might be called a practice-based participatory question that I've been looking at.

So I'll pass it back to Daniel.


SPEAKER_02:
Excellent.

Thank you both.

And Dean, thanks again for the many month journey, the many email and month and message journey that we've walked, because I do hope this will unfold and include in a way that is taking live streams and the kind of materials that we're working through beyond where we have gone.

And in spirit of that, I will pass the Dean to introduce some of the big questions here.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, if you're going to pull two papers that don't seem to have a heck of a lot in common in terms of their subject matter, you're going to have to come at it from a little bit of a different angle in terms of not just ferreting out what's within a paper, but how those papers might be compared.

So we pulled together some questions around the idea of what role as a situational analysis, either tool or reality method, active inference might play in

pulling things that seem to be a long ways away and apart and entangle them.

And so questions were basically, can active inference be both something that holds or contains or bounds something and also be the thing bounded or being gripped?

What is active inference?

Or what if active inference is both the thing being contained, say a partitioner line in a table and the cell,

So the actual gap that we can actually put more information into what that look like, what it would look like both as a constraint and a separator simultaneously.

And I think it's that mutuality piece that we're going to try to tease out in the next few live streams and what is similar or different in getting a grip on models and a different process, which is modeling.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Stephen, do you want to add anything here?


SPEAKER_00:
Now, I think that covers a lot of it.

The only thing that X that's there is sort of denoting, you know, can active inference models, modeling, frameworks.

So this contextualization of the term sort of comes into play, but we're going to talk about that a bit later.

So, yeah, thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

And this is one of potentially the first Our Aims slides because it is hopefully going to help to come back to this level.

The meme here represents this live stream bringing together the two papers in a way where we've had one hand clapping.

Now we're going to bring that together into two.

You can hear the sound coming out of the live stream already, especially if you're listening.

Dean, what would you describe about our aims or how would you summarize?

Oh, and one other note I'll add about our aims is we want it to be comprehensive, but also to have videos that are listenable and of reasonable temporal duration.

So there will be many slides that will have a lot of text copied out of the paper.

And we'll merely note, pause the video if you'd like to read, but we're just going to move on from many of the text slides.

We just really wanted to make sure that all the text was there and visible.

but we're not going to read everything.

So please, Dean, summarize what of these aims you'd like to talk about.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm just going to talk about the root of each one of these bullets, which is take a closer look at the realism-instrumentalism debate.

I don't have to go into what that is.

If you've been a participant in it, you know what we're describing.

Reinforce a two-eyes-open approach where one eye takes in the pair of active inferences

papers, the inactive dynamic social condition and abduction, while the other eye manifests active inference as an integrator of both, because we think that it actually can do that without blending.

It can actually cause a weave or a braid.

And then the third bullet is make explicit the absolute necessity, if we're going to do those first two things of understanding the temporal depth of models that would actually incorporate

two papers of seeming distant topics as we make active inference into two different subjects.

And then just what we did is pulled out different things that the authors noted about their papers.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

And Stephen, if you could carry forth with reading in between those aims or adding anything you'd like from this slide.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, thanks, Daniel.

know one set of authors says you know is really looking at instrumentalism um and you know you know it's a valid scientific perspective but you know there is there that then describes you know this question about the road towards um realism and normalism so you know where the idea is that in one paper that instrumentalism is is the way to sort of

capture or to to sort of hold ourselves in this scientific work well that can be challenged um and we would we would see ways that we might need to to loosen that when we get into participatory approaches so something in between which loosens that scientific space and is a practice space so the same with the second point

um where okay is is instrumentalism um you know the way forward so what what constitutes behaviors when living in a niche what constitutes living beings um and how do we resolve which way forward so if there's if there are contradictions

should we reconcile them if we're in a team trying to use this um should we just live with them and just move forward um or where should we actually highlight them so this is in a way trying to think in a um outside of maybe this sort of laser focus on the scientific philosophical point and saying okay when we're trying to bring these into a team context

should we would we loosen some of that so and so just it just mentions here to give an application should we then also think about active influence being prefaced or suffixed you know adaptive active inference effective active inference or active inference modeling you know is how important is that clarification to to then also think about how the instrumentalism realism piece might be utilized in in these other ways

Do we need to position fully in one, fully on another?

And if we're in between, can there be greater or lesser access to knowing based on the context?

So often in participatory work,

different types of practices you know the context is key and then this sort of speaks a little bit to my own idea of the co-creative work and i know that um you know daniel's very much with teams and and dean's very much with transformation you know often there there's a co-creation piece there's a bit where you you want to support the butterfly without crushing it there's something quite delicate there so how can we at times

bring this into spaces where it's a co-creative space, where there's modeling happening in a more subtle contextual way.

And while we have these scientific definitions and strategic designs and hard analysis, and they're useful, we don't want them to crush what's happening.

And there's a couple of pictures there that sort of speak to that.

And I'll pass it over to Dean maybe, and you can speak to the sampling, the waters in between and the mind the gap.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think that was a beautiful explanation.

And I think if and when the authors are able to come on, that'll be something that we'll now be able to put some color to.

I think we put some anchors in the ground, but we haven't said how much flow

can go between those different nodes.

And that's what I think we wanted to establish right here is the betweenness.

Lots of times, like it says, mind the gap.

That's the only thing that can kill you at the subway, all right?

Because you're not paying attention to the gap.

And I think the sampling of the waters in between does the same thing, except it provides a little subtle difference in terms of the fluidity.

of those kinds of gaps.

So I think it would be really interesting if we use that as our portal into how we might bring things together and make them dance when they otherwise would be sitting on chairs on the opposite side of the room.

That might be an interesting conversation to start in the dot one and two.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you both.

And the only comment I'll add here is this

discussion we've been having on the adjectives that preface the adaptive, affective, et cetera, active inference.

And then also, Stephen, the focus you've brought to the suffix, that X in brackets, active inference model as one instance or case or realization,

active inference framework, active inference process theory, what follows.

And this really reminds me of left branching and right branching clauses in grammar and syntax, and that there's a base clause.

What is our base clause?

And then what branches before, during and after?

I think there's a very rich space and I really like these embodied and flux based metaphors that help us understand

so much so into the paper overviews this will just be some metadata and descriptions on the papers before we pull back to the background and context and then move forward into the papers running through their main points so we're not going to read the abstracts they're both of course available for these papers here is the abstract for active inference and abduction

Here's the abstract for inactive dynamic social cognition and active inference.

Here are the keywords for both of these papers.

The inactive paper has the keywords social cognition, niche construction, active inference, theory of mind, inactivism, and dynamical systems theory.

The abduction paper has the keywords abduction, active inference, free energy principle, frist and blanket, triadic relations, and Pierce.

Let's go to the aims of and the claims of the abduction paper.

So Dean, would you like to cover any of the aims of the abduction paper?


SPEAKER_03:
What I would like to do is just sort of foretell what,

both of both papers want to aim at and that is you'll see a key word in the second bullet of this one which is alliance and then there are words that you're going to see in the other paper where they're again saying we want things to come together but we want to be careful in how we describe that coming together we don't want it to be perceived metaphorically as a blending

as an undoing of two or more things that we believe have an associative relationship.

And so I think when you're going through the aims of the two papers, if you kind of step back a little bit, you'll see that the authors of both papers

doing a hard explanation on what relationship they want us to pay attention to.

And so that's something that they, both papers share.

It's a heavy emphasis on relationships.


SPEAKER_02:
Great point.

And they both are very richly and powerfully written.

And here we see alliance and allegiance.

And certainly there's going to be a lot of discussion in both the papers about integrating disparate or partially related ontologies and vocabulary sets and different thinkers, different threads of intellectual development.

uh these quotes from the paper can be read and of course are expanded upon in the paper but as dean said this paper's focus is on the intellectual alliance between active inference and free energy principle fep and primarily the work of cs pierce in terms of semiotics pragmatics parmaxism abductive logic that is the aim synthesis is bringing those two together in a way that's synergistic and and is providing meaning stephen


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and just following on from what you're saying, both these papers, and particularly the abductive one, it gives a way to look at areas that are really hard to simulate for computers.

And the way that abduction happens, particularly with humans, is

very sophisticated and i think it's really helpful to then see semiotics which is actually used a lot in theater sonography and set design um pragmatism so brought into this with it with it with a really um a theory that's you know transcends science often right is often used in other fields like

the the natural sciences has some use for it but it's often used in the humanities so i think this is speaking to that piece about what is it that is revealed that kind of secret source that kind of hidden soul which is normally missing and in action is also something that's like that awesome claims of the paper


SPEAKER_02:
are throughout the paper but just to highlight some of the key claims they're claiming that that aim that they set out to make between the work of active inference and the abduction and semiotic perspective appears they're claiming that that is feasible and that they're providing an initial sketch for it in this theoretical theoretical integration of the new and the old

something red, something blue, something new, something old.

And the two frameworks, the new and the old respectively are the modern instantiations of neuroscience and cognitive science represented by a free energy principle.

And on the old, a historically accurate and precise interpretation of abductive inference, including the importance of the economy of research, all things that we're gonna come back to.

Just wanted to clarify the claims there.


SPEAKER_03:
Can I just add one thing real quick?

So theoretical integration there, I mean, from what, if you can think back to when we were talking about our aims, now the question is, this is what the authors are saying.

What we're wondering is, does that make active inference both the integration product and the integrator, the process?

And again, I want to kind of tease back that one step because I think that's going to happen again when we look at the other paper.

They'll use different nomenclature, but they're going to say the same thing.

And again, it's hard to see the commonalities unless you, and you don't have to make them up.

You just have to notice them in the two different types of forests.


SPEAKER_02:
And a point on that there,

both in a way using active inference as an integrator, as well as as a differentiator.

We're making an integrated model of internal and external and blanket states by differentiating them.

And then of course, integration and differentiation also have a joint usage in mathematics with integral and the derivative notation.

So there's going to be a lot of things coming together.

Steven, is your hand still up?

Yes, please.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just one thing as well.

I think this is really helpful to talk about neuroscience in this computational neuroscience and to highlight that because I think something that is the reality in the world out there, the culture out there where these ideas are circulating is that neuroscience is turned on its head basically by active inference.

Neuroscience is a field as people understand it

is some sort of deductive process of stuff coming in and then being evaluated and concretized as opposed to this predictive journey.

So I think it's really, really useful

because this is something that we all face.

And I think what I also have noted when I've spoken to some neuroscientists is they've actually had an existential crisis and shifted, partly often by coming up with inactive claims and seeing that really if inactive claims are there, how can their work with neuroscience be held together?

there's this there's there's a piece here that relates to the general and and that that general piece is is more important when we start to bring um active influence out from the specialist areas where it's kind of enclaved and its rules of the game are known and you're into the areas where people say neuroscience well i know what that means and off you go so thanks great thank you


SPEAKER_02:
The paper has relatively few sections.

It has an introduction.

It then presents a pairing of active inference in the light of abduction, abduction in the light of active inference, slightly oblique reference to nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution or except in the light of something.

And these are two lights.

Back to that islands.

What is the space between?

And then there's a discussion

on the economy of research and its free energy naturalization and the conclusion and the Pierce rabbit holes run deep.

We're gonna go into a few soon.

On to the inactive paper.

So here we're gonna be describing the aims, claims and roadmap of the inactive dynamic social cognition and active inference paper.

The paper presents a twofold aim to dissect new accounts

that blend inactivism with inferential accounts and explain why doing so involves contradiction is the first aim.

And the second aim is to offer the only reasonable account linking inactivism and inferential accounts, especially on this case of social cognition.

Daniel?

Yes, please.


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, guess what I was hoping.

Could you now turn the word linking purple for us?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.


SPEAKER_03:
Now all of a sudden we have different ways of describing the between that Stephen did a lovely job of emphasizing before we actually started looking at the papers themselves.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

It's the between.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Go ahead.

It's awesome.

And it is actually through your request and the Slides platform, it becomes inactive, dynamic, social, stigmatic.

And so...

That's a proof of concept for what?

But this is the aims of this paper.

They also have many claims articulated throughout the discussion.

And they actually use some very clear notation to describe the specific claims from other work and from their own work and about which claims and hypotheses have which logical relationship.

They're going to make claims about the nature of cognition and its embodied basis.

They're going to be discussing some of the claims related to the human social cognitive niche.

and talking about the importance of relationship, enculturation, niche construction, and then they're going to be talking about theory of mind and about the compatibility or contradictions associated with linking inactive claims with theory of mind or inferential accounts.

The papers

Roadmap lays out many of these aims and claims quite clearly.

They begin with an introduction and introduce a recent, though influential, work in the active inference field, which is the Thinking Through Other Minds framework, TTOM.

And they, as they say, dissect this account to try to tease apart the way that, in their view, the inactive and the inferential accounts were brought together.

They also have a figure describing a Markov blanket, which is going to be a concept that plays Keeley in both of their papers.

Section two, something's got to give.

Rejecting inactive inference through other minds.

They're going to utilize two assumptions, namely that social cognition reduces to mental representation, and two, that social cognition is hardwired from birth, and they're going to disagree with both of these assumptions.

And in their opposition to these assumptions, supported by subclaims and evidence, that is going to lead them to their broader conclusions.

They're going to use dynamical systems theory

and talk about how DST can be linked with inactivism in terms of its compatibility and what these two frameworks offer each other within an instrumentalist reading.

And then they're going to discuss active inference specifically in the context of dynamical systems theory on one hand and inactive

cognition, social cognition, on the other hand, that's the inactive dynamic hyphenation.

They'll describe with a few figures about similarities and differences between social and action generally as conceptualized outside of active inference.

And then they're going to introduce visually how active inference enriches that picture.

And then they have a very interesting table distinguishing between or amongst phenomena observed in the natural world and observed behavior in the natural world.

okay awesome to run through the papers that way now let us move to the background and context section so in this section of the dot zero we're going to use some quotes from the paper for sure but we're also going to pull a step back and demonstrate just the tip of the iceberg of the scholarship and the research that we carried out leading up to this point hopefully to excite

the listener or reader, and to provide some context into these very deep threads that are going to be approached and approximated in the papers.

I'll provide a first note here, or Dean, please go for it.


SPEAKER_03:
Just because I think this is a spectacular moment to say, okay, so background and context.

So we're talking maybe the temporal and physical setting.

So that's now something that we can situationally analyze.

And again, it doesn't matter whether you use active inference or whether you use a CAS model or whether you use professional initiatives programming.

Bottom line is everybody is trying to figure out what the situation is through an analysis method.

And I would imagine that every one of those methods has a greater or lesser viability depending upon what the situation both temporally and physically is.

So I think that's the critical thing, is we're not saying that each of these papers are good or bad.

We're saying that each of these papers has a focus on a different background context combination, minimum of two.

So now if we pull the two things together, we can't say that it's going to be the same thing that we're going to come up with, that our aims as people who have now looked at the two papers


SPEAKER_02:
side by each that's going to create a whole new entity thank you to lead off this background and contextualizing section i wanted to invoke one of my favorite artists and poets william blake and blake wrote contraries are positives a negation is not a contrary

Negations are not contraries.

Contraries mutually exist.

But negations exist not.

Exceptions and objections and unbeliefs exist not.

Nor shall they ever be organized forever and ever.

End quote.

Contraries in this Blake-ian fourfold logical framework...

in fact, are part of a dialectic and they exist as a function of each other, like convex and concave, or like gravity and radiation, as Buckminster Fuller might take it towards.

And so negations in this poetical framework are those which exist not.

whereas A and B can be on the contrary, whereas A and not A have a different logical relationship.

And this kind of fourfold logical approach to recognizing the state space and the truth claims that multiple juxtaposed assertions can have amongst each other is also foresaged in a lot of world knowledge traditions.

For example, the Kataskoti,

And this is a logical tool and method that's been applied for a very long time in the dharmic traditions of the Indian context.

Wanted to provide that and also with these images, which either of you are welcome to explore, what does one hand clapping or a person doing the splits have to do with contradiction and negation?

Yes, steam.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Regarding contradiction as well.

And I think this points to the kind of the contextual piece.

The situational analysis piece is there's there's the situation inside which

the contradictions are constructed, if that makes sense.

And that's also embodied and enacted through our life.

So it might well be, as a baby, the morphology of the child at different stages, in different contexts, gives the ways to establish situational awareness and the contradictions within that

as things become codified so you've got these these these situational um processes are kind of um are what we're doing in this ongoing modeling flow the kind of the fields of practice

in these different papers that underpin them, the inactivist fields of practice or the more computational fields of practice.

They're what we kind of embody and we get into and we learn.

And that's what we're kind of intuitively modeling in a way.

We get a feel for how we should model being in these situations, the contradictions.

But that modeling often, and this is the danger, where it gets overpowered by someone with their model.

i.e someone's in their world modeling what it's like to be themselves or trying to process it they go and see a counselor with their model and that model is being used to fit them to the model and then that counselor will tell us what their problem is how it's framed so i think this model model in

um is um quite relevant here because you know once these contradictions are established it might well be that there's a model created within that domain and then someone who's not necessarily in that domain can be ascribed to the model they don't know what the game is they're not in the process and the model takes over so that sort of switches over to the splits because then okay we've got two things there together

we were talking about this yesterday you open up and you've got a stance okay so i'm slightly and at some point it's like that's not a stance brother that's that's a split you've gone into there you're going to have to be careful right so you you've gone into this idea that you're opening things up now were they one thing to start with were they a stance that they were held in some ways have they split in a in in a way where they're now

isolated from each other you know and i suppose we're trying to hopefully find a way to neither push them to one neither have them split maybe have a stance in between that is um somehow agile and uh relates in this case to realism instrumentalism but kind of echoes some broader broader themes thank you dean just real quick um a lot of people have heard the yogi yogi vera ism of


SPEAKER_03:
when you see a fork in the road, take it.

And I know that with the term joint has come up a lot, joint probability, for example.

And so the idea of split here is a really good one, metaphorically speaking, because if you are looking at something with active inference and you are assuming that in a T maze experiment, you have to go left or right, well, human beings,

can see a fork in the road and take it.

That's kind of the standing joke.

If you see a fork in my legs, take them.

Don't necessarily, you have to choose A or B. You can take the whole thing.

And I think that's what Blake is trying to point at with this exercise.

And so is that a contradiction?

No.

If I see utensil on the road, I can take it.

But if I'm not open to the idea that fork doesn't only mean


SPEAKER_02:
left or right then i'm already self-limited in terms of what i am testing what i'm situationally analyzing thank you both all right into the more direct keyword pieces so in action from this definitions.net site an action is one of the possible ways of organizing knowledge and the forms of interaction with the world

Inactive knowledge is knowledge that comes through action and is constructed on motor skills, such as manipulating objects, riding a bicycle, or playing a sport.

That's just one of many definitions that have been provided.

We've also had several live streams and paper discussions on inaction in active inference.

For example, in Act-Inf Livestream number six, way back when in 2020, we discussed Ramsted et al., A Tale of Two Densities.

Active inference is an active inference.

In 2021, we discussed a paper also of Hippolyto et al., Embodied Skillful Performance, Where the Action Is.

And interestingly, for saging in some ways, this very discussion, here's a slide from...

that live stream um with uh of the hippolyto paper and here we had the piercean uh triad and we had the symbolism and this the semiotics and the references to frege so we actually were talking about the very related concept of representation and indeed those who support and or reject and or find contradiction and linkage all of the above

The discussion around inactivism and the inferential account is going to hinge very much on the question of representation and cognitive representations, what those are, where or if they exist, and so on.

That was Livestream 23.

Also from this paper of Sangati et al, they lay out just visually, we're going to see more representations soon, in their view, some of the distinctions between traditional social cognition and inactive social cognition.

And so rather than just a visual interpretation of the image meme, Dean, would you like to provide it?


SPEAKER_03:
No, I'll wait till you're done.


SPEAKER_02:
Here what I see is that in the traditional social cognitive inferential accounts, the gears are turning inside the brain.

And then there's perception action loops and linkages that connect social entities that are in their body.

But the body is seen as like an interface for that kind of information transfer.

one extreme stance or simple visual representation and then here in contrast we see like the gears are everywhere including in the environment in the niche in the space between and that yes the brain is doing things but also it's part of an enacted system that is implementing this encultured social cognitive process a little bit more in a holistic framing so dean yes


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I was just going to say, in a minute, we're going to look at what the abduction thing talks about.

But for now, I would like people just to sort of hold in their mind the idea that this is speaking to a type of temporal depth, but that temporal depth is vertical.

I think abduction looking at longer timelines or for hundreds of years is more horizontal.

So just keep in mind that we're talking temporal depth, but the focus is on a vertical or a deep

temporal depth instead of a wide lateral temporal depth.

They both matter, but they're orthogonal.

Doesn't mean that they're in conflict with one another.

It just means they're going in different directions.

That's all I want to say about that.


SPEAKER_02:
It's funny, left and right or west and east, those are contrary directions, but they're not negatory directions.

And so right there is where we start to see like how orthogonality or sparsity or conditional independence granted by a Markov blanket, for example, how those can be seen in the framework of contraries, though not negations.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
and that gear in the in the right hand diagram there the gear in between you know that can have temple depth that can have this mind body environment piece is definitely there like you're saying and obviously makes as a unit of analysis that's really challenging and i would also put in there as a gear words words are twitch twitching of our voice box is giving us words in space around us

So, you know, they're being used as tools as well.

So suddenly we're much more enmeshed, even if it's just speech.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

And it takes time for the speech to travel through the internet and through space and time.

A little bit more depth on social inaction.

This inaction research resource describes several meanings and senses of inaction in the performative, in the bringing forth senses, so please read.

And also a really nice 2009 paper in cognitive semiotics by de Bruyn and de Haan.

discuss some of the relationships of inactivism and social cognition.

And they did an excellent job of summarizing what the inferential and the inactivist accounts can bring together and sort of discuss that linkage.

Yes, please, Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I read that paper because I found it.

And here's an interesting thing.

If they're going to use a bridge metaphor, I think inactivism does have a bridge.

It's just a vertical bridge.

It's the side of the building going up.

And so not to criticize what they've written here, but I think there is a gap and there is an ability to span.

It's just that it's going vertical.

It's not going traditionally side to side.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

So on to a little bit of depth into abduction and semiotics.

Well,

We had quite the learning journey together and the abduction paper with one or one and a half or even two of the authors being true Pearson experts provided many details.

Pierce was a prolific writer and thinker and collaborator.

And also much of the work was unpublished, which means that there's some arcane reference systems and not all of it is hyper accessible.

We found the commons.org site to be immensely useful in providing many definitions as well as links to resources.

Dean, would you like to summarize anything on this page?


SPEAKER_03:
Nothing other than if you are interested in pragmatism and you want to get past William James, actually William James and Charles Saunders Pierce had a bit of a, they were maybe 150 years ago the first

conflictors around how things work.

It's actually really, it's an amazing takeoff point in terms of how people who appear to be in competition with one another actually make one another smarter.

But in fact, a lot of the things, a lot of the ideas that we 150 years later are now looking back on, we would have to say,

They may have felt they were in competition with one another, but I think what they were doing was relaying or somehow building a better model because they weren't always looking at things as through the same eyes.

They had both eyes open.

So that's all I'll just say.

Go to the common site.

It's really good.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it's great.

This representation...

ironically slash appropriately, is of the well-known Pearson triad semiotic framework where a stop sign is called the representamen, the represented instance, the physical stop sign, the real stop sign.

The object is the message cars must stop here.

And the interpretant is I should stop here.

And that's where we get that entity agency.

I found an interesting paper recently

about the user interface which brings some of these truly timeless discussions on semiotics and logic into a digital context they're applying that semiosis to the user interface metaphor one could imagine if that were a stop sign in the real world or if it were a button on a website in a user interface context and anyone may pause and read some of these very excellent selections from quotes and uh

lectures given on how copies signs and symbols are linked through logic and semiosis lot here but we'll carry on to abduction specifically so this was a little bit on pierce and the definition of semiotics as opposed to the science of things the more positive sciences and the science of forms which are the more formal sciences

What is abductive reasoning?

This was very fascinating to explore.

This is a quote from the abduction paper.

They wrote, it is common in the secondary literature, e.g.

that building on Pierce, to conceive abduction as occurring in two parts or two kinds, generative abduction and selective abduction.

Here's another perspective on the two types or the two varietals or two components, two-stroke engine of abduction from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

They wrote, in the philosophical literature, the term abduction is used in two related but different senses.

In both senses, the term refers to explanatory reasoning.

In the historically first sense, it refers to the place of explanatory reasoning in generating hypotheses, that's generative abduction.

While in the second sense, which is the sense which it is used most frequently in the modern literature, it refers to the place of explanatory reasoning in justifying or evaluating an enumerated set of hypotheses.

And in a sense, it makes sense.

The content has to be generated to be curated.

The ideas have to be specified, enumerated in order to be justified or evaluated.

Dean, please continue on this.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, just real quickly.

So we now have red and blue, which was really, really important to highlight that you need both.

You need a minimum of two for the explanation to appear.

Next, abductive reasoning in the probabilistic sense is also known as inference to the best explanation, is a form of logical reasoning that looks to the most likely hypothesis to explain something.

An example, did the white beans in the left hand come from the bag of objects held in the right hand?

Here we can see how the hypothesis put forward depends on an incomplete observation or an inference.

Are there beans also in the bag?

And even if so, is that the source for what has been

transferred to the left hand.

So again, temporal depth, when you arrive into a situation, what kind of background and what kind of context do you possess is going to go to this fourth form of logic that Purse literally spent a lifetime trying to disentangle and then reform into some sort of coherence.


SPEAKER_02:
And those listening along may start to see inklings of priors, sensory observations, posterior updating of beliefs about the world, even action selection coming into play, especially translation of the affordances, instantaneous action availabilities into policies, which can be evaluated by their expected free energy, but we're going to get there.

Let's turn to abduction.

And here are some of the very fascinating papers available on Commons related to abduction.

Lot there.

And to kind of continue on with one of the resources from Commons on Abduction as Practical Inference by Thomas Capitan.

This work, which we're not going to read everything about, goes into a lot of interesting points about that dual nature of abduction with hypothesis generating and hypothesis selection and distinguishes that hypothesis selection can make deductively valid evaluations

However, the creativity phase is non-inferential.

That has a lot of resonance with like not pre-censoring ideas and having like an inclusive discussion when brainstorming and recognizing that there has to be a winnowing in a finite period of space and time.

Additionally, there's some discussion here.

This was relating as we move back towards or interweave with free energy principle.

Initial awareness of the hypothesis comes with the observation of a colligated whole by means of an uncontrolled insight into the world of ideas, into what he called thirdness as given in perception.

The novel conceiving of any instance of premise two, citing a previous part of the paper, is caused by prior cognitions, hashtag priors, its content is suggested by the facts,

observations sensory observations but not everything suggested is inferred from the cognition of the facts and so pierce goes on to describe there are operations of the mind which are logically exactly analogous to inferences

accepting only that they are unconscious and therefore uncontrollable and therefore not subject to criticism so leaving aside questions like whether unconscious processes can be considered controllable here we very much see hints of perception as unconscious inference and we see also continuity between processes of attention and awareness conscious inferences

and other subconscious inferences and so in a way this is also providing an integrated framework of perception learning belief updating temporal depth conscious and unconscious awareness all these features are explored in the persian work and the abduction paper is going to very specifically highlight that fact okay carrying on a little bit more uh abduction and retroduction

Would you like to add anything on this one, Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I mean, people that study and analyze this wonder at times whether or not this was a morphology or whether or not we can use the two terms simultaneously or interchangeably.

Again, it's probably one of those things where if you want to find out what the details are, you should probably go and have a look because it's interesting, but it doesn't... At this point, all we basically want to do is... Here, I'll just read this.

Retroduction of the process whereby from a surprising array of facts we are led to a conjectural... We've used conjectural theory to account for them.

Many logicians refuse to call this last inference...

because its conclusion is so extremely problematical as to amount to little more than an interrogation.

I'm sure they are wrong, however.

They have not possessed themselves of the true scientific definition of inference.

So what he's basically saying here is, let's not call abductive reasoning inductive reasoning.

The logical justification of a retroduction of which the proper conclusion is that the conjectured state of things is likely in the vague sense of tending to resemble the real state of things.

And I, this is the part where, so what replaces that?

Instrumentalism?

Whatever we define as instrumentalism?

This is again, this is one of those conundrums.

If it's not, if it's not real

state is it what isn't then what is an unreal or a non-real state because it's there we've labeled it what what fills that what fills that eventually to make the whole that's the question here


SPEAKER_02:
And also, again, worthwhile reading some of the prior work of one of the authors of the abduction paper.

And one can see in their research a strong line of developing and extending and modernizing a lot of the work.


SPEAKER_03:
So I put down those bear signs because I want to tell a really, really, really quick story.

So if you live somewhere where there are bears, if the bear sign stays up,

people begin to ignore the actual sign, object, and they no longer become interpreters.

They willfully lose that triadic.

So if you're in the business of animal welfare and you don't want the bears to become too used to human contact, you have to be very selective of when you put the sign up and most importantly, when you remove the sign.

So I wanted to put that up there because that's a big part of the abductive and retroduction piece.

You have to sometimes take things away for abduction to work.

It's the removal of possibilities that actually creates an emphasis.


SPEAKER_02:
I think we'll just carry on to realism and instrumentalism because we're going to come back to abduction in the subsequent discussions more.

So here's some quotes from a Farabend paper.

according to realism such knowledge factual knowledge is descriptive of general or particular features of the universe so that doesn't mean that the model of gravity is gravity doesn't mean that the model of gravity is what the objects of gravity are

But a realist would remark that, for example, formal models of gravity teach us of the existence of objects acted upon by the force, gravity, and license the description of a force which cannot be directly seen, heard, or felt, but still has noticeable influence.

Forces are real.

Things are real.

According to instrumentalism, even a theory that is wholly correct does not describe anything, but serves as an instrument for the prediction of the facts that constitute its empirical content.

And so again, on this Newton's gravitation example, the instrumentalist could take the position there are no entities, gravitation force and gravitational fields are merely instrumental applications of statistical arguments or potentially even social or power dynamical arguments.

And an instrumentalist may deny the existence of objects

entities and forces, in this case, and even take things to the level of having skepticism around words as instruments and the relationships around communication and how it orders and predicts sense data.

We've explored realism and instrumentalism quite a lot over the streams, and we highlighted it a lot in Mel Andrews' work in livestream number 14.

one more slide on realism and instrumentalism and then either of you please feel free um I'll describe some of the bottom ones again the map territory distinction is very key to the realism and instrumentalism conversation there's also been variety of excellent philosophical work for example a successor to the realism anti-realism question

Those two, by the way, I would say are negations, whereas realism and instrumentalism, we are suggesting might be seen as contraries.

And also Helen Longano's work on scientific pluralism has a lot to say about this by taking a multidisciplinary lens on realism and instrumentalism.

And then Dean, would you like to describe anything about this top paper you found?


SPEAKER_03:
I don't remember this in the grand scheme of things, to be honest.


SPEAKER_02:
It's here for people to read.

There were many papers, and again, we're just putting a lot of text up for those who want to pause and follow the trails, and it all kind of gets enmeshed in.

Stephen, any comments on realism instrumentalism?


SPEAKER_00:
I suppose the piece that comes to mind for me a lot is all of this is then underpinned

within action at some level so the the the idea of looking for different contradictions or different retro approaches could be a case of you imagine when someone thinks about taking a path through the woods

Or you could re-embody a lot of these things.

And maybe everything at some level goes through some embodiment.

And when it's conceptual, that embodiment is just happening in a more conceptual space.

that doesn't rely on as many other kind of stories or feeling your way through things.

So the difference that happens when you're in a field of practice is that you're so used to being in that field of practice that that embodiment becomes the water that you swim in.

So that could be something that sort of relates to this.

Great.


SPEAKER_01:
Justine.


SPEAKER_03:
Just real quick.

So again, we'll ask at this point, yes to realism, yes to instrumentalism, yes to the and, not or.

I'm done.


SPEAKER_02:
We had a little ampersand here and we emphasized the and here.

One brief note on 4E cognition.

We won't go into depth here, but 4E can refer to, as per the Schiavio and von der Schiff 2018 paper, which was in the context of music pedagogy, which is a very fascinating area, 4E is embodied, embedded, extended, enacted,

encultured, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, 7E, 11E, 22E, all of them.

And then a fun quote from Carl Friston from our Applied Active Inference Symposium in 2021.

He said, one key thing about active inference

is it's it's beyond predictive processing it's beyond sentience and it emphasizes or reflects the pragmatic turn at the beginning of this century really epitomized by the four e's to make it clear that sentience is active and that you are talking about the circular causality of engagement with any particle personal or plant with whatever's out there purple circular causality and all of that entails

Then quite briefly, we're not going to go into any of these details, but here's a bunch of work that's relevant for the inactive paper, just some of the other background citations and other work that one might want to look into.

And for the abductive paper,

um and also a little bit of leaning even into something hopefully the authors can unpack for us on the the role and relationship of nominalism with all of this but many previous papers by the authors here listed and a lot of great work again so thanks you fellows for this journey now we can enter into the two papers or the space between

Let's have an initial juxtaposition of the two papers.

I'll put our video will be the tip of the iceberg here.

So Dean, you're the tip of the iceberg.

What would you like to say about these two papers in an initial juxtaposition?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, as I said, I think if you actually step back and realize that what people are doing by, by pairing to active inference, you are saying,

I have a particular kind of situational analysis that I would like to perform.

And in doing so, I would like to try to remove contradictions or I would like to formulate integrations.

And if you step back to that place, your example of... So you're hyper...

your subject is situational analysis, your example fitting under that, you're not now making the mistake of saying, my way of looking at things automatically negates or turns other ways of looking at everything that's under that title of situational analysis to dust.

Now,

There are comparisons and they're not written here and they're so ready long.

I just basically chose examples within each of the papers where papers are talking about two different focal points, but they're still within this larger marginal boundary of active inference and how active inference is behaving around the behavior within a regime of attention and opening that up

to something more available than the specifics or the scale-friendly thing of, does theory of mind necessarily blend with active inference?

Or does the idea that abduction, the moment when I arrive, actually negate any possibility of using instruments to extend my sensory window?

So again, we're not going to spend a whole lot of time

pulling those other things out.

But if people want to actually see how, when you set approximately two papers beside one another, you can find a ton of similarities.

It's kind of an interesting exercise.

It takes a while, but when you actually see them side by each and entangled, there's a lot of braiding going on.

Thank you, Dean.


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen?

Yeah, I like this.

Like what Dean was talking about there, you've got these two papers.

It could almost be seen as two icebergs where their philosophies have kind of frozen and given shape and form.

And there is stuff underneath and stuff above.

But there's also the water around and between, which may have lots of shrimp and all sorts of things swimming around.

So I think in this list here, you've kind of got realism, instrumentalism.

Well, they're your two icebergs, right?

We want them to be nice and sharp, and maybe you get knocked a bit if you bang off them.

And then your case, statistics and model comparison.

you know they they they they're still out there but they they might jive a little bit multi-agent belief communication oh hold on we've got something flowing here things as assembled ensembles so it models as ensembles perspective or tight perspective or where are those perspectives coming from ways of knowing stochasticity complex systems and so forth um we're now maybe

I don't know if we're not dissolving the iceberg, if that's not about that, the iceberg's there, but there are different types of ways of starting to maybe be more flexible and less stable.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

So into the inactive paper we go.

So to keep things reasonable and also have a lot to discuss in the one and two, again, we've put a lot of content onto the slides for your pausing and enjoying.

Most of the content is copied and quoted from the papers.

So that is the point of reference to learn more.

We'll just walk through in the order of the roadmap, some of the key pieces that the papers go through.

So in section one of the inactive paper,

going to begin with a summarization of vesier et al's 2020 argument for understanding others in the world and that's presented in this thinking through other minds ttom paper and then tom is theory of mind they summarize or capture the argument of thinking through other minds as one

Premise one, social cognition is inactive and embodied.

Two, inactive and embodied, the social actor cannot directly grasp social cognition.

Three, anything that cannot be directly grasped must be inferred.

Ergo, QED conclusion, inactive and embodied social cognition must be inferred.

There must be inference about social cognition.

And the authors of the inactive paper state that by premise two and three, TTOM joins the TOM orthodoxy.

Understanding the world and others to them comes down to the ability to infer and attribute mental states.

That is the summarization of thinking through other minds.

And they are going to call into question on this critical dissection that such a T2M account is indeed making this happy marriage with inactivism.

going to pull on yes any anyone or continue okay they're gonna they're gonna they're gonna pull out on a few different of these premises and what hidden assumptions might be underlying those premises like what axioms lead one to generate such premises the contradiction between p1 and p2 results from two hidden assumptions in that ttom argument so here we see p123 above

And then hidden assumption one, social cognition reduces to information in explicit propositional form, mental representation and description.

They are going to say this, they are feeling this way as a mental representation.

And hidden assumption two, social cognition is hardwired with the concepts and logical tools for inference, for example, at birth

And in the subsequent sections, they're going to analyze and clarify the contradiction between premises one and two, this tension of if social cognition is inactive and embodied, is it really the case or is it a contradictory claim that social cognition cannot be directly grasped by such a social actor?

then going to critically assess from the inactive perspective what problems might underlie these assumptions the hidden assumptions and why an activist reject these hidden assumptions and hence reject the premises listed above and then they're going to be exploring what are these non-representational methods and mechanisms of co-construction in social action they have a markov blanket

a representation visually that we've seen here before with the internal states, external states, and the mediation of internal and external states by blanket states, which as per the Pearl 1988 definition,

are the blanket states making the internal and external states conditionally independent sometimes people go further and describe a friston blanket where the blanket states b are partitioned into two kinds of states sense and active and those two kinds of states are defined by their incoming from the perspective of internal states

statistical dependencies sensory states and outgoing statistical dependencies which can be interpreted as actions or interfaces from the entity or thing towards the niche but we'll come back to markov blankets and more later yes steven go for it


SPEAKER_00:
Just coming back to that, actually the page, the slide before this, but relating to this is when it says things cannot be directly, there's a couple of things that directly be grasped.

Well, I would argue that with that, that's a useful distinction because

when we think about um well we're talking about the grip and the gripper or a pair of pliers and i can't directly grip a hot pipe i need the pliers i can't directly um do a number of things without maybe more than one tool but there's a sense that when we talk about grasping things or when people are thinking about if something is you know to grasp something that is explicitly propositional

know we have other kinds of tools that might be coming to play even when we think about words and the act of ascribing all of these things can be performances with tools at every level so there's a there's an interesting blending going on here depending on how the iceberg gets melted


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

In section 2.1, which you can read in the paper or pause here and capture many aspects of it, they're going to question the assumption that social cognition reduces to mental representation.

And their point can be distilled as understanding others is a matter of being skilled at shared non-explicit meanings and potentially some abductive

ding, ding, ding, and model-based reasoning, all of which are context-specific, modifiable, and dynamic.

And they are going to unpack in the further paragraphs that in there lies an evident contradiction between those first two premises, which is really like the Achilles heel or the soft spot where they're going to be targeting their logic.

In section 2.2, they're going to question that second of the assumptions, which is that social cognition is hardwired from birth.

And so while they do qualify the TTOM position and they say, Vessier do not hold a nativist position, for example, like a pure inborn perspective, because they do have a focus on the developmental and ecological dynamics of how culture is acquired.

they do call into question the acquisition of the starter pack and they are also exploring more in this section some inactivist critiques of for example hardwired perspectives on social cognition in section three

having critiqued assumptions that in their mind highlight the contradiction inherent within thinking through other minds they're going to suggest another relationship oh you don't like that dish let's try this one and this is going to be a approach from dynamical systems theory or dst they write dst

as we shall argue in this section is an approach that serves to learn about and generate predictive power about the socio-culturally situated practices of agents constructing their niche because dst has at its core useful tools such as emergence non-linearity and spontaneity etc it allows us to move away from prefabricated notions of tom theory of mind like theories of social cognition

One should therefore refrain from making ontological assumptions, ontological here being about how things are in the world, so more of the philosopher's ontology rather than the computer science knowledge management sense of ontology.

One should refrain from making these kinds of ontological assumptions licensed by realism,

about the complex system based upon a tractable model.

So just because the model is so tractable doesn't mean that we have the license to make ontological assumptions.

Since the tractable model is an opportunity for learning about the complex behavior, only epistemic claims are allowed.

let us take a closer look at the claim to make it tractable we can represent a dynamical system by a static relationship as follows and here are their equations one two and three with the captions below and they're using these very simple kind of like the kernel of the dynamical systems theory is understanding how things are a function of how they change

broadly, and it's represented in a few different ways in terms of a successor model and more of a rate of change model.

Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
i think this is a very useful point point number three there the bullet point because it also speaks to that sense of this is a modeling approach let's see what the modeling is telling us rather than a model fitting approach which is often you know what ends up happening if you have the defined ontology you know you effectively

pre-assume so many things.

So that's maybe a key piece that links a lot of how things can be bridged in terms of active inference and how it could be held between.

That is a stance in a way.

It's holding the legs apart and saying, okay, am I doing the splits or have I got my legs together?


SPEAKER_03:
right so let's find out rather than you someone expert tell me um and yeah thanks thank you dean yes yeah i just want to add to what stephen was just saying i up to this point i really and i love the paper the it's the constructivist piece though that i think has me pausing for a minute because i believe that in order for

us to be able to make that decision.

Is it the splits?

Or is it a fork?

Is it literally a fork and split instead of having go left to right?

That requires a deconstruction that I think is oftentimes left out prior to a reconstruction.

So again, I'm not arguing with the author, because I think they're respecting the autonomy

And I think they've done a brilliant job of saying, okay, this logic, this deductive path that other authors have taken may not necessarily apply here because it causes too much blending.

So good, good, good.

You're holding up what actually is left and right, but you're leaving out the and.

The and part is it could be a fork that I could literally pick up.

And the only way you can see that is if you can deconstruct before you reconstruct.

And deconstruct doesn't mean differentiate.

That's already present.

Deconstruct literally means the when-ness.

When did I arrive in this moment?

What parts of the puzzle am I still missing because I'm in a hurry to figure out if I'm supposed to go left or right next?

Especially in the social context, especially there.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, Stephen, if you would like to give a quick point here.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Jim.

Just adding to that.

that piece of the situationalness um i'm believe that's where you come into the awareness of what's going on so science is very much telling us what's going on what is a thing what is this what is that but that fork in the road or being you know a team teammates junction or something else ultimately there's awareness piece

where is that situated and in active inference that's often more complex nebulous with the scientific being about the accuracy of the method well other times the awareness and the complexity comes in active inference can have both of those yeah great continuing on through the latter parts of the paper


SPEAKER_02:
they talk a lot about complexity, which many of us love.

So complexity, complexity science, complexity theory bring so many great terms, concepts, people, methods, tools, ideas, everything.

And they talk a lot about autopoiesis and this recursiveness.

There's a lot of really creative linkages made in the inactive paper and complexity is used in a really valuable way.

In section four,

they're going to move into active inference in an inactive dynamic setting and that is where active inference is going to be deployed as an insightful instrument to learn about and understand the dynamics underlying cultural co-constructions considering it does not necessarily take agents as passive agents together are the authors of the states of one another and so

kind of analogous to the inactive figures shown earlier, where we had the gears in the head, and then that went to like the gears being more distributed in the body and in the mind.

Here in figure two, there's more of a classical meaning and model-based reasoning where different social actors are kind of having this inferential account that is very like one directional as shown here with the arrow pointing just to the middle.

And in figure three, they're depicting the social action in figure two under active inference in terms of labeling here the internal states of the social actor two

and the external states being social actor one.

So this is from the perspective of social actor two, where the blanket states are being framed as sociocultural meaning and that model-based reasoning, which opens up for inferential accounts that are distributed and enacted.

And...

Hopefully we'll go into more detail because this is where they are supporting their positive instrumentalist application of active inference into the social and active space.

And then they write, characterizing a social scene as analogous to scientific practice is thereby a mischaracterization.

It's almost like taking what happens in the laboratory in a certain context and even a certain view on what happens in the laboratory in a certain context.

comma, in a certain context, and then critiquing that and thinking a bit more expansively about what happens in the hallways of the laboratory and in the basement and in the world around the building.

And that is also really nicely connected to some of Jelle Brunberg et al's work on the anticipating brain is not a scientist, which also focuses on the inactive perspective from an ecological perspective, not only necessarily the social, but the social is an important case.

in table one they're going to discuss a little bit more about some of the dividers and contents of cells related to the natural world and scientific tools and constructs

For sure, we're gonna return here in subsequent discussions.

So just check out table one, see what you think.

What other lines would you draw?

Would they be kind of like curved lines, like look like letters?

Would you circle anything?

Would you draw some triangles?

Would you add another row?

Would you make it a tensor?

What else would you draw on table one, even if only another double bounding line to emphasize that it's perfect as is?

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
All I would say is if you do go and have a look at this, ask yourself why these hyperparameters and why these laterals?

Because I think that will lead to all kinds of, well, for me, it just got me so twisted around.


SPEAKER_02:
Fun.

Okay.

And then conclusion before we move to the second paper.

We have shown that holding both in activism and theory of mind entails contradiction and confusion.

This is evident when we critically dissect the two hidden assumptions held by TOM-like theories such as TTOM, which are rejected by inactivism.

Those two covert assumptions that they believe disrepute the linkage.

And then they reiterate the co-constructive nature and the embedded and ecological components of social inaction.

and the recursion and the unfolding through time, the rolling out of social inaction.

And they suggest that dynamical systems theory and active inference instrumentally applied as a type of dynamical systems modeling has promise and is a suitable and complimentary tool to consider social understanding as generalized synchronization held in a certain way.

that was that paper and it will now be paired with the abductive paper so one breath before we move into abduction yes stephen


SPEAKER_00:
Taking that breath, that last sentence there about how it can be almost a bridge there, the complementary use of dynamical systems theory sort of fills a gap.

They're sort of filling the gap.

And in a way, I think as we talk about the abduction paper, some of the gaps that doesn't fill

I know we're not trying to talk about filling gaps here, but let's say we're filling gaps, abduction might also fill.

So, you know, the beauty of active influence and the Bayesian approach is that lots of different scales and modalities can be weighted and blended to give you potentially a feel of what to do, right?

So it doesn't mean one excludes the other.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, into abduction.

We abduce away.

The paper begins with a relatively short and very concise introduction to some of the key points of the paper.

We described earlier in their aims that they're interested in this naturalistic rendering of some of C.S.

Peirce's later, e.g.

post-1903 or post-1905, mostly unpublished work, unpacking the semiotic and logical notions of abductive reasoning, which we covered in the context section.

They're aiming for this biological model of abduction, which is going to

thread the needle, weave the fabric, whatever it is that maintains the functional integrity of the organism, the evolutionary imperative for that living being's existence, and to be compatible with modern neuroscience.

They focus on the allegiance and the alliance, which we talked about earlier.

And they'll introduce also in the introduction, the Markov blanket concept, which will be a great point of juxtaposition to add a little bit more detail.

Like if it is a front, a contact front with active inference, with social inaction and abduction,

then these are like hot points or points of contact within the interface front to really zoom in.

Okay, how is internal state being used in these two models?

And that's where the active inference ontology is of immense value because even when people are speaking in different languages or we have a computer program, an equation, a poem, and then a scientific paper,

when we can link and proactively use or proactively annotate with the active inference ontology we gain the ability to not just say well we're both pointing at the moon is your finger my finger or are we pointing at the same finger because it's so far away and so maybe it's a little bit off and your your ray is missing the moon from my point of view and so on instead we can actually get down and not

bleed out on the operating table, but rather pin down transiently and find a tractor that helps us really go into that intersection rather than merely hitting and running with just points of resonance.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Again, I'll just summarize that by saying we can situationally analyze better because we now actually have a way of being able to hold some calm and


SPEAKER_00:
thing together so that's all i want to add to what you just said and just adding one on to that as well is yeah sorry but um and where there may be a difference so you know like there could be this understanding of a lot of the terms the ontological understanding say what often is a problem is if there's something that's not

aligned but is just not noticed or is brushed over say okay this is different okay there's an ontological change here there's a way there's there's there's a way for that to be attractively like we have with active influence it's a tractable way to do it because otherwise there's so many ontological things floating around in this space which is its beauty but it's it's not cognitively possible to find what you need to look at


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

The next section, again, with these two lights co-illuminating, co-constructing, no two lights can physically overlap.

So there must be parallax induced by these two lights and shadows and all kinds of effects.

And maybe it's not the same wavelength and maybe you're walking around and different sides have different illuminations.

The section is on active inference in the light of abduction.

this is very fascinating section because they're going to take that almost quasi-algorithmic but certainly pre-computational framework being developed in the latter 1800s and early 1900s and start to interface

and see how it relates to active inference.

So we can highlight more and we'll look forward to discussing in further sections.

So do pause it if you want to read all of this or read the paper.

But they're focusing on the late schema.

Yes, please, Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
All I was going to say is it's mood lighting.

If you actually look down at the bottom bullet, the lighting is actually trying... Purse talked about it.

Maybe, I don't know if he actually did have the formalisms to back that up.

But active inference actually does now talk about the kind of level of energy that we can now maybe see within the two constraints, that idea of parameterizing, back to the vice grip sort of thing.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

So just a few quotes that are really fascinating here.

So in science, abduction can be likened to the logic of discovery of hypotheses

which as we discussed earlier, has a generative creative element and then a secondary selective component like Bayesian model selection, Bayesian model reduction.

And they even add with a cautionary remark that no full assimilation of Pearson abduction can occur to IVE.

That's inference to the best explanation, which is one half of the two stroke engine.

And commonly people will use abduction to refer to probabilistic reasoning from a given set.

like abduction elsewhere in the writings this later schema those ones that are after 1903 that according to experts have been the least researched ones there's beginning with an observation of surprising factor events observation surprise and through a conditional major premise

includes in a co-hortative mood again a mood which peers termed the invest against it's like it has and right in it and that is that something of imperative importance ought to be done pragmatism inaction policy selection initially aroused by curiosity uncertainty reduction entropy that leads to the formulation of a question which is semantic

And there's more discussion of the investigand mood and other moods.

Yes, Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
One other quick thing.

Cohortive or co-constructed from the other paper, again, share a common prefix that we, again, I think we'll maybe be able to tease some more of that, the importance of that in the next few lectures.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

they're going to continue with this question of the economy of research so they formed three argumentative cores really specified areas of contact with active inference and abduction that they're suggesting form an initial trio or triad that will start to form the allegiance between active and abductive inference

First, the presence of non-degeneratively triadic relations, then the utilization of the leading principles of abductive reasoning, B, and third, the subjunctive conditional formulation.

There are some logical technicalities thrown around, but that's what the streams are for.

In point A, which you can pause and read the text of,

they're going to highlight the Markov blanket concept or rather their realist interpretation as frist and blankets and argue that the Markov blankets again implemented in a realist first and blanket sense have a markedly piercing irreducibly triadic form

focusing on the boundary as mediator between external and internal states, and therefore the thirdness arising in semiosis.

There's a lot more to say, but if either of you want to give one more point on A. Okay, in B, they're going to continue on by talking about some of the guiding principles of inference, and specifically discuss abduction's role in guiding inference.

What is the leading principle of active inferences then?

Here, they're going to describe some technical details of active inference in terms of free energy, variational or expected, as bounding surprise.

And then they'll connect that to some of the primary sources of Peirce and discussions of biosemiotics, which have also been connected in a lot of discussions that we've had on representation and meaning and so on.

it goes even further or deeper afield with discussions of synechism as well as this question of universal mind which is for staging in some ways the universal cognition pan-cognitive dynamics distributed cognitive systems matter is effect mind by von schiller

And then they're going to argue about Frist and Blankets and their construction in terms of triadic relationships, Pearson triad, sign, object, interpret, ant, leads to unexplored semantic possibilities.

Bringing together some of these broader qualitative threads in semiotic analysis with potentially dynamical systems theory, quantitative Bayesian methods, and everything else that active inference brings along with the toolkits to implement.

And C, they're also in C going to unpack some extremely interesting, though nuanced, logical, constructive elements of the semiotic proposition, if I could call it that.

We'll go into it more in further discussions, but they're going to explore how different framings of logical relationships amongst clauses or assertions and warrants and all this rhetoric relate to realism, abduction, and Pierce's version of realism as the possible is what can become actual.

yes there are things that are possible but cannot become actual and then what do we use for that adjacent or realizable possible and

Where might we want to use it?

And what's going to break that symmetry?

Where's pragmatism?

Well, what would be useful to consider would be the space of all possibles that could happen and none other, and not be surprised by adjacent possibles that we didn't consider, but did happen.

And then maybe it's not so bad to spend a little bit of extra thought or a few extra computer resources on considering possibilities that couldn't happen

but we wouldn't want to get lost in the potentially exponential space of possibilities that can't happen and end up losing our focus and attention on possibilities that can happen, which are what Peirce describes as real possibilities.

And the pragmatist stance

and mood, also closes the loop with policy selection and pragmatism in active inference, where they say that the pragmatist meaning of beliefs in the Bain-Peirce formulation is that upon which one is capable of acting.

And there's a lot of resonances there.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think this also speaks then to the need to have

talk about scale friendly or levels or you know some sort of structure that enables this to be present because you know active influence can sort of go all the way down in the down to the cellular level there's ways of looking at it here there's a sense that okay we're looking at these um ideas of um a signifier

we know with active inference it's not that it believes that we have signals coming in which get processed and aggregated so there's there's a sort of a scale at which you have the structures that you have the the morphogenesis maybe to get to and the scale to make the stop sign make sense to be interpreted um as a as its own

signifier so i think that may be where there's this um tension going to happen between the inactivists here and and where that can happen but the argument could well i would say is that certain scales certain structures and maybe certain realist ways of things happening something like that is feasible


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

Just Dean, and then we'll quickly move through the rest.


SPEAKER_03:
I'll just be real quick here.

I think especially in B and to a lesser extent in C, the business of how we take piercing thinking into the active inference realm is built on an assumption.

And that is that our continuing existence, our continuing reality, um,

means that we're accumulating more experiences with the tools in the world, the rules in the world, and the pools.

And by pools, I mean those aggregations that Stephen was just pointing to.

Thank you for bringing that up, Stephen, because that made me want to write this down.

Aggregations as densities, tail of two densities, materializing.

So again, I don't know that you...

exclusively say everything is real and then all the examples underneath it are also real because even Pierce himself said that there is an aspect of this reality which we will never be able to describe as anything other than non-reality, even though we're fundamentally using it.

So how does that enable these densities to form?

And I know that sounds way the heck and gone out there,

I'm sorry, but it's actually something we have to contemplate.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
They're then going to flip the script, or at least the syntax, and talk about abduction in the light of active inference.

Here is where they kick off with that acknowledgement of the two-stroke engine with generative abduction and selective abduction.

And then they're going to connect that to some of the ontology of active inference in terms of like seeing selective abduction as a sampling process and understanding where generative abduction fits in.

So continuing on with seeing abduction from the light of active inference, which we might even operationalize as saying like framing or viewing abduction from the perspective of the active inference ontology.

So rather than us self-electing as interpretants of active inference as some concept, which we cannot necessarily speak for a concept,

can't speak for english but we can use english words and so analogously we don't need to necessarily speak for active inference though i'm the last to say what those should or shouldn't do it's possible to use the active inference ontology and then it's kind of like a two-step checklist was the term in the active inference ontology in the core supplement or entailed sections

Was it used in a way that was pragmatic, that made sense in that situation, in that multi-scale context?

And that is actually a two-step process to ask if we're speaking using active inference rather than if we're speaking for like an advocate or like a salesperson for active inference per se.

And they're going to restate the case in terms of the FVP framework in the sense of and using the terms of.

and they're going to highlight the relationship of internal states to external states mediated through the blanket.

And they then go through this syllogism and they restructure and restate their qualitative schema of abductive active inference.

And they describe this action cognition perception loop where a surprisal, any incoming sensory information is experienced

And then they take that not just into the passive or even active interpretation of it in the context of a Bayesian generative model, but rather something that is unfolding in that mood of the investigant.

They do continue on and bring in important Pearson idea of the economy of research

So we'll go over this again, hopefully with authors.

It relates to Pierce's theory of science.

Pierce's original paper in 1876 on the economy of research wrote, the doctrine of economy in general treats the relationships between utility and cost.

specifically that is going to be related to research in this socially enacted pragmatic sense by asking how given expenditure of money time and energy what is going to obtain the most valuable addition to knowledge what experiment that my eyes could secade to will have the most information gain

what experiments could the researcher carry out to reduce their uncertainty the most about the natural system not merely to verify something they know not merely to falsify something that they know will be falsified but rather to exist in this optimal experimentation space and then pierce and later the authors are going to naturalize contextualize

bring to the social cognitive area by asking, well, how does money, time, and energy happen?

Because that optimal experiment is encultured and it uses energy, it uses reagents.

So perhaps in this way, we could say that Pierce was one of the first modern program managers for a major funding agency, but no, he wasn't.

And they discussed this economy of research a bit more.

They describe in this section how Peirce promotes several values or virtues or qualities that characterize the economy of scientific hypothesis making.

Incomplexity, which is like a de-risking.

Breadth, which speaks to unification.

and caution as the economic quality of avoiding diminishing marginal returns by skillfully breaking down questions into a series of small questions that can be answered with reasonable limits of investment.

How many interesting threads are being brought together?

For example, questions that are broken down to binary yes, no questions can be connected to information theory and quantum as well.

Here, Dean, I will let you speak to fairness.


SPEAKER_03:
I'll just read it.

To be fair, and as briefly noted at the beginning of this paper, there are no instrumentalist interpretations of FEP and its ingredients, such as Markov blankets.

But, and this is a footnote in this paper, but our faith, for want of a better word, in realist credentials of FEP has its roots in the pragmatist optimism, or rather, its active meliorism,

about the gains from the alliance between evolutionarily useful processes that contribute to maximizing survival.

If this pragmatist approach to realism displeases the elevated taste of one who looks for some staunch metaphysical criteria, let a thousand flowers bloom.

I think what's fascinating about this is that to hold the idea that there is a realism is a very easily defendable position to take.

But even in the previous slide, one of the things that first talked about without saying them directly, or at least not in those quotes, was that that optimal position is some element of exploitation or economy or simplicity or somebody's done this before me.

Is that a shortcut?

And exploration, which tends to take longer, has more trial and error.

but also doesn't have you constantly overfitting to a particular outcome.

So that's the reality.

And again, I wouldn't push back on the claim that there is a very real piece to this playing play, a minimum of two going back and forthness.

So I'm not, in fact, I fully agree with these authors, like I fully agree

with the other authors about the idea of a co-construction.

So I don't know that you are necessarily confused if you can say yes and yes and yes again.


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen?

Yeah, sort of adding to what Dean's saying there, and the idea of implementation or...

Exploitation definitely is being alluded to.

And in science, experimentation is sort of the way of gaining knowledge.

But there's the exploration piece, and I would argue that

you can't get exploration per se within the kind of objective domain there has to be this journey into the into the into the performative subjective intersubjective liminal

as Einstein did with his mind games or these and you create these sort of mental constructs in a way what some of what's happening today is a mixture of that and then that's brought back and modeled experimented with or whatever um so I think there's a I mean modeling is interesting because

it kind of can come on that journey a little bit as well.

So that could be something which experiments can't do.


SPEAKER_02:
Here's a summary of an old joke.

Person A says A, and the referee says you're right.

Person B says B, the referee says you're right.

And person C says, well, A and B can't be right.

And the referee says, you know, you're right.

little rapid humor for those who like that genre um they then have a conclusion section and we have many questions and points to make and a lot of connections to bring back to a lot of the naturalization here like the fields and leaven work and they even take it to the regenerative capacities of flatworms so from flatworms to flatmates

That's where we're going today.

And then we also saved up for the dot one, some of the juxtaposition of the Markov blanket concept specifically.

The social and active components of science, which are super important and Majeed has brought on to these discussions previously, is a great point of contact with the abductive paper and the social and active paper.

Markov blankets represent like a very constrained, even technical, contact front that will provide a lot of discussion in the dot one.

and that is where we close the dot zero with uh again so much excellent groundwork and backpack packing by dean and steven so is there anything else you'd like to add at this point or anything arising that you want to discuss in the dot one yes dean then steven if you'd like


SPEAKER_03:
Daniel, fantastic job.

We just did an order of magnitude three from what was typically a single paper live stream, and we still got it in under two hours.

So you're to be applauded for that.

And secondly, I just want to, maybe as a bit of a tip off for the dot one, there's a research by the name of Iskra Nunez, who talks about if you want to be able to look at how things are deconstructed and constructed, you have to look at both product in process and

An example being, how do I build a car and process in product?

What is the thing that's either a branching point or an actual utensil?

And so if you open your mind up to both that inversion along that continuum, it opens up all kinds of possibilities in terms of bringing things into a place where they don't necessarily come into conflict.

Yes, they can integrate and braid.

And so maybe that will be, after today, something that people who are using active inference, which in my opinion is both product and process and process and product at the same time.

It's the gripper and the gripped.

Maybe they will give some thought over to that.


SPEAKER_02:
It's almost like the pragmatist sees the fork in the road and uses it.

And maybe you use the fork by going one way and maybe you do pick it up.

Maybe you use it by completing the table setting for someone else who will dine there.

And so there's so many ways to use because use is socially enacted, abductive, contextualized, et cetera.

And again, at the fork is where that conversation is happening.

And at our field site or at base camp is where we can imagine the forks and the roads that will come across Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah and next in the in the dot one sort of finding a way to to bring the authors if whoever's there you know on a bit of a journey maybe down one of the forks maybe it goes to the edge of the lake and we need to get in and get a bit wet um so how can scientific

abduction or some of the sort of more scientifically bounded models rules substantiated by experimentation and instrumentation okay when when does that get moved away maybe because of participation maybe because of transdisciplinarity maybe because of transformational processes maybe because of deep exploration outside of the field um i wonder this is something you might want to think about how can we

give some sort of clear journey options, right, so that they can come a little bit off without getting stuck in a, you know, in quicksand or drowning in the deep water, right.

So we want to sort of navigate by thing this, this is given some of those pointers, I think of where there is sort of ways off ramps as well as on ramps.

So thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, fellows.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
This was huge.

I really, really appreciate all your help.


SPEAKER_02:
Great times.

See you in the dot one.

## 1yYFJnf_mHY

SPEAKER_03:
all right hello and welcome everyone it is act inf live stream number 47.1 on august 10th 2022 and we're continuing our explorations into the paper dyad inactive dynamic social cognition and active inference of hippolyta and vaness and active inference and abduction by pia tarnan and benny

welcome to the act inf institute we're a participatory lab and institute that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference links are on the slide this is recorded in an archive live stream so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams

Head over to ActiveInference.org to learn more about other projects at the Institute and how to participate and join learning groups.

Today in stream 47.1, we're continuing to learn and discuss this pair of papers mentioned earlier and on the previous video.

And we're going to open with some introductions and then probably just jump in wherever anyone has a new question they'd like to ask.

Maybe ending the introductions with Blue so that you can bring a new vector into the conversation.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California and I'm looking forward to

taking a dot one lens a little bit to the paper which had an extended dot zero as there isn't so much to learn on a few of these angles and so much to kind of think about that um what is the difference between

being in the bathtub and then in the middle of the paper pair versus, for example, coming into it to contextualize it or tried to leave it to apply it.

Something in between even there.

I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, I'm Dean.

I'm here in Calgary.

I don't know if I don't know what the dot one means because we've never done a dot one where we've tried to pull two things, put them proximal and see what happens.

Because sometimes that's fire and water and just get a lot of steam.

And sometimes it's nitro and glycerin and the whole thing blows up on you.

So I'm kind of looking forward to that.

That's kind of the risky part that I think is kind of exciting.

I'll pass it over to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, thanks, Dean.

Yeah, Stephen here.

I'm in Toronto.

I'm really curious around what this infusion of two different approaches to active influence can yield.

So what's behind it all?

What's behind an approach of an activism that brings in instrumentalism

or an approach that's more mathematically focused, bringing in realism.

So I'm curious, and hopefully it's going to be useful and practical.

I'm going to pass it over to Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Blue.

I'm in New Mexico.

I really enjoyed reading.

So I've read the, I think we did the Hippolyto paper before on another live stream.

And so I've read that one before, but I really enjoyed reading this abduction and active inference paper.

I do not have like a strong philosophy background.

So I kind of come at this like with a, what is this?

What is that?

Like I have to go search Wikipedia a hundred million times to kind of get more information.

about from a philosophical aspect.

And so one of the key things like where I was having a hard time like locking in on this abduction paper, active inference and abduction is why do Friston blankets, like, like,

they presented, the authors presented it as if the frist and blankets like necessitate a realist perspective.

So is that true?

And if so, why is that?


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

Thanks, everyone.

So two threads blew in what I heard.

And I think two areas for us to kind of

get on the slide and and see at the same time so one was like different approaches that can be taken both by an individual like different backgrounds in different fields or disciplines and then kind of going beyond one person's just learning trajectory and thinking what are the conceptual approaches that we can take to in this case active inference but this might be

studying active inference and applying active inference kind of both ways might come into play and then the question of the first and blankets something like what aspects of what enable a situational realist or a instrumentalist why are people taking the stances they're taking


SPEAKER_00:
on a given situation sometimes even like mixed across different contexts for the same system they might use one or another or something like that stephen and this brings action back into the equation i sense that action is is quite important because the idea of instrumentalism is in a way is there's a use of

sort of an instrument, and that's the best way to think of what's happening with the blankets.

Actually, Lou, I think it's really cool that you brought the blankets up because that question comes in an active way.

It's like the temptation is to make everything realist, and then it's like, okay, we've got a blanket, so it's kind of like, well,

maybe we should make sure we keep the blanket question in an instrumental way to avoid all those traps.

And then on the other side, it's like, on the math side, it's like, well, these potentially fundamental dynamics

Well, as they're being acted in some way, they must have some relation to reality in some way.

So it's sort of almost the mirror.

It's not the mirror, but it's something that's sitting on the other side in an interesting way.

I don't know what Dean thinks on that point.


SPEAKER_01:
I was going to mention that I think if we are taking two papers and actually

doing a bit of a what happens when they get entangled thing.

We're looking at what happens when something is actively inferred as a process, as opposed to active inference as a subject matter or topic.

And so when we do that, we're essentially asking the big questions on one of the next slides here is, so is active inference both as process, as actively inferring, and of process?

Something falls out of that.

And we asked it using the metaphor of being both a gripper, right?

Something as processing and of process, being gripped.

And so, yeah, I think if we actually look at it as what's going on, not just from the doing sense, but from the observing sense or participatory sense, I think it leaves us with no choice but to say that there's gotta be some going back and forth between both, but that's just my take.


SPEAKER_02:
So let me read this quote from the paper, specifically going back to the blanket, the one that set off my question bell that's unanswered.

It says, OK.

According to recent interpretations of the FEP, the dynamical interaction of living systems and the external world under active inference can be interpreted semantically, this is a Ramstad 2020 citation, by assuming that sensory states are meaningful representations of the reality.

This is especially the case if we assume that the development of Markov blankets by Friston

unlike their original characterization in works of Judea Pearl on probabilistic causal networks, admit a realist interpretation of the relationship between the organism and the environment.

So it says, while the role of the concepts of Markov blankets and Pearl blankets in many treatments of the free energy principle is an instrumentalist one, or as in Pierce's even stronger terms,

concede to a nominalist interpretation of their meaning.

Frist and Blankets are realist, not only in the non-instrumentalist sense, but also in the sense of being non-nominalist entities.

The modal terms of references to real possibilities, such as what is conceivable or produced by imagination or anticipatorily related to the future states of affairs, are used in making sense of the key aspects of the theory.

And so in my recollection, the Friston blanket, like I didn't have that linked to realism necessarily per se.

So Daniel, like maybe can, do you have any more clarification?

Like, is that like a realist, a Friston blanket is a realist interpretation of the pearl blanket or, or am I just forgetting that?


SPEAKER_03:
When I read that part, I didn't know what nominalism was.

so according to the summary the view that universals and abstract objects do not actually exist other than being merely names or labels one version denies the existence of universals the other the abstract so it's an anti-generalist position so let's see where that was used with the frist and blanket

because this is the um crux of the discussion like one of the frontiers of contact other than just saying well inactivism and dynamical systems theory work like this coarsely or this broad area math and chemistry work together like this this is starting to get into the real contact points of turf semantically that are being

vied over people have different perspectives on how to interpret base graphs in different contexts and so then the markov blanket is like it still might even be too coarse grained to for that whole turf to be controlled by one view or another so then let's look at how

the abduction paper and anything else that you see where would it be more justified just in your sense um what and then we'll unpack this because i think this was just copied in to discuss today

since it's obviously a clear area where both papers are talking about their view on the Markov blanket which might make it clearer to see how multiple views on blankets and graphs come into play but let's unpack both of their perspectives


SPEAKER_02:
the nominalist interpretation.

And as you're unpacking that, like it's something I didn't have to look up because it's a very prominent theme in Buddhism, right?

Like that, you know,

it's like the absence of any kind of inherent existence, like that existence is nominal.

And so it's interesting that in this abduction paper that they take this, this, you know, construction by Pierce of nominalism, but, but also like more than once in that paper, they point to an objective reality, which is like, if, if,

if things are interpreted, if all stuff is nominally interpreted, then what is the subjective reality other than like linguistics or semantics or perhaps semiotics?

Yeah, so.


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen?

that's a very good point um because it also ties back you mentioned about um when we're talking there about the relationship almost being the reality i sense that they were kind of saying if there's a relationship those relational dynamics or they didn't use the word dynamics therefore

have some can be called real, you know, which I think is a fair assertion in some senses.

Although, you know, again, there could be an overextension because there's a question about how much you go up into transcendental and how much you go down

into the kind of more morphology and the whole morphogenesis and there's actually a really good there's a there's a um hector lazaba he's actually it does a lot of work with theater the oppressed and work with you know people have been tortured and stuff like that and he talks about um the medicine is in the wounds the medicine is in the wounds when people get you know

former etc.

And one of the things that's interesting there is that we may be in a culture, there's times when we might try to explain things or do transcendental work to transcend a situation or avoid us and we may actually avoid a situation.

But sometimes, when you go into the wound, what you might find is is literally a bloody mess.

So that may not be real in the normal sense.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
I'll just add to that a little bit.

I think it's interesting that most representations of Markov blankets show the Markov blanket in between two distinct sets of properties.

And that's always represented on the horizontals.

And I think what's interesting here is that if you find yourself in a debate situation of two top-down perspectives, one that says it must be from the top-down inactive, or it must be from the top-down some series or set of different logics applied depending upon

your familiarity with what it is that you're observing, that can lead to that whole question of hierarchy and then what entails the other.

So for me, it's pretty easy to understand why people who take the exclusive position of instrumentalism as entailing something like logic,

or the other hierarchical relationship of the logic being the real thing, and then the actions to follow, or that's the thing that's being entailed.

I think what the diagrams, what a lot of the pictures tell us, is that there's a lateral aspect to this as well.

And so if we're going to look at that lateral, less

which is enveloping the other top-down view, because both of the views in both of these papers, the bias or the position that the authors take is one of top-down.

What rules under this set of conditions or circumstances?

Placing those two things side by each strips away some of the questions around relativity

And now introduces the idea around relationship, not relationship in terms of power over, but relationship in terms of what needs to be present in order for somebody to be able to actually make fewer prediction errors.

So the Markov blanket, I think, can be turned.

I mean, right now, most of it is perceived as being some sort of a vertical partition between

lateral elements.

I mean, it can be flipped and we've talked often in lots of papers about what's the hierarchical structure, what's the bottom up, what's the top down.

But I think both of these papers admittedly say we are taking a top down view of this and therefore they are constraining themselves to more

emphasis on the relativity aspect of what is going on in an actively inferring way than they are looking at it as a relationship between the sensing and the acting.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

Wow.

A lot of stuff.

let's go through the abduction markov blanket discussion the first part is the statement of context potentially for a philosophical background but it's important that they're placing this along the lines of

autopoiesis in biology so these are systems that are self-perpetuating in a diffusive multi-scale self way perhaps but they're self-creating we're not just taking them as existing in a certain contrived arrangement five minutes ago we're thinking about systems that have maintained a non-equilibrium steady state with their environments

And if someone denies the realism or anything of the environment,

then that can be verbalized and even cognized but it is not enacted by persistent systems either from the view from the inside or like if one just stops breathing or something like that or the view from the outside because again systems with persistent measurements have to be at least doing well enough to persist

amidst the regularities of the environment so this is kind of like grounding it in an evolutionary and developmental framework but connecting it to the non-equilibrium steady state maintenance which is grounding this realism discussion in a relationship with the environment not as like an a priori then there's a definition of markov blanket

the blankets state conditional independence between nodes in a base graph which doesn't mean that influence doesn't travel or that those states aren't semantically about each other but it means that they're conditionally independent in a statistical way external states in Ceboscu not sure this author but the endosemiotic view

would be like potentially meaning on the inside.

Like photons on the retina really are light.

It really is the case that that's the real thing within that facet of biological function.

and internal states described from exosemiotic perspective so perhaps like the interpretive view so view from the inside the true influence of a of a feature and the kind of studying of it view from the outside where those agree you have semiosis like with a stop sign and it means stop in the situation with different entities this speaks directly to active inference

given that the regulation of the entropy of internal states, so all these functions that we're describing as being like bounded or constrained or minimized, are having to do with that interface's surprise.

Control on action, outgoing, and then bounded surprise on perception, which is also very forsaged by like the perceptual control theory and various motor theories, which we've talked about, but like the reflex arc,

challenging the way that people modeled decision-making, for example, then in many treatments, they're agreeing that people take an instrumentalist usage or stance.

Christian blankets are realist not only in the non-instrumentalist sense, opens up a whole discussion with non and anti,

but also in the sense of being non-nominalist entities.

And then in this last quote, it'd be great to hear more from the authors about what the modal terms of reference are, but the part that stands out here is the real possibilities.

Because for these systems with these features engaging in this way,

their cognition can be considered real to the extent it has all of these features and is tied to the environment over time and so on hope that is one view on it because many paragraphs in the abductive paper and in the inactive paper if you really engage with their structured arguments there's so much to like read in between and

to respect the way that they've laid out the argument while also, hopefully now, all seeing interesting ways to connect it.

So, Stephen, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is a little bit sort of feeding back to you, Daniel, so in case you've got a thought on this, because there's the biological aspect here that you're bringing up, and I agree with that.

and you know in the work on the brain kristen's been talking about moving from say a causal correlation to a functional correlation and there can be many ways of getting somewhere when it's functional so then but of course in this case there's a certain element of what's real in terms of what we scientifically because it's scientific realism as a scientist what is real in what's been scientifically deducted

So if it's being deductive, it is a perspective that's being taken.

So within the perspective that's being taken on certain states, non-equilibrium steady states, where is that regime of attention, the scientific regime of attention, purely an instrument to be considered, or is it for the things it's analysing, that could be real?

So there could be sort of a get-out clause, yet there could still be phenomenon rather than perspectives and logic sitting underneath that, which have many dynamics to get to the same outcome.

So what's your thoughts on that, Daniel?


SPEAKER_03:
My thought is I want to hear what Blue and Dean would say on it.


SPEAKER_00:
OK, go on.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, Dean first.


SPEAKER_01:
Go ahead.

Go ahead, Luke.


SPEAKER_02:
No, go for it, Dean.

I want to hear what you have to say.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, well, here's an interesting thing about both papers, and maybe the authors of the papers will push back hard on this, but great, that's what I'm used to.

Both papers take a scientific perspective on this, very much a scientific perspective, which in my books is easily...

as an idiom is when I see it, I'll believe it.

They want the evidence, right?

They want it.

They want that sort of inductive deductive piece to sort of sit front and center.

They want proof, which is great.

I get that.

But what I think is really fascinating about this is while they are holding up that, that epistemic priority, they're also talking a lot about

I'll invert that and they say, I'll believe it when I see it.

So there's a lot of faith in this.

It hasn't materialized yet, but if I continue to exist in a social setting or as an agent, guess what?

I got to have faith that all this time that keeps rolling out, I'm going to continue for whatever purposes, goals, or directives I'm taking to

to work through the not seeing it until I actually arrive at that moment where something materializes and I can say, oh, now I have the evidence.

So both papers have a real, they play with themselves, they dance with themselves in the sense that they are both papers from an explicit standpoint saying we are looking at this scientifically and mathematically,

And yet, in order for us to be able to hold on to this thought or idea of the FEP being, you know, I'm whatever called steady state.

I've just lost the expression.


SPEAKER_03:
Non-equilibrium.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Non-equilibrium state-state.

I do have to believe in something in order for whatever materialization goal or outcome I'm moving towards, if that's homeostasis or allostasis or I want a sandwich five minutes from now, I have to believe in that thing or my agency or my ability to achieve or attain before I can actually have the thing.

So from that view alone,

I find it really interesting that there's a certain amount of naivete in both papers.

There's a kind of a, we have to tip our hat to this rookie view that every time we realize something, there has to be a little bit of faith or a little bit of belief in what's going on.

Those priors actually exist and I'm going to use them because I want to carry out whatever my priorities are.

And it doesn't matter whether it's the top downiness of abduction and logic or the top downiness of an activism.

They both tip their hat to the bottom upiness of I got to kind of have a confidence that even if it's not here now, at some point, it will either continue the way I want it to or whatever change I want to impose on it, I have that capacity to

to wait it out and have that thing happen.

So yeah, that's what I would add to what Stephen was saying.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Yes.

So I'll say a couple of things.

I was looking at just now the difference between a Fristin, like what is a Fristin blanket?

And I came across a paper that we're going to have to discuss.

It's called Scientific Realism About Fristin Blankets Without Literalism.

And it's by Kiverstein and Kirchhoff.

So someday we're going to have to have that.

It's a preprint up on Philosophical Archive now.

So apparently like having a real...

boundary can be like literal, like there's like a literal interpretation or a realist interpretation.

And so just like, I'm still trying to narrow down, like, what is this realist interpretation of a Friston blanket?

And yeah.

So in also a very real sense, like what is the real boundary of a living thing?

I can't find my real boundary.

Where do I stop and something else begins?

There are hundreds and trillions, I don't even know, more non-human cells in my body than there are human cells.

So I always have to come back to this.

So what would I be without all of those non-human things?

Are those non-human things also me?

But then I'm constantly like...

ingesting new ones and excreting old ones.

And so like, and they're coming into my skin and leaving my skin.

So where is my boundary?

Like, do I have to have this boundary in order for active inference and like the Markov blanket interpretation to apply?

I don't know that that's necessarily true.

So like, I can just get off of it.

I love this paper and I love like the semiotic interpretation in like the abductive sense, like, but does it even really matter?

Like, like,

So the realist interpretation, like to someone who doesn't believe in like a shared objective reality is never going to work.

Or like, can you find the boundary?

Like, what is this line between self and other or like between like, like I can't find the boundary.

So like for me, it's all a modeling perspective that doesn't lessen the impact of this abduction is active inference paper for me at all.

Like, like I really thought it was a great paper.

and has a lot of really cool things to say about cognition and perception.

So, like, why are we hung up on this still?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, both of you go for it, and then I'll add some notes.


SPEAKER_00:
Could I just add one more, Daniel?

I mean, I think, well, I agree totally with Dean on this bottom-up thing,

phenomenon you know that's that's going to be there in the background right maybe it's always going to be unknowable apart from some of these simulations giving us insight but i think also what blue is saying there is for me this whole boundary question is where there's the problem with the systems

discussion, in terms of that being kind of naturalised.

And I think that it because you end up with because systems are defined that way, what's inside what's outside.

And for me, the big revelation, and I think for a lot of people, maybe in the biological sciences, it's not so unusual to think this way.

But to think about agent based modelling, to think about where where's the agent, where's the agency, the teleology.

And that

Agency doesn't necessarily sit on a boundary in the same way that systems tend to.

mean someone can argue that it doesn't have to and i'm sure it doesn't but it ends it nearly always ends up there right in reality in terms of discourse so um you know we want that discourse to be clear we're doing this work with systems engineering to have it where we want these clear divisions for the purpose of ontological discourse so we know what we're talking about and why however which is where maybe there's a challenge this agent

agency, teleology, morphological dynamics are something else than that.

I'll pass that to Daniel, and maybe his answer will come in somewhere.

I'm not sure.


SPEAKER_03:
Dean first, then I'll go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
I'll be real quick here.

So in some of the diagrams, and Daniel, you're really good at this.

Some of the diagrams, the Markov blanket is literally an oval with the word discrepancy in it.

And so all I would add on to what Blue was saying is that if you want a hard physical boundary and you want to discover what that is, I think you're looking at it again.

Where does one thing end and another thing start as a relativity question?

What I'm suggesting is,

if you're looking at the bottom up and the top down as relationship, not as a, which is, which is more powerful or holds more influence over the other.

If you're looking at it as a relationship, then it's that relationship holds as a discrepancy zone.

It's not necessarily something that has a physical beginning and end.

It's kind of, it's kind of fluid and it, and it's, it's not,

to say we shouldn't look at the relativity piece at all.

It is to say, let's have one eye on the relativity piece and the other eye on the relationship piece, the discrepancy between.

It doesn't lend itself to hard stops.

It's discrepancy.

That's all that is.

That's just what it is.

It means we're not sure about anything other than they're different.

We don't know where...

where the separation boundary is, but that's kind of where this whole, let's bring these two papers together thing came from, because if we're actively inferring, we can bound around that discrepancy.

It doesn't always have to be a partition.

That's what the affordance is here, potentially, if we can have two things being held simultaneously or co-occurring.


SPEAKER_03:
all right wow well a lot there well first for the discrepancies textbook figure two three discrepancy not a blanket or discrepancy as blanket of blanket etc and uh that can be a continuous or discrete value but in non-idealized like non-singular path of least action settings

aka real settings there's always a non-zero value so that's one way to leave the door always a little open in a way that just having two feet on zero or one or any rapid switching strategies of zeros and ones doesn't really capture that in the same way then blue great question like

We asked a little bit about, at the beginning, what is leading someone to consider something like a blanket in a realist or an instrumentalist light, and pointed to factors like the persistence of the organism and the reality of the action in flow with its environment.

So it kind of forces somebody to say, well,

if the environment is real then the entity and the actions and the semiosis of their actions are real if stop signs are real and stopping at a stop sign is real and they're all part of a non-equilibrium steady state

What further realism does one want to know than that?

Like, there is a territory.

And then this is the maps of the territory.

So is someone going to go all the way into territory skepticism?

Or how will they then reframe their stance?

Then on just a few other random pieces, this was in Livestream 3 when we read about communication in Active Inference.

and they are which is a lot of in the social inaction setting that we're bringing this abductive light to the social inactive setting that's really like expounded upon in the hippolyto and vaness paper that that goes into a lot of the scientific and philosophical aspects of social um so here they're borrowing from the framework of tinbergen's four questions

and providing multiple scales of analysis that are all like the four y's and these four y's are kind of like a two by two quadrant and so then that allows in biology parallel research agendas and integration because like the fact that brain regions are connected to each other up here on the mechanism side

is part of the picture but it's a yes and with the pattern of dna divergence times like you could imagine situations where they're correlated or not and they could be causated or not and it could be either way of causation or a confounding factor or any other number of things and then neither of those have a direct closed door on like what the bird song sounds like so without even going into what the bird song is like interpreted as

there still is space within that interpretive or semiotic scientific approach that is hopefully as we can explore considering the research and the application in a different way than it's been partitioned in certain specific analyses in the past

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
So I'll throw something out there, knowing that I have not really thought about it more than while I was listening to you talking.

So if it's completely wrong, somebody can correct me really quickly.

I think it's really interesting that both of these papers provide what I would consider to be a stable or a stabilizing effect on what

we might describe as something resembling strategy for the potential for strategy.

What I'm always thinking about is that strategy is not behavior.

Behavior is usually given the label tactics.

But strategy does include the anticipation and the logic that is applied.

And I think that's where we're not in conflict when we say there's a triadic,

and there's a co-construction of the social scene.

Because I think both of those things provide the stability or the platform then to strategize and minimize those prediction errors.

So again, we can still build off of strategy and do, and we can still build off of strategy and eliminate bad consequential decisions.

So again, that's the relationship as opposed to which one of these two approaches, these two top-down approaches is the thing that holds the most sway.

Because at any given time, one or the other or both, as long as you don't get trapped in one, would actually be the most, I would think, would be the most option-generating

not option selecting, because they talk in the abduction paper about the different types of abduction.

But they do heavily emphasize also that in the end, both of those types, the generating and the selecting, are essentially, you can't have one without the other.

So that's an interesting thing to incorporate here as well.

Or at least consider, I'm not saying you have to take it up,

But if you did, what would that look like?


SPEAKER_03:
I'll just directly respond to a few pieces there, then Stephen, and then anyone else.

So very interesting connection with multi-scale prediction error or free energy minimization, uncertainty reduction, surprisal bounding in multi-scale systems.

And then in this social and active setting that Hippolyta and Van Ness brought to the forefront,

that is our gripper and gripped in a way that a little experiment on a fixed mirror active inference system or a system described by any of the conventional mechanics

classical physics mechanics, statistical thermodynamics, quantum.

Kind of just going off on a prelude to upcoming discussions with Dalton.

But I think that we'll pull out an aspect, which is that the Bayesian mechanics broadens that discussion into the cognitive dynamics of active particles.

And so in that way, a ball falling becomes like a special case of active particles falling.

could take various paths based upon their embodied affordances even if just described as if like the baseball is not following the parabola equation but that's how the real environment and active particle interact which is to say semiotically which is why they both papers mention abduction in the social context um and then you mentioned like these two top-down perspectives

and how when we have the divergence between among like multi three body problem we have multiple ideas minimum of two hopefully more and then there are strange attractors there's there's live stream 32 there's live stream 26 everything happens in that space from the top down

because there's always going to be a plurality from the bottom up so the one error that wouldn't just be the right core screening for sure is a singular eye of Mordor laser and that leads to basically the unexpected unexpected with the reality of the bottom up

and then when there's divergences and continuous state spaces and paths in between top down then there's a bi-directional relationship with the top down and the bottom up or the inside out and the outside in because you could even move amongst those without feeling like we were like violating a system to sometimes use a left to right for time and then we could use right to left for time and so seeing those kinds of cognitive moves as accessible

in a social setting and then cut tying that course lastly to you said that the two-stroke engine of abduction with the generating and selecting because the laser is not a generator and that's the anal the analogy of attention in a top-down system like we've seen models and and mental action several times steven yeah thanks daniel um


SPEAKER_00:
Would you be able to go back to that four by four that you had there with the ultimate?

Yeah.

And I think that this is really important because there's also this implicit enlightenment assumption that was always sitting in the background where up is good.

And I think it's really interesting there.

And I think you're absolutely right.

It talks about ultimate.

i think it's really curious and it talks about you know we talk about these interactions so this kind of interaction this is the ultimate set of interactions the robin and that is what the truth is seen as what's the rational truth when we go up and we get enlightened so then we can project down

what's there and the idea of that what's coming up is interactions that's the general way it's thought and there was this magic box called emergence to sort of get around the fact that really we didn't know but i would i would challenge that not not to say that's that's not true in terms of how it's perceived but there's another way that bottom up can be explored and that is another way that truth can be explored there's there's rational truth

And there's, which I thought ultimate is quite high, I get the sense that that is very much looking out as this is in built into those words, right, this assumption of enlightenment.

But there's also intimate truth, intimate truth is different to rational truth.

And intimate truth is not about interactions, it's about knowing.

Okay.

it's about a deeper kind of knowing so when i go down it's not what's coming up in a bottom up it's what am i going well my only way to engage it is to go down into it does that make sense and that going down into it is also valuable it is not more primitive than enlightenment

And I think that goes to sort of a very foundational assumption, which we don't even notice it's there about science, that everything's trying to be enlightened.

But that is only partially true.

And I think biology sort of knows that, but maybe can't speak to it.

Anyway, that's my little piece there.


SPEAKER_03:
Two.

try to connect that one layer closer to i think some academic traditions but by no mean uh normed ones but thanks everybody for sharing those it um reminds me of the direction taken in the uh one of the biographies i'll paste in the title here this is um evelyn fox keller's biography of barbara mcclintock and the title is a feeling for the organism and uh

that takes a history and philosophy of science informed view like what is the feeling for the organism how does one have a feeling for the chromosomes like this belief that there were jumping genes from certain cytological observations and then how does that really play out when somebody is in a context

of professionalism and like expectations around different people who look different and so on.

So that takes a holistic look.

And I think there is that on this every or many cases, that kind of story to tell.

And so that is one bridge of connection.

Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
From like the evolution standpoint.

And I think, um,

like part of the question that Steven asked earlier, like, can we take multiple trajectories, be it like top down, bottom up to arrive at the same conclusion or the same like end point?

And this is something like in evolution, there's like convergent evolution where, you know, completely different genetically unrelated species will arrive at the same trait or develop a very similar appearance that makes people think like, you know, before we had DNA relationships, like we had species lumped together because of their similar appearance that were actually completely like unrelated, like are very distant on the phylogenetic scale.

So it's an adaptation that we converge on the same feature, or we converge to the same argument, or the same place in some kind of space.

And this is something that I think about a lot.

And just going to the quantum perspective, can we all go from point A to point Z?

like traversing a different trajectory, but like if everything is time reversible, then that's not really possible.

Like we can't converge to the same point.

Like we have to follow a specific path.

If time reversibility holds true.

Sorry, had to just like throw that in there.


SPEAKER_03:
Interesting.

No, let's kind of return to some of our earlier frameworks, but

fun stuff, I guess.

We knew we wanted to cover the Markov blanket.

We have explored some of the threads that justify

the realist or even further stance though we still have a lot of questions from the last 20 minutes or whatever about like what leads somebody and what the implications are for being different stances causes and consequences of different stances why does that matter in general studying crystallography why does that matter for the social setting like decision making and governance or organization

That was a justification broadly for abductions capacity

to be compatible with active inference and form a type of probably valuable relationship both directions because active inference gains these cognitive features that were described before Bayes graphs were invented analogous to kind of Blue's suggestion that there was classifications that were some were really insightful, others were false clumpings or lumpings or whatever before there was a way to look at it differently.

that is some of what grounds a realist interpretation though again we're still not fully closed on what it means to be realist or why it matters but now let's go to the Markov blanket in action concept and similarly break down their angle on the blanket and understand maybe what leads them and what their suggested implications are for that stance

what kind of a person do they think they're being by taking this cognitive social position which could be asked of both papers and all uh speech action and then um where's the beef then what is the what is the between there so anyone can go for it what is um

something to bring in about inaction, blankets, and or how everything is brought together in Hippolyta and Van Ness 21.

Yes, Dean, yeah, go take your time.


SPEAKER_01:
So one of the things that I really like about this paper is again, it's the time it takes

and that they heavily emphasize that as part of this co-construction that enables people to gain some sense of what it means to be in a now social situation.

In fact, they talk about, and I'm not sure where it is in the paper, but they talk about the fact that people that are new to a cultural setting, it requires of them

some time in order for them to be able to pick up on the non-linguistic non-verbal non-expressed information that's being passed within that social realm and that they're not picking up on so so what what enables that and that's when they spend a little bit of time sort of talking out why that could only be then considered a

The more you do within that condition, the more you pick up.

You can't simply be watching.

In fact, the transition is going from spectator to actual doer.

And so that's a heavy burden to put on the statistical landscape.

Because you don't sort of sit there and go, okay, so what's the probability that this person, who I can't really understand because I don't even know what they're saying because they're speaking a different language.

What's the probability?

You don't sit there and kind of do those kind of calculations.

Or maybe you do, but you're just not aware of it.

And you're not spending a whole lot of time with your calculator out trying to figure out what the distribution is while you are trying to,

co-construct or co-coordinate your active involvement in this new thing that you're now trying to be a part of.

So that's one of the arguments that I really like about their paper.

They basically say, in order for this to work, first thing we have to appreciate is that there is a temporal commitment to making anything happen

going forward.

If you don't have that temporal commitment, if you check out before you've even checked in, nothing changes, nothing happens.

So from a markup blanket standpoint, that essentially goes back to the discrepancy question.

Is it a hard boundary?

Well, you can perceive it that way.

There's this limitation now because I don't speak their language or

You can look at it as now, what is this evolving discrepancy and how does it change?

How does it shift?

How does it deviate and then reconform, eventually oscillating down to some sort of agreement?

That is the instrumental piece.

I'm just saying most people aren't sitting there calculating that out as it's happening.

They're basically just trying to figure out what does Olay mean?


SPEAKER_03:
Lou, want to bring in anything on inaction, blankets, instrumentalism?

And then we can, after that, look at what the inactive writers say.


SPEAKER_02:
I think it's been said like in the in the inactivist and instrumentalist blanket perspective.

I don't know.

That's always tends to be like the classic way that I think about it.

But let's let's see what the authors say.


SPEAKER_03:
All right.

let's see in the first half how they set up this question and then we'll end with a fork in the road that we can discuss all right so they start with similarly defining blanket we we could look at the word overlap in the future but it's a scale free tool don't know if scale free was said in the other situation it's introduced as a statistical tool that allows us to interpret

and then again we see allow for interpreting so the language has already conveyed certain flexibilities if one is to take a charitable though narrow reading so this isn't the only way to read but just in terms of how

below the surface an argument is framed as an as in addition to the direct rhetoric um immediately moving to the relationship with the physical boundary in the abductive case we saw highlighting of the reality of the closure of the action and influence Loop

but there wasn't a justification of a physical boundary and so I do think it is interesting the earlier discussion with like how does the multi-agent or like agent-based model perspective as a scientific tool help us model blurry systems as like swarms that are a certain resolution or density away um then

going straight to the fristen variant of the markov blanket where there are already active and sensory states rather than introducing it first in the general case like that it's about statistical insulating sets that can then under

perhaps some situations be partitioned to like an incoming representing sense and then an outgoing representing action aspect and so those are the blanket states sense and action s and a here and then b in their figure one is the box around s and a

and then uh the eta and the mu they're like kind of like flips of each other I don't think that's the only reason why they're those letters and they don't have to be those letters none of them actually have to be those letters but this is the connectedness structure or sparsity of what both the authors are describing all right then here's the fork it is possible to understand active inference in two ways

think we each had a few ways just today um a realist view that the properties of the model should be expected to exist as an ontological property in dot dot ontological being like not in the use of using the active inference ontology importantly differently enough but rather describing the philosophical ontological or real basis that's why it's associated with realism

Then the second way is the non-realist view that the model is simply an instrumental tool.

So we're at the fork of these two directions.

What is the move, Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
My sense of the move is that so does that not make up a whole?

And I'm not saying that in the tautological sense.

I'm saying if we're actively inferring

as opposed to looking at a topic that's titled active inference, don't we want to incorporate the entirety, the complexity, or for the sake of, for the sake of being able to, to understand an action is, is active inference kind of, is it,

My question would be, how is active inference actually being used in each of these papers?

Is it founding the argument that we don't want to get complacent around theories through other minds?

Or is it sitting on top of that kind of the icing, kind of the way it can

make sure that we don't go too far off the rails.

My argument is that it's both if we're actively inferring.


SPEAKER_03:
Blue, any thoughts?


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know.

How is active inference being used in each paper?

I just went to go like, look, like, like what, what is the, the drive home message?

I mean, maybe that's something that we can leave for the dot too.


SPEAKER_03:
Where's the graphical abstract.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.


SPEAKER_03:
For all of these strings.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, it is hard to fish stuff out of the abduction paper due to like the lack of figures.

I had to like go find my own figures for, for the pretty picture.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, let's look one layer deeper at the three ways that they suggest that one can be a non-realist about Markov blankets.

be a whole nother intersection map with where's non-realist anti-realist pro-instrumentalist just we could do political compasses all over the map um and there would be even second level questions about how things are defined and what periods of times and just it's all good and so we try to

follow these again i i like dean the way that you've brought it back to like navigating in this continuous space between two ferns between two poles um at minimum and then that stays in a kind of dynamic navigational setting it's and then if you're the moth that's uh if you can't go too close to the lantern either lantern

you hit one then you die so your flight stops there so that i think puts a very

meaningful uh interpretive layer because just like mentioned the figures help with interpretation and shorter lists help like there's three reasons why I'm against this here they are one two and three those are important structures yet also there's a reason that people don't communicate through outlines

outside of certain situations okay slight tangent but what are the three ways that they're suggesting one can be a non-realist about markup blankets one meaning less semantic tools this is going to be i think very interesting they do not hold semantic value interpretive value linguistic or otherwise other than that constructed by using them to understand or predict behavior

in the situation where the scientist is studying the stop sign they could say yeah the statistical edge for me at mine is being used instrumentally and there would be a valid stance but especially when we take this semiotic view which is very similar to semantic and they have similar seed but the semiosis

with a stop sign and the actual stopping and the social inaction of stopping and the development of the agent that led to them having that belief in that context that isn't just setting it up in terms of merely propositional logic which we hinted towards in the dot zero and many many of the peers in the commons.org articles lay it out much deeper but abduction is not

a static set of rules alone, the generating selection cycle includes at the very least structured novelty arising from internal, external, and everything in between.

and a continuous type attention distribution and strategy on attention and so on so it's a much richer setting than potentially semantic which can mean in certain settings symbolic which is to say the kind of symbolic logic carried out by like a turing machine which can still be extensive so even a generous interpretation is still very um plausible

but there's something different about semiosis and the biosemiotic that was mentioned in the other paper that is not one in the same as the researchers modeling of and that was also explored well by yellow burnberg in the 2016 paper the anticipating brain is not a scientist which contrasted a scientific analysis modality with


SPEAKER_01:
the cognitive system as cognizer and distinguishing cognitive science in a way from that through ecological psychology dean yeah i was just going to tag on to that i think it in order for this to happen i think in theory it's easy to say um we don't place a waiting on our priors

I simply don't.

I remain objective throughout all of this.

But I don't think that most of us, even when we take that really strict scientific stance, are aware of the priorities and the weights that we have even subconsciously applied.

So, again, I think you can say...

There's no, there's no value add to this.

I'm just, I'm just, I've removed myself from it and I'm just a passive observer of it, but I'm not sure how, how long we remain passive before we start applying weights and values to what it is that we're.

We're analyzing, especially in a situation, especially in situational analysis that are personal.

and the consequences fall back on us.

And now if you're simply watching something and there is no consequence upon you as the observer, maybe that's easier to do.

But if you get to a place where the scientist is part of the experiment, wow, show me how that switch gets turned off and you don't place a waiting on something.


SPEAKER_03:
Very interesting.

powerful and true and in many ways implicitly and explicitly the kind of messaging sometimes that i see in the information environment is about getting people to update their priors to believe that they're included in a larger problem which is an absolutely valid communication and perspective and the how of the path

the homeostasis in the multi-level system and the critical path it has to follow including reflexivity and narrative and anticipation and this bottom-up top-down aspect it's that is social inaction

Like people can argue that there's different social structures in different settings and it doesn't have to be a top bottom.

It doesn't have to be any specific metaphor or psychoanalytic like lens, basically.

But the one shortcut to collapsing all of that complexity into a data point, this one trick is to approach it like an experiment.

because that is what the experiment is in a way it is about finding a manifold where it's like this tube has this strand of dna and this set of things and then that allows the the paint on the wall and all these other factors of the true context to be

isolated from that's kind of like the partial information encapsulation or just any other type of system and then potentially we see like with quantum yes some persistent anomalies that suggested things were not always as they seemed however the real case study

is not the quantum mechanics but is the bayesian mechanics with the psychological study and the neuroimaging study and the behavioral study by all kinds of uh people in all social and action settings and um that really does point towards some of the deeper implications of interactionism

formal modeling of social and cognitive systems one could step out of that real life and enter into another and and situate themselves from like a third person perspective and look back onto this single path plane and see that as an experimenter and that is in many ways associated with metacognition

However, can that observer claim realism versus instrumentalism?

Where are people speaking from in terms of that view?

I don't know.

I'm just bringing up that sort of like, are you, where are you?

And that really relates to the self-concept that Blue brought up and like the kind of situatedness with the self-concept and then realist instrumentalist.

But let's move on through these points.

Second reason why one could be a non-realist about Markov Blankets.

one could merely view them as valuable fictions yes okay that allow abstracting certain features of a phenomena but a valuable fiction one could ask are all of the generated interpretations fictions valuable or not or so does saying it's a fiction and saying everything is a fiction is that um in what ways is that instrumental or in what ways is that realist

making a real claim that that is the stuff which all things are, though it's not of the stuff that potentially somebody was taught about atoms in a certain classroom.

So the persistent divergence can lead some to think that one of those is scientifically grounded and another is metaphysically grounded and or open to preference, faith, or other preferences and concerns entering that discussion.

then um okay the third one is you could be a non-realist about markov blankets because just because it's the success of the use of the markov blanket justifies the acceptance of the epistemic value of the model without necessarily making ontological claims in other words just because the epicycle model is fitting well

doesn't mean it's really an epicycle.

Just because the circular orbit model is fitting well, how well?

99%, until somebody comes along and goes 99.9 with a totally different model structure.

So it's kind of like saying, how sure could you be about a realist interpretation of the structure of the model when as part of one's commitment to the scientific process, they might leave the door open

to some future model with higher explanatory, predictive power, design and control, et cetera.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that's, and I don't know where it is in the, we actually had it because I was looking at the slides from the 47.0 this morning, and there's a part that's highlighted in the other paper, the talks where Pierce says, leave the door open.

That's what abduction is about.

It's simply the door is ajar.

You don't have the certainty, but you have enough information

to make a hypothesis, not an explanation to best, or not something rather to best explanation, but you can now, you now have something to move off of, to leverage off of.

And that's because the door was left open.

So again, you can come at it from,

You can come at this conclusion, the third one, the success of the Markov blanket, through the instrumentalist lens, but there's people on the realist side that are saying the same thing.

The more open, the more likely it is that you'll actually get to the specifics sooner.


SPEAKER_03:
Here's a fun ant example analogy to kind of bring it back to Steven's earlier request.

There's a faster is slower or slower is faster.

One can just imagine both ways.

But the empirical finding in ants is that during certain escape evacuation situations, like leaving a room where alarm pheromone has been spread,

that when there's like a constriction in the exits so the morphology of the nest that they've constructed when there's a constriction that situation in car traffic jams and in people crowd situations can be very deadly and that it can be associated with like a crush situation or a liquid to solid

like jammed in and then a fracture which can have all kinds of issues on the center of where it happens whereas in the ants they slowed down their individual movement so it wasn't like some orderly cue everybody get in line and now we're going to wait for number so and so to be called this was like their response in the situation to the biosemiotics and the niche construction of escape

was a slower is faster response such that, yes, their morphology as nest mates helps them, like by having legs that are wide out, they're physically insulating.

So it's not to say that that is the single thing for a human to semantically keep in mind in a physical escape setting.

But active inference lets us pull back to those different settings.

and look at the ants and their view from the inside, the endosemiosis, like the pheromone perception, the neurobiology of the nestmate, and then there's the exosemiosis with the scientist, and then there are instruments in play.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
So you're not thinking through ant minds.

That would be T-T-A-M instead of T-T-O-M.

However, there is a sense that there is a hive mind at work, even though you cannot necessarily share that hive mind.

There is no blending.

There is an autonomy.

And there is a sense that if I am a believer in the top-down version, which is enabled by an activism,

If I'm a believer in that, I can also understand without thinking through the mind of a realist, what that realist perspective is.

So you're not, I would say that what Thomas and Inez wrote from a logical standpoint makes a lot of sense, but that doesn't disqualify my thinking of

And this other way of thinking from coexisting and having, I don't think, I don't know if the ants are watching Daniel or not.

Maybe they are.

I mean, maybe there's another narrative that Daniel will share with us about when the ants became aware of him.

But I'll just tell you a quick story.

I feed magpies.

I feed corvids.

And what the corvids realized is it's me because they're very quick to recognize faces.

And what they do is they return the favor.

I get bones from dead things that they've eaten.

I get the bones set on the same rock that I placed the dog food on because they love this fish flavored dog food.

They actually return things and contribute back because they want me to continue

So I don't know if ants do that, but I do know that other species, whether they would describe it as knowing my mind, certainly want to influence my behavior from a strategy standpoint.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.

A lot of points there.

So that's in contrast with a framework like panpsychism or like the absence of psychism.

So just totally putting aside many of those questions, you described like a pan-intentional stance-ism, a pan-strategism that allows for complex holobionts, blues microbiome, as well as the human, dog, supply chain, crow setting.

allowing for those to exist and be modeled by decision-making, control theory, game theory, etc.

Because of the pragmatism of the game, it is like a doorway into considering all these situations as something to play, some games to signal through, some games to win in this way or to have this outcome.

So that's pretty interesting.

Then...

there's thinking through other species that's a very interesting idea and it'd be cool to design experiences like through games or art that could allow for different kinds of communication and then on the point in the abductive paper about the economy of science which we can return to that discussion of Pearson's concept

it's like thinking through reviewers' minds.

And so just seeing also facets or thinking through my chess opponent's mind, it's not a total emulation of,

But being able to generate interfaces, affordances, policies, there's so much in a partial information situation that the entity has to generate.

And the generation scope means that there has to be a strong selection mechanism too.

And those are the cycles of temporal abductive logic, which breaks us out of

the inductive, deductive, static, conceptual, dialectic.

and this brings pragmatism action ecological psychology and so on so it's really fascinating to see what is flowing within that space of formal models of perception cognition and action which are thousands of years old and it will be important to understand so many of these different threads because they're not all quantitative

And the abductive paper and the social and active paper are demonstrating two of the most important areas where that's the case.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just real quick on that.

So it wouldn't matter if I decided that I wanted to do a situational analysis and base that on the very real gifting exercise that's going on, or at least I'm interpreting it as a gifting exercise.

That would be one approach that I could take.

The other approach I could take would be a very instrumentalist one.

in terms of token exchange.

Either one of those things would work.

Putting them together might be even more additive.

I'm not sure.

I don't think it would be confusing.

I think it would just provide two lenses on the same process.

Looking at it,


SPEAKER_03:
Hippolyta and Vanessa's figure two and three.

So here is a perspective on social construction that they're pulling from non-inactivist or non-active inference perspectives.

The difference with figure three is the social action in figure two under the active inference framework is the coupling.

And so there doesn't seem like there'd be even one kind of thing that would be captured by this gray box in the middle of figure three.

So play it safe.

Take an instrumentalist perspective on this gray box.

Mm-hmm.

it's one very important node and interpretation and then pass that you know through the tubes to the abductive reviewer who looks at it and says yes and the social actors are engaging in abductive logic my background in pierce suggests that abduction

primacy of the generation selection and the time dynamics and the flow of action with the environment.

From Peirce's work, abduction can be interpreted in a realist framework.

So this can be held instrumentally with this view, with this eye.

And one can then ask whether the abduction that you're modeling it doing abductive logic

may even be able to hold an instrumental stance.

But is it instrumental for the social actor, for the endosemiosis instead of from the exosemiosis?

Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
So you kind of took the words right out of my mouth there.

Good job.

So is this gray box, this sociocultural meanings and model-based reasoning, can those be subsumed under...

are you asking if can it be a filter like is exosemiosis like the imputation of sociocultural meanings and model-based reasoning is that exosemiosis


SPEAKER_03:
From the definitions that I've seen in the usages I've seen it, exo means from the outside, endo means inside, in general, in scientific words.

Semiosis is the meaning construction process.

So exosemiosis is a view from the outside,

For example, looking at that stop sign situation unfold, looking at that ant pheromone situation unfold, whereas the endosemiosis is the interpretive semiotic process by which something comes to have an internal meaning, which then could be asked whether it's in a symbolic or a cognitive or an attentioned way and all these different aspects.

But I hope that that's an accurate distinction.


SPEAKER_01:
are you actually are you are you at i'm trying to make this simple for my little brain are you asking whether or not person can take a third person perspective so i'm just like trying to understand like endosemiosis is very clear to me um


SPEAKER_02:
but, but like this exosemiosis, like when, when I like look it up, right, right.

Like, so, um, endosemiosis is like the signal transmission into the interior.

That's like endosemiosis, like the, um, right.

Like the, the interpretation of signs into the inside, but like this exosemiosis is like between, um,

organisms like the sign interpretation and signal transmission between organisms of the same species or of different species like for example the ant pheromone like that's what i read as exosemiosis so when you look at that figure three like is that not exosemiosis i mean it looks like model representation and what was the other thing in there sorry i'm looking for the


SPEAKER_03:
here's a fun view, I think, on the exo.

So yes, I think we're in agreement here.

Endosemiosis is like the signaling within the organism or the view from the inside, but that right there is the heart of also the boundary as a physical versus boundary as a functional.

So there's a whole complexity with biosemiotics, which is usually, I think, why people talk about the biosemiotics and just recognize the complexity rather than

take a stance too early on that partitioning but then this one is the exosematic perspective constructing messages to alleged extraterrestrials so if we're looking who are the authors of that paper they're listed here douglas a coach but yeah let's um


SPEAKER_02:
Well, so, so just this like sociocultural meaning imputation and, and like in the meme paper that, um, Daniel and I just put out and in, um, with RJ and Marijula, um, the semiotic representation is culturally like relative.

I mean, like there's no, a stop sign isn't going to be a stop sign to like someone in like the Aboriginal, like very like native primitive, um,

Like, lifestyle, right?

So...

this exo exosemiotic is like a transmission between organisms of the same species but like also like the same culture i would say because like how do you you can't like and even i don't know if that's true in pheromones like if pheromones and different ant species mean different things like the same pheromone can have more than one meaning is that also true or the same like kind of molecular compound i mean i think we probably don't know enough


SPEAKER_01:
I think I understand what you're asking now.

Is there an assumed sense that some type or form of entanglement has to be present for any of that to make sense?

To make sense implies that something has existed that didn't maybe exist in the distant past.


SPEAKER_02:
It wouldn't exist in a different context also.

So that's why the sociocultural meanings, like I think of that as like exosemiosis.

Okay, I got you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
I mean, it kind of goes without saying that there's just different closenesses along different axes, like people who are speaking the same language, but different vocabularies or, you know,

situation matters so much body language then the more uh distal or different the cognitive structure is relative to what it becomes harder to quote put yourself in their shoes and so on um and i feel like that's a big question with the multi-scale system phenomenas whether they're dissipative or persistent

diverse intelligences, understanding what the water we swim in is cognitively and linguistically.

Because the water we swim in, some of it is going to be the signal for something else.

It could be the influence signal, like the B matrix in ACT-INF, influencing causal relationships in the world as part of the water you swim in.

It also could be modifications through StigmaG, niche modification, like your physical influences, which might be the water you swim in in the sense that you don't notice them, like many things that come of and through us we don't have direct awareness of.

So they're like the paint on the walls in that PCR.

experiment with amplifying the dna because it's the parts that whether we like it or not they get condensed down to a dot or a path and then that becomes our like sense making from local partial information

as if a lot of the invisible part, we could just disregard and we do cognitively.

Like we talked about like the exhaust heat with Chris Fields and Quantum, like you have to burn information to pay attention and you have to pay attention to deal with a real complex niche.

so there's a lot of tensions in that path and uh especially with this dyad and i'm sure so much other related work but with this dyad and i think with the lens that dean you helped approach it to with um it is putting some of those threads into a different light and especially for those who

in this semiotic way had some Bayesian surprise, some cognitive state updating from any number of different things

that's like proof of concept social inaction but not in a corroded or in a performance art although who could say it's not performance art but still way that brings the realism into the social through the formal and other doors uh Dean and then blue


SPEAKER_01:
I think I see both of these papers as pillars.

I see them as really stabilizing for different reasons.

And I would rather stand on both of my feet and have something stable under both of them than try to stand on one or have both feet standing on one cylinder.

Because I find that just based on my form more difficult.

But as we tried to take up this new season of live streams and bringing two papers together, that felt like a frontier moment.

And I think that one of the things that I hope we have conveyed is that looking at two things at once is by nature more complicated, not necessarily complex.

The complexity exists in each of the papers, but to look at two things at once is more complicated and therefore is more fraught with the error of the trial and error relationship.

I'm not saying that we made a bunch of mistakes, but I think

the first rule of generation is you won't get it right, right away.

You will have to, again, have that temporal commitment in order to be able to get wherever the heck you think you're going.

And I didn't really know where this was going to go other than I wonder what happens if we don't narrow our regime of attention.

and necessarily know that we were widening it, but I did know that at some point we might get the authors coming on and asking us, asking us why pick these two?

I don't think it has to necessarily be these two papers.

It's just that both of these papers create a nice symphony, right?

So it could be any set of papers.


SPEAKER_03:
takes a chocolatier or a wine connoisseur to really make the pairing special.

Yet there's other situations where any pairing can be potentially fruitful and insightful.

Like sometimes I think about that in a community context, like you're always going to share between zero and one context.

and wherever you are in that continuum the parts where you're sharing is awesome and the parts where you're different we can also respect as great or the overlap between two papers wow the word use was opposite or it was like contrary in some other way

Okay.

And then with the stance, so then I thought of the kind of like games where people have to stand on a single pole in a tropical, beautiful location and try not to fall.

So I thought when you have both feet, like you said, on one position...

narrow then buffets of wind are assaults on your non-equilibrium steady state especially when it's like which one of these one person is going to be a professor just as an example so why not resist and return to a fixed mode because that's like sort of the mode seeking that we heard about in some of Dalton and Maxwell's recent work

the fixed mode is the center of gravity and then another way that you describe with like kind of having like a non-zero divergence and the space between is like in basketball the triple threat stance because you could dribble or pass or shoot by like going for the basket and uh yeah that's a different stance and it's also in a field of affordances

So it's not just that they're in a different position.

The feet here are not much wider than the feet here.

But this is the investigand mood, as Pierce would have maybe alluded to it, that in a context with an action, ecological psychology, all of that, in a context with an instrument and a game,

and something outside the game that supported the game all those levels are in the triple threat but the how did i get here why am i on the green one is a limited context and um yes it's still highly skilled nobody's questioning how how much energy is being poured into doing that thing that's that's hard work

And there's a huge reward for doing it well.

And there's many.

And so I totally agree and didn't even intend that people could have trained a lot for this one.

This could be someone who doesn't play basketball.

And so that's why it has to be a little dynamic and situational, but just seeing them as kind of like extreme modes of paper interpretation in an extended paper interpretive metaphor, one could see different modes of receiving

semiosis from literature or discourse and then what is the role of participation and feedback and then that multi-agent setting that we mentioned hope that's not too random um in our last oh yeah blue go for it


SPEAKER_02:
So one like pairing of papers that I would have liked to have done is this abductive reasoning paper with the Crisfields quantum theory.

paper, the one from the 40.

Because I was just reminded of it so much as I was reading through the paper.

And just learning about abductive reasoning and what does that look like, and how in abductive reasoning, you don't have complete information.

It's partially observable.

And so you just make your best prediction from a partial observation.

And it made me think of the overlapping quantum reference frames.

where you can't get full overlap with someone else's quantum reference frame.

Even with perfect learning, there's still going to be some noise or some overlap between the quantum reference or some incongruence between the quantum reference frames, some area that's not overlapping.

So I don't know.

Those two things, that's one pairing that I would have liked to see.


SPEAKER_03:
That's really interesting.

As alluded to earlier, the quantum broke the glass on the reflexivity question.

in philosophy of science i hope that's not too overstated to say and it wasn't the only piece in the building or the weakening of the glass but the earlier mentioned persistent anomaly regarding experimental context expanded the scope of certain questions in science beyond discourse in certain cultural circles during the last like 500 years that stephen alluded to parts of

So quantum is where this abductive temporal relationality, it's there when you see it, now it's not.

Protoactive particle, oh, if the electron were just a pebble, this wouldn't be happening.

Or...

If the electron were a pebble that were bigger, this wouldn't be happening.

But would it not be happening?

Or would it not be happening because we could measure it better?

All of those questions about points and particles and waves, under Bayesian mechanics, as a mechanics for cognitive particles, the reflexivity now can flow in not just from electron scale,

but i feel like there are multiple contact services with reflexivity at the semiotic narrative ecological the real scales outside of the experiment and i think that is what partially speaks to the way that we entered this dot one discussion too so um in our last five or ten minutes

what would we like to have or note for dot two just to the authors if they listen to this in the time between or not we're looking forward to talking to anybody who wants to whether it's for the dot two or any point in the future there's always a dot three affordance so we hope to continue this discussion with those who have authored

those who haven't not yet authored because there's so much to build on on on this vector so both of you though feel free to as long as you would like just mention any points that you want to discuss for next week


SPEAKER_02:
dean um had brought up earlier like where where is active inference is it is it the basis is it like resting on top of is there some kind of duality there i think like that's something that i would like to kind of look back at each paper and and figure out like where i where i want to put um active inference in that pillar or on that pillar or is it the pillar i don't know


SPEAKER_03:
yeah are we going to be able to go with our active inference colored highlighter and say okay these two words yep or you know this clause yep this paragraph with this paper or this interaction of the paper this tool developed by the paper where would one be looking to highlight how I saw the paper Dean


SPEAKER_01:
Because I know Stephen would completely agree with Blue.

Can I just get you to put behind where in brackets when is active inference?

Because again, I think that matters so much if we're talking about adaptive logic and retroduction.

The other thing is that I hope that Blue's thinking about

Well, what if we pulled other papers and entangled them?

What might that?

I hope that's an opening.

I will say this.

It takes an incredible amount of preparation to pull two papers together and not do the proper respect for the amount of work that the authors, the originators of that work have done.

So whatever the preparation is in terms of

quantifying it for a single paper to do it justice.

It's many multiples of that to quote two papers, but I think if we are going to be active inferrers, not just subject matter experts on active inference, that exercise, as difficult and as time consuming as it is, it literally changes the game.

As we talked about the game here,

quite a bit today, which again, I didn't think that was going to come up, but thank goodness it did, because it's not all additional.

The game can be everybody gets in the canoe and works together to arrive at the Hawaiian Islands.

That can literally be the game, right?

It doesn't have to be a competition.

It's not a race.

It's do we survive given the limited amount of information that we need to glean here

as important to our ability to continue on.

I think that's what being an active inferrer is.

That's where the shift from a subject matter expert to a prediction matter expert actually transitions.

So I want to thank people again for what feels like hanging yourself out there in a real risky way, because it is risky.

That's what it is.


SPEAKER_03:
thanks again there's so much to say i hope that it's an honor and a privilege to be in epistemic spaces and have one's homeostatic variables secured so that opens up an amazing space and approach the temporal aspect of abduction

sounds so great to return to because i think another one of those points of contact communication is the dynamic what were the only formalisms in either paper in terms of like equations and mathematical symbols

It was three representations of dynamical systems of Hippolyto and Van Ness to connect and ground a contact point from where they were taking a stance and a skilled performance into the mathematical symbolic

scientific someone says this paper is a philosophy paper yes but it has equations so that is going to come to be something different and then you thought reading a paper would change the game but reading multiple papers changes the game and it is in a way true it is more Reds to keep in mind because

at least under some norms and preferences for paper discussions like personally i prefer and find myself at home when people don't extensively speak from what a person thought and take the endosemiotic perspective from them or from like a whole culture which seems implausible to me but situates the exosemiosis of themself

in relationship with a non-trivial endosemiosis?

And where do those two threads meet?

In the blanket, which is in potentially its most elegant coarse graining represented by the gray box here.

and why would we want to delimit or even grip maybe the grippers that we have at this point are like car pliers and this is something very different and or something active so at this or any point in time it seems absolutely valid

to look at the structure of figure two and three and hold so many stances at once or in rapid navigation so wow what a fun discussion thanks steven for joining and blue and dean and we will look forward to some interesting times in the dot 2 and beyond so peace out

## riJYh87FPx4

SPEAKER_01:
hello everyone welcome to actin live stream number 47.2 it is August 17th 2022 and I'll just quickly update the video now it's really August 17th we're having our third discussion of the set of papers in active dynamic social cognition and active inference and active inference and abduction

welcome to the active inference institute we're a participatory online institute that is communicating learning and practicing applied to active inference you can find us at links here this is a recorded in an archived live stream so please provide feedback so we can improve our work all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams

at ActiveInference.org.

You can find out more about participating in projects like the live stream and also a lot of other learning groups and projects ongoing.

We're here today in our third discussion around this dyad of papers, both from 2021, Active Inference and Abduction and Inactive Dynamic Social Cognition and Active Inference.

So check out 47.0 and 47.1 for more background and to kind of get up to where we are now.

let's go to the introductions and then we're going to take it where it goes.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a researcher in California and I'll pass it to Dean and then to Steven.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, I'm Dean.

I'm here in Calgary.

I guess I'm still a researcher, although I'm a retired one.

Basically,

This is an opportunity to have one of the authors with us, which I think is fantastic, and essentially sort of take this from all the things that we've set up to now and get an opportunity to sort of get through the lens of the authors.

And so I'm really excited about that.

I'll pass it over to Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Dean.

So yeah, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

I work a lot with spatial meaning making, participatory theatre and dialogue approaches.

And yeah, I'm really pleased to have the author here today, one of the authors, and also to

for me i'm really interested in in what we're doing here because of um the ability to get beyond what's often just called emergence um emergence through the mind body or emergence through some sort of loop that's being explained in an action or emergence that people just talk about when things interact and something happens well i i see

this work with abduction or the work with abduction as being a way to make a much more tractable way for living things that start to make things happen be thought of and not just call everything emergence so I see both these two as being

big kind of black boxes that we can maybe shine some light on and that will help a lot of people so yeah i pass it back should i pass it to you daniel first


SPEAKER_01:
Well, Majid, go for it and just say anything you'd like to, any context on the paper.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm Majid.

I'm a philosopher of science based in Ankara, Middle East Technical University.

And I thank the organizer for this wonderful event and for the good and graceful discussion of the ideas and themes of the papers.

I do not know if I can add anything that has not been discussed already in the past couple of sessions.

So I think that this is

Well, there has been for the past few years.

So I'm the second author of one of the papers, Abduction and Active Inference.

And the other author, Asti, is a renowned Charles Sanders Paris school.

So I mainly can take credit only for the parts that are about active inference.

I'm not an expert in Paris ideas or in semiotics for that matter.

I also have been doubling from time to time in biosemiotics and I was searching for a way to be able to ground semantics in nature, to be able to ground semantics in natural world.

which is very tricky because it seems that to the extent that we are engaging in natural processes, we can see mechanisms, we can see processes, but meaning is something that emerges at some point, something that has not been there before in the nature itself, which

doesn't completely sound right because, well, it seems that everything has to be come from nature at some stage, but it is not like a continuum.

So I was thinking of finding a way for, an action-oriented way for being able to speak about meaning and representation and, well, the inactivist embodied approaches in cognitive science and philosophy of science are very well established, you know, but

To be able to grow semantics, semiotics in action, we came to the conclusion that active inference may provide a nice way, a nice way that is well supported by what we know in the sense of computational neuroscience and theoretical biology.

To be able to explain how some linguistic concepts, some semiotic concepts can be explicated in natural terms.

I don't know if any of that makes any sense to you, but it was what we were trying to do in this paper and a couple of other papers that we were composing together, altering together.


SPEAKER_01:
Excellent.

Thanks for that context.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
So, Masheed, I got to ask you a question.

So lots of times when we're talking about semantics, we tend to see them written down on pieces of paper as an example, right?

But when you say semantics in nature,

One of the questions that we've danced around but not sort of spoken to directly is sort of semantics as nature, maybe semantics surrounding us.

And the abduction paper really helped us understand maybe the perspective that instead of us moving towards and seeing semantics or generating semantics, us being available to that information around us.

What's your sense?

after sort of, I don't know if you've embraced Peirce's philosophy, but after at least engaging with it, what is your sense of what semantics are as nature as opposed to sort of embedded in nature?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, that's a very good question and also a difficult one.

What I was trying to speak about was grounding semantics in nature.

Sometimes I also think of our informational trade-off with environment in semantical terms.

Some other times, I think that perhaps we are reading what we think about the world into the world.

Perhaps there are no meanings in the world itself.

I think that if we want to be erotically naturalist about the world,

the natural world doesn't contain semiotic in the sense that, for example, artificial languages, human-made languages contain semiotics.

That much is, I think, more or less obvious.

I think that we can treat semiotic into the nature, the same kind of semiotic that we can find in human-made languages into the nature.

I think that that's

obvious too.

On the other hand, the things that are made by human beings are in a sense natural because human beings are natural entities and they have this kind of natural capacities to be able to communicate with one another and with their environment.

So there should be some sort of natural, it couldn't just come from nothing.

It should be some sort of natural basis for that, which is basically

I like to think of that in terms of human beings or the community of human beings, action-oriented interaction with one another and with nature.

So if you think of semantic in this sense, thinking of being

in semantics, or being surging in semantics, or enveloped in semantics in this sense.

I completely agree with you, because I think that even though it is not precisely as well-stated semantics that we can find in an artificial language,

some sort of trade-off of information between human beings, between organisms, self-organizing complex systems with one another, biotic self-organizing complex systems with one another, and with their environment, either individually or collectively.

And I think that this provides a good natural basis for also understanding semiotics in the sense of the signs that we interpret, the interpreted signs that we use in writing books or, I don't know, different source of communication, the more advanced ways of communication.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_02:
Stephen?

Yeah, thanks, Majid.

I was wondering, when you're talking about these

more advanced forms of communication or biological ways of um having semantics whether that's far more entropic far more um dispersive than what would happen when we think of it in our traditional literature of uh words and uh ways that we would have ontologies and computers so is there kind of

some other is it an a a completely different process or is it like another flavor of what's your thoughts on that


SPEAKER_00:
I'm sorry, I was not quite clear about what I was trying to say.

What I was trying to say is this.

By speaking of the advanced forms of communication, I intend to refer to advanced form in comparison with the rudimentary natural form.

So, for example, the way that we are speaking together, or the way that Danny is just writing down the ideas on the screen and that sort of stuff.

I think that these are advanced ways of

conducting some sort of semantic enterprise because we can communicate.

And by speaking of that in terms of advanced, I just wanted to say that it is more advanced that

I don't know, the very basic cases, for example, very basic cases that we can see in the natural world.

So for example, how the signaling processes in terms of biological, terrestrial biology, cellular biology, that sort of stuff.

So I think that I'm seeing that in terms of some sort of theory of evolution, how creatures or how self-organizing systems

start to communicate with one another and with their environment, even at the cellular level or at the level of population of cells or neurons or whatever.

So there are the rudimentary ways, but at the same time, there are more advanced ways of communication, meaningful communication, such as what we do in human societies, whether in terms of individual or what we do in libraries, institutes, and recently in terms of human artifact interact.

So it was what I've

And I think that the story, the main story, what persuaded us, what motivated us to look into active inference was that we wanted to find some sort of natural basis for that.

And you are completely right again.

We were thinking of that in terms of the entropy of system, keeping the entropy of this information, entropy of the system within the bone.

So like everything else that

has been constructed around the notion of active inference and free energy principle.

The core of the story is that in order to be able to maximize the chance of their survival, the biotech self-organizing systems have to be able to keep their entropy or their surprise within the bones.

And in order to be able to do that, they have to be able

to find ways to optimize their moods of communication.

And I think that this provides a basis for the generation of semantics.

So in order to be able to maximize the chance of survival, we need to be able to

gets to some level of competence, and reaching that level of competence seems to be impossible.

So I think that to the extent that this story is action-oriented, to the extent that it tries to ground semantics in nature or semiotics in nature, I think that this is completely faithful to the pragmatists, to the Persian origins.

But then again, I'm not an expert in that field.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, thanks.

Like what I heard there is that active inference helps us find patterns across systems by framing them within a common lens of keeping their entropy or their surprisal bounded in engagement with their environment, which can include other entities like themselves or just a niche more generally.

And maintaining that survivable bound

homeostasis and all of the variants that we've discussed in other times, it's going to have different features in cells, bodies, computer programs.

Like a computer program is a specifically constructed entity where one extra parenthesis or period is going to lead to a halt.

But this continuous embodied and inactive nature of the biological engagement, the biosemiosis,

which is what is pointed to in the formalisms that we saw in Hippolyto and Van Ness paper.

Again, the only formalisms they brought in the paper rather than citing out to were about things changing through time continuously.

And so, yes, for sure, maintaining the bounds of computer programs in a digital and in a fragile setting is different than maintaining the bounds of survivability for like a cell or for a linguistic entity

And they are different, but they can't even be said to be different unless we have some ways of juxtaposing and contrasting them.

So, Stephen, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah thanks thanks for that clarity there majid is one thing that i think also this ties to and i think um having this move from semiotics into like this broader kind of unifying theory of active influence is really interesting and

it speaks to some extent as well to the when you say advanced communication it speaks to what we often think of in complexity work around complex and complicated so it's like organisms and life has this complex adaptive non-linear processing and then there's these kind of simple to more and more complicated ways of engaging the niche to do things to have

sort of systems of performative action using objects using in in the case of words that can also be seen as objects so is this kind of parallel evolution between complicated things being manipulated and simple processes of things being manipulated and the complex sort of non-linear abducted processes of the uh that's all going on underneath all of that


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Very well.

Look, there are a bunch of technical notions such as complexity and

I try to speak of this in terms of the basic ideas that I have in terms of philosophy of science, because I'm basically a philosopher, philosopher of science.

So when I speak of more advanced form, when I and what I have in mind in terms of sophistication of ideas, I don't know whether it could be translated into the technical notion of complexity, but I'm seeing that like that.

Look, so there is interaction between

organisms so take the individual fish in the in a school of fish or take the monkeys in a horde of monkeys or uh or bears and flock or anything that of that sort and they have to be able to communicate they have to be able to try to make sense take two bears that are trying to sing to to perform a duet to sing from the same human

It seems that they are engaging in some sort of harmonious activity, and in order to be able to do that, they have to be able to communicate in a successful way that altogether minimizes the overall information entropy of the system.

By speaking of more advanced form, I'm not only thinking of these simple forms of communication between birds and other kinds of organisms,

But in terms of the sophisticated cultural forms of communication that we use, poetry, sonnets, I don't know, scientific theories, which usually come, especially in case of science, come with very sophisticated, theoretical and mathematical, sometimes formulation, notation, and you're completely right again, they demand...

the right amount of manipulation because you need to always test the theories and confirm them or falsify them.

So this kind of engagement between human beings also

mandates a great amount of manipulation because it is not just on the basis of transfer of pure information that it takes place but most of the time through manipulation of the environment which is also engages artifacts other than other agents and this is how i think of the sophistication or complexity of the situation by thinking of that in terms of

the advanced forms of cultural practices, such as what we observe in mathematics, literature and science, which are still meaningful, which are still

involving a great amount of semiotic enterprise semantic enterprise but we need to be able to explicate them in simple natural forms of communication like what we observe in the natural form and what like what we hope to be able to be explicated in terms of minimization of free energy and minimization and keeping the information entropy of the system within bonds


SPEAKER_01:
It's a different thing to maintain the, not better or worse, but merely different to maintain the survivability of a biofilm than a data center.

Yet we want to approach them in a first principles, grounded, compatible, interoperable, scientific lens.

And so that is what perhaps

brings in active inference.

So, Dean, and then we'll continue.


SPEAKER_00:
Or Majid, yes.

Yes.

Just with regard to the last thing that Dan said, there is another collaboration.

I mean, there is another co-authored paper that is by me and Afti published in...

I think that the European Journal for Philosophy of Science, and it is about the explicating methodology of science, which also includes abduction and inference to the best explanation and other sorts of stuff on the basis of

active inferences.

So you are completely right.

And in many ways, this project, to be able to explicate methodology of science at the individual and social level on the basis of these first principles, given all of the skepticism that there exists about trying to engage in first principles in life sciences, it sounds to be a very ambitious project.

But it seems that where we are now, and I think that

I think that this is a project worth pursuing, but if there is time, I will come back to that later.


SPEAKER_01:
Excellent.


SPEAKER_03:
Dean?

This is awesome.

I got a question for you, because I think you could probably answer this better than I could.

wrestling with this one so if i'm if i'm a person who's trying to perform some kind of a situational analysis trying to determine what the functions and the purposes are in the setting in which i exist i can look at that in terms of a semantic space but what abduction i think um introduces is the idea idea of semantic time and and i'm so glad that you

sort of pointed to the fact that Daniel's typing stuff out right now.

This is semantics time for him.

He's actually generating some semantics even as we're talking.

So I guess what I'm wondering is if we're going to look through the lens of active inference as the situational analysis lens, do we separate out what Daniel's doing when he's typing from the nature

of what we're doing right now, or do we see them as sort of co-compatibilities?

I don't know the answer to that.

I'm leaning in the direction that they're kind of inseparable.

They orchestrate something that doesn't happen if we only have one or the other.

What are your thoughts?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, to tell the truth, I'm not well... Sorry, my phone was ringing and I lost focus for a moment.

And I do apologize for that.

It was one of the reasons that I was hesitating to join.

But, well...

could you, I do, again, apologize to Esther, but could you elaborate a bit on the last part?

I hear that right, but I want to get more familiar with the last part.


SPEAKER_03:
Sure, well, the semantic spaces stuff, I think, is really material.

Like, you can see Daniel typing things out across that slide.

But what I think Kearse asks us to contemplate is the actual semantics time, the actual change or shift of what's

actually happening in that moment.

And so I was wondering, if we are not just looking at active inference as the object of our attention, or we're actually inferring what is going to happen next, do we have to include the idea of what's happening, not just semantically as a product of what's typed out on the page, but as a process

And what does that then imply in terms of what we might be able to pick up quicker in terms of our embedding in these different contexts that we otherwise wouldn't be able to pick up if we only had one or the other?

It kind of starts moving us towards this realism, anti-realism debate, which I'm still not sure it should even be a debate, but that's me and my relativity piece.


SPEAKER_01:
shortly what i heard there unmute is semantic spaces have been extremely characterized not completely but before active inference long before people have done embeddings of sentences and meaning concepts in semantic spaces without a temporal aspect

And so I heard a question about abduction as providing a framework for semantic or semiotic time, whether with the two stroke engine of generating and selecting hypotheses or the action perception loop or a few other ways.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, very well.

Look, very well.

I think that that's a very good question.

I put, only in order to blow one's own trumpet, I put the paper that we wrote in the chat box.

And I think that this is precisely about this point, because it is about selecting hypotheses, the process of selecting hypotheses.

And I do not know how to relate that directly to induction or abduction, but what I try to do is to say this, that at least in the so-called advanced forms of communication or abduction that I talked about,

What's important is not only what we are doing in the moment, but what's important is our estimation of what's going to happen later, next.

And I think that it is very important in terms of Charles Sanders Peirce logic, not only logic of science, but also economics of science.

when he says that we have to try to find a way to invest in theories, in hypotheses that have a chance to being a winner in a long time.

So in a way, time enters the process because we have to be able to have a long time view on how the abductions that we are going to construct lead to fruitful results, not only at the moment, but in future, possibly long future, especially if we are engaging in some sort of sophisticated research

sophisticated process such as scientific uh practice or such as theory hypothesis construction or hypothesis testing time plays an important factor and what's important about active inferences especially the forms of active inferences that could be

appeal to.

So when we speak of active inference, perhaps we didn't elaborate that much on the abduction and active inference paper, although we referred to that.

But in the other paper, I think that we have been referring to that quite a lot.

The thing is that the kind of active inferences that

are useful in this context are active inferences that are taking place on the basis of temporally rich models, what Christo and others mentioned as models that have some sorts of temporal depths or temporal richness, which basically allow the organism to have a perspective, have some insight, not only on

prediction of free energy or, sorry, minimization of free energy or minimization of information entropy, but also have some insight into the efficiency of its

processes, its practices for minimizing free energy in the long term.

So I think that it comes back to the issue of temporal depths and temporal richness, which also is related in a very interesting way to the issues of consciousness and selfhood, another topic that I'm interested in.

So

This is the thing.

There are some biotic self-organizing systems that can engage in some sort of social activity, and these self-organizing systems happen to also have this wonderful capacity to form abductions that take the

temporal aspect into account at the same time the same group of biotic self-organizing systems that are capable of making this kind of abductions inferences are also capable of having self-hood and consciousness and self-consciousness and that sort of stuff so in a way it comes together the ability to be able to

form this kind of abduction that allows to choose the hypothesis that have a better chance to being good hypothesis in the long run.

And the ability to have self or self-consciousness and at the same time, the ability to form generative models that have some temporal depths or temporal richness.

So I think that temporal depth is at the root of that all because it allows us to make policies and it allows us to have some

some strategies that basically enable what we can think of in terms of scientific methodology, in terms of philosophy of science that I'm interested in.


SPEAKER_01:
I could add a note there, then pass back to Dean and thinking about the similarities and the contrast with different biosemiotic systems.

So a signaling protein or signaling molecule might have a tremendously rich and contextual biosemiosis, like a hormone in a certain way might do various different things relationship with the cellular context.

So

What I'm hearing with the more rudimentary forms or the non-abductive forms of communication and the relationship with their temporal depth is that while there is a conditionality to the way that hormone is received,

and there's an instantaneous complexity or complicatedness, it doesn't necessarily have a temporal depth in the semiosis.

It might play a role in a temporal depth, like the hormone could play a role in development, but the interpretation of that hormone is instantaneous.

In contrast with linguistic communication,

even before we get to this level of like speaking to the distant future or invoking the distant past or different timelines and metacognitive awarenesses, there's a space of interpretation between the heard sound or the seen symbol itself and the way that it triggers internal cascades, which must involve temporal depth, like a word alone

a phoneme alone is not conveying that same impact of meaning as the hormone binding.

And so the increased cognitive complexity of like a linguistic entity opens up a space of interpretation for the words

that brings in the temporal depth and differences in acculturation and differences in what people have learned, whether they even know that word at all, whether they know about how it's being used by that person.

And so in the linguistic semiosis, we can see how it has analogy to other forms yet also

contains a space where also active inference can be used to start to disambiguate and to build models of.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Daniel.

First of all, you almost grabbed what I was about to say, but I'm going to say it in different words.

Here's a question again around that abduction paper.

I don't have the exact quote up here, but so paraphrasing,

One of the things in the paper that you point out is that Pierce understands that if you don't see the triadic, if you don't see the three kinds of logic as taken together, the deductive, the inductive, and the abductive, you're kind of missing what he was trying to alert us to.

My question is, so when we break it down further from that, if we reduce it to

deductive, inductive, and abductive.

We don't leave it as a whole, as the way of looking at all of the logics sort of working in concert.

Is that looking then at logic as a tool?

Is it looking at it as instrumentalism if we take it down to that reductionist place?

I know that if we leave it up at all three together working in concert,

That's realist.

And that's the part that I very much agree with in your paper.

But then my question was, you guys never really talked about this.

If it's taken down to those more simple relative logics over time, are each one of those logics, then could we see them as actually being instrumental?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I'm not sure that I can

answer that question because i'm as i say i'm not an expert on pairs but i can see my own perspective so what i was genuinely interested in was in engaging with purse ideas was the part that was about abduction so perhaps i was

I don't know that I think of that.

I do not know why I was so interested in abduction, but not in deduction or induction.

But perhaps because inference is the best explanation, abductions do seem to play an important role in philosophy of science.

But, well, it seems that philosophers of science just take deduction and induction for granted, and perhaps it is because

I can't defend that decision.

I don't know whether we have to, I had to at least spend more time to say deduction and induction.

But about these logics, or at least this

kinds of inferences being insteruments.

I don't see why they couldn't be insteruments.

In a way, if I want to stick to the jargon of distributed cognition and embodiment and inactivism, the things that I'm pursuing, no.

I think that we can think of them in terms of cultural tools, like many other kinds of cultural tools that we can use in order to pursue our intellectual quest, whatever that intellectual quest is.

ill are there to be pursued so i think that we can think of them as instruments so the main question i think that because you also mentioned realism and anti-realism the question is that if we think of these things as instruments

would there be any room for being realist about this kind of approach?

Is that related to the question of realism?

Did you want to say, what do you want to say?

Do you want to relate that to the question of realism?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I actually do.

I think, as I said, when I read the paper, I think the argument that says that if we look at Peirce's work

as anti-nominalism, non-nominalism, I believe when it's in its complexity state and the relationship between those logics, it's the relationship between those logics that it's examined.

Yes, I very much agree.

You can't describe that as anything other than realist.

My question is, is that if we reduce below that, is that when the instrumentalism


SPEAKER_00:
percolates.

That's my question.

Alright, very well.

Look, so my perspective on realism in this context is this.

Look, so we are speaking about semiotics and we are speaking about the semantic aspects of language and interpretation and that sort of stuff.

The question is that where this kind of interpretation, where this kind of semantical interaction with

the word is coming from.

I think that if we concede that it is not something arbitrary, that this is something that is not developed or chosen on the basis of convention, not only conventions, but conventions that are feeding on, I don't know, wanton and whimsical element.

If there is some objective element in that, it is not in-serving mentalism.

It will provide some basis for realism.

And there are semiotic and semantic aspects in, for example, constructing scientific hypotheses or theories or scientific practice and that sort of stuff.

I think that to the extent that we are able to grow on these semantic and semiotic aspects in nature, to the extent that we can provide some sort of dome to Earth,

natural explanation for the emergence of this semantic and semiotic element, we could defend some sort of realism.

So, then again, you may ask what sort of realism is that?

And I can say that this is the sort of realism that

is informed by our best scientific theories.

So it is some sort of radically naturalist take on realism that I think would be kind of compatible with pragmatist and Persian ideas.

So I think that the realist

take comes from the fact that we try to grown semiotic and semantic the logic of abduction induction deduction all of that we try to find natural processes that enable those kind of inferences and to the extent that we can find natural processes that are explicated in terms of some or best scientific theories there remains some room for defending a version of realism that

Willard Van Orman Coyne used to call robust realism.

It is robust in the sense that instead of trying to latch onto mind-independent, science-independent realities into the objective world, this kind of realism

draws its force from our best scientific theories.

And I think that it is realistic in the sense that we can provide a naturalist story, we can threshold some naturalist story, some scientific story of the psychological ground mechanisms that enable this kind of inferences.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Stephen, and then I'll add a note.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

So you mentioned the scientific process and almost the deductions, the inductions that can occur with a model, a scientific model that's being created.

So it's just slightly different to say what's real for me at the scale at which I can perceive

as a human and see things.

My model might be able to see things slightly beyond what my sensorum can perceive in my experiential ecosystem.

I like to use the term experiential ecosystem of being alive.

So when that's the case, is it almost that these models are given some sort of agency, some sort of sentience, that what's real for the model in a way?


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Very well.

Well, that's a very good question.

In order to try my best to provide an answer to that, I may need to drift away a bit from the scientific context and engage in some sort of philosophical discussions that might be a bit boring for the audience.

I'm not sure about that, but I will ask you to try.

For us.

Try.

All right.

Well, giving some sort of agency to models is an interesting question.

A question that, as it happens, I think is worth taking seriously.

but it might not be directly related to so look in order to be able to defend some sort of mode in order to to to advocate some sort of model-based version of realism you do not necessarily need to give agency to models and because

In order to be realist, the thing is this, the nature and the structure of scientific theory is so complicated that we cannot defend realism on the basis of some sort of perceptual or sense perception evidence.

So the evidence for scientific theories, if you think of it in terms of model-based science,

doesn't come in terms of sense perception, because the construction of scientific theories is much more complicated than that.

There are different kinds of experimentation, manipulation, theoretical distortion, idealization, you name it.

So when we speak of models, there are different kinds of things that make it very hard to

to think of the model-based representation as some sort of direct relation.

So we cannot defend realism about models in terms of relating sense perception or sense data or something directly to the model.

There are other kinds of virtues that we may want to depend on, and most of the time philosophers of science do not agree on a specific set of virtues that could be used.

They usually speak of considerations of simplicity, fruitfulness, parsimony, that sort of stuff, efficiency, but usually they do not agree on a specific set of virtues.

But one thing that they agree about is that

models do not receive confirmation on the basis of their fit with sense experiences, because it seems that our modern science, think of that in terms of quantum mechanics, not only that, but different sorts of sciences, is becoming so tortically complicated.

Or scientific models are becoming so idealized and theoretical entities that feature in these models are sometimes so sophisticated that it would be futile to try to find some sort of perceptual or sensory evidence for that, right?

So, well,

And again, when we speak of abduction and when we speak of inference to the best explanation, I still think that inference, I still think that active inference could eventually or could at some point lead to

at least grown some methodology of model selection that allow us to, on the same basis, more or less on the same basis that Charles Sanders Peirce speaks of logic of science or economics of science, can lead to some sort of methodology of science that could allow us to

select scientifically fruitful models, models that deserve to be given a chance by realists as things that are providing a more or less reliable image of the universe without depending directly on sense experiences.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

There's a lot there.

One of the

most key pieces of i think the juxtaposition of these papers and how we're seeing the discussion around science and realism and enculturation progress in 2022

is that and to connect this also to this area of the semantic spaces and semantic time which abduction requires it's at least two phasic so it has to it can't both be happening in the same instant in the same um unit so the question of realism and

especially on specific constructs within the broader apparatus of free energy principle, like focusing on the blanket construct, Markov blanket, Friston blanket, etc.

It's often been approached in terms of a question of compositionality of space.

As you put it, like mind independent.

Does this exist physically?

Well, what do you mean by the table exists physically?

I mean, it's there when I'm not looking, or if I don't believe it's there, it could still hit me.

In the mind-independent situation, first off, there's a massive challenge in re-minding that system, the whole hard problem of consciousness or even just simply hard problem of biocognition or semiosis.

And so in that setting, it's very defensible to take a instrumental perspective on the meaning of semantic spaces.

when we turn from a compositionality of mind independent physical space into a compositionality of meaning as enacted in the pragmatic sense what's real is action then the commitment to mind independence being lifted

we have actually a multi-perspective cognitive scenario that naturally embodies questions of semiosis because meaning as enacted is model dependent

And so I'm sure there's a lot of like loose threads or other ways to go, but again, it's a large turn for me to see the discussion evolve from being about mind independent physical interpretations as being the crux of realism and the pragmatic shift as opposed to like the materialist or the reductionist stance

the pragmatic shift reintroduces mind or really just removes the kind of filter or the dam and just lets mind rush back in so there's really a lot there and then you connect that all the way to active inference grounding methodologies of model selection and i think in that

domain, it inherits greatly on a huge amount of statistics and machine learning work on policy selection, for example, like using a free energy functional and minimizing it to scan and evaluate and make a decision upon a space of affordances and policies.

is what has been happening in control theory, cybernetics, and so on, even down to the evidence lower bound and the forms of the free energy functionals that are used are broadly related to exactly model selection processes.

So just like if we were doing a linear regression, we might want to fit the least squares error.

And if we were doing a Bayesian model selection, we might want to use like a Bayes factor or a BIC or AIC criterion.

Here we're in the space of mind based cognitive entities, active particles.

And so active inference provides a process theory that is able to

make all of that come together and make sense.

And then this paper connected it to the qualitative, though rigorous and structured framework of abduction and kind of fit like abduction into the ignition instead of the inductive deductive, which can be limiting in certain contexts.

Steven?


SPEAKER_02:
just just wanted to pick up back on when you mentioned about model selection um so that's interesting in the sense that there's there's policy selection in active inference okay what policy i'm going to take on my action i suppose you can look at what regime of attention will i used and will capitulate my internal model

think a lot of times and i don't think this is often thought about um in active inference but really the model selection may well be the the external artifact or the like um like like uh majima's talking about this scientific model is um is different to say the model selection that's happening in terms of maybe types of generative models that we might think of in the brain

and can have its own you know it can exist someone could write a paper like uh pierce and you know it wasn't published and people pick it up 50 years later and it's recapitulated into a system of of meaning making um so i think this there's um the the the ways that models get selected and then how they can be used and maybe

couched in a system i think it's really interesting and maybe that system is also we've talked about this before is when that system doesn't need to be alive anymore to function like can there be a dead system i.e a computer system that can then or how much of it becomes not dependent on the living so that's just just one point that i think you know comes back to that question of

You know, where is it ultimately grounded?


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Stephen.

Yes, Majid.


SPEAKER_00:
I think that, unfortunately, I have to start to leave.

And I do not want to open another can of worms before doing that.

But I want to briefly speak about what Stephen mentioned, right?

For example, and I want to...

say with the example that you provided, for example, the person being dead, Charles Sanders being dead, but the ideas of being picked up.

When I was starting to think of scientific practice in terms of active influence, in a book that I wrote in 2019, people started to make very significant criticism and meaningful that

Active inference is a theory of individual brains, but scientific practice is not an individual activity.

Science is not taking place in the brain of individual people.

It is some sort of social activity.

It is distributed in scientific groups and scientific communities.

I get more deeply engaged with this literature on distributed scientific cognition in terms of works of Ronald Gere and some other people.

And I found it very interesting.

So look, the model selection, scientific model selection as some sort of advanced form of

cognition, finis form of cognition is grounded.

I still think that it's grounded in active inference, but it doesn't need to take place at the level of individual scientists.

It could be distributed to the community of scientists.

And then the issue of minimization of entropy could be understood in terms of minimization of collective entropy of scientists, or even minimization of the

collective entropy of the coupled community of scientists and their environment.

I think that it leads to some sort of revolutionary understanding of the nature of scientific theories, because we usually think of scientific theories as a class of propositions or set of model theoretic or set theoretic models in terms of mathematics.

But if we broaden the scope a bit to think of theories as pieces of information, pieces of knowledge that are dispersed and distributed in scientific community or things that emerge through the interaction between scientific community or scientific group and their environment, I think that

it may lead to a very interesting perspective on the nature of scientific theories as well.

In a way, I was hijacking this discussion of active inference because being trained and bred as a philosopher of science, I'm mainly interested in some internal issues in philosophy of science.

And when I speak of scientific realism, I think of that in classical

classical terms in philosophy of science, being realist about the target system of theories and scientific models.

But I think that it still leaves ample room for also being realist about active inference itself, but for different reasons, and for reasons that are much more sophisticated and complicated than

uh could be could be unpacked directly with relation to mind independence reality of active inferences or or whether there are such things as first principles in mind independent war so i think that of course there are no such things as first principle mathematical first principles in if you open up

brain and nervous system you can't find first principle mathematical first principle you will find different kinds of tissues and mechanisms and other kinds of things but i think that these two concern about realism about active inference and free energy principle and my own concern about scientific realism about targets of scientific theories that could be selected on the basis of active inference could be related together at some point

But I have to apologize.

This is a joy to participate in this discussion.

And I have to apologize for being pushed to leave abruptly.


SPEAKER_01:
It's excellent, Majid.

We appreciate it.

And the dot three is yours when the time is right.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you very much.

It was very nice to meet all of you.

I'm going to leave.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, take care.


SPEAKER_01:
Wow.

Okay.

We'll take a deep breath and then we'll continue, or maybe you don't even need to breathe, Dean.

Go for it.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I just love the fact that the term hijacking was introduced, not by me, because one of my biggest fears around this thought too was hijacking something.

And I think I understand what he means by that, because it actually feels that way.

If you

If you look at what we were just talking about, which is active inference could ground a methodology of model selection.

Let's just assume for a second, abductively, that it does.

It can and it does.

Well, what would that mean?

Well, what that would mean is literally changing the directionality of what we typically perceive.

And as Michi pointed out, we can't let our perceptions

conflate what we are perceiving with whatever reality is.

And I think we've all agreed that that's a dangerous thing to do.

However, in the spirit of what could active inference ground in terms of methodology and then in terms of model selection, my question is,

Typically, in the outside world, as we're using scientific principles, we start with an idea, a hypothesis, a process, and we turn that into a product, some kind of a materialization.

Stephen and I were actually chatting about this before we came on the live stream today.

That's what we see.

That's what we sometimes label the reality.

What active inference, as active inferring,

suggests is the Markov blanket stays in the middle between the generative model and the generative process.

However, if we were to actually contemplate that active inference could ground a methodology and does, we would actually say that the

Generative model is the product or is the materialization.

And as we pass through the Markov blanket, we actually move to two different versions of process.

One is relativity.

The other is relationship.

And together, that forms a new absolutism.

So that is literally the emergence.

And that's kind of where I started in this.

I haven't sort of been that explicit in on my, my backside out there to have a whole bunch of people take a bite out of it.

But if, if we, I think are courageous enough and take the risk and we look at that differently than how we traditionally looked at it, that process

leads to product.

Another way of describing that is product and process.

But we actually look at it as process in product, meaning we start with whatever our hard evidence is as a generative model as product.

And then from that, we gain insights and intangibles and things that we call structure because we understand now relationship and the relativity and those new absolutisms.

That would be

The condition under which active inference actually does ground model selection.

What do you guys think about that?


SPEAKER_01:
It's a nice angle.

I'd like to move to the images that you've prepared and see where that comes back from.

So let's return to the initial juxtaposition slide that we looked at in the dot zero with the iceberg.

Okay, so again, I'll put our video chat as the tip of the iceberg.

We raised many points of contact between these two papers, and then,

you've provided a graphical abstract, we could say, that we're gonna go through now.

And then from that graphical abstract, we're going to enter into one or more of these comparisons and see how they are structured in relationship with the general abstract, which we'll see now.

So here we are.

What is happening on this slide?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, so Inez recently had, there was a YouTube clip where she was talking, I think the topic of the conversation was the free energy principle and the edge of chaos.

And one of the quotes that I pulled was she made the statement, making this bridge logically sound, because what she was looking at was some of the debate that's been going on between realism and anti-realism.

And of course, in order to be able to talk about those things, she spent a lot of time looking at free energy principle and how that works.

And then she did a really brilliant job of sort of trying to make a case for why the debate was taking place, why she and some of the authors that she works with have taken the position that they've taken.

What I think that us bringing to

topics like that that's been focused on inaction and social cognition and abduction if we bring those things together approximately which is what we've done in this live stream series we could actually show how potentially you can move from a place that says well if i'm all about the realism um then i can't be anti-realist and vice versa

I think if you're in a position where you're trying to help people understand not what they see outside of themselves as a product going through an assembly line, like somebody who's learning, and then they come out the other end and they're now all assembled because they've gone through a process.

If you actually start out as seeing this human living system as a product,

that is made up of things that are already present, priors and posteriors, and all of these actions that it can take as an agent, and you actually move from the left of that bottom left corner diagram to the right, you can actually use the inaction and the abduction and the anti-realism and the realism as placeholders within a Markov blanket setting,

And as you move through time, and as I quote, passing through time, as in depth of field, some of those memory traces that you are pushing through your working memory and pulling out from your long-term memory, as well as literally the river of time flowing, you could move from an idea of this is sort of the platform product or stability, the grounding from which I start,

And as I become more and more familiar with what I'm analyzing situationally, I can actually pick up the relationships, the entailments, and the relationships as relativity and the relationships as entanglements.

And so that is acting as an act of infer as opposed to looking at

and through active inference lens.

So that's what I was trying to pull together here, because as it says in the middle of this slide, as active infers, as predictionary reducers across all processes, not just subject matter, one of them could be active inference as a tool or as a non-tool, when is active, and then this was, we've already talked about the when-ness of semiotics,

When is active inference both a partitioner and a framer?

And when is it also a filter?

So looking back through time and then pulling from the memorial and projecting out into the future, how do we keep the complexity?

How do we keep the triadics?

How do we avoid the trap of reducing down but then not being able to build back up

to the complexity scale where the reality actually exists.

Because I think if you cross a certain threshold and you get to the operations level, of course, it's got to be tools.

Of course, it's got to be instrumentalism.

But then it's got to come back to, and I think Daniel, you mentioned this earlier, it's got to come back to, so what about that table that I bump into?

Is that not real?

And so I think it's the ability to sort of,

go below the threshold and then resurface back above, it's being able to understand what the actual outer boundaries are and what the rows and columns and their ability to differentiate are.

And I think if we wanted to, as I said, I don't want to hijack, but if we wanted to, we could show how both the inaction and the logic application requires us, or at a minimum,

at least gives us the complexity state from which active inference, which was, it's kind of the one thread that holds all of this together, retains that sense of, okay, it's both anti-real and real at the same time.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you, Dean.

Stephen first.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, deep breath.

So yeah, no, this is really this is there's a lot here.

This is really powerful.

And I think, I think the idea of moving room,

these ways of interpreting anti-real realists so that moving through or moving through inaction abduction i think that's helpful um and the idea of you know how that passing through happens what we're trying to do is pass through almost the trough a bit between the two um and there's this idea that there's maybe a couple of roads we traditionally have this high road low road but um it can be

i i see is also um the way that we structure that understanding of abduction of inaction of realism is shown up in our idioms it shows up in the way we structure our language so i mean to what extent if we're passing through the middle here right through the middle

and i was saying is and if i was to go and on my left there's a road under my right there's a road and the road that's left to be explored or the road that's forever giving and revealing the left field is the inaction the abduction and what's right is my anti-real real i mean it's either anti-real or it's real right that's right as as they say in north america a lot so i think there's um

there's this way that we're sort of trying to engage with

these ideas as practitioners and researchers and kind of interdisciplinary sort of connectors, which starts to become itself structured.

So I think this diagram is quite helpful to start to tease out some of that in, again, maybe a kind of an inactive way.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

make a few comments and then let's jump into the comparisons and see how this image is applied so the epistemic foraging the journey learning journey all of these have a temporality and so just wanted to quickly note that that connects very much to our discussion on semantic space and semantic time okay if there's a space to be semantically exploring

but we're taking a path in it, then first off, Dalton and Maxwell et al's path formulation of active inference is a natural fit.

And we need to consider the when-ness.

And as we've talked about when, there's clock time with Kronos, and then there's the timeliness with Kairos.

And so that epistemic journey, we don't need to deny or even take a realism or not stance on the chronology.

we do need to take a reality of that journey in the abductive semiotic space with time.

Then Steven, you brought in this road and path metaphor.

And so one thought there was these are like signposts, like they're labeling the quadrant, but we kind of have a cultural norm that actually that quadrant is all labeled.

It's not only labeled underneath the word and

so when we have a signpost and we say we're going along this road that doesn't mean you just gravitate and collide with the signpost in fact we're always like moving between and among signposts and then i just thought of someone saying like i'm in the city i'm as close as you can be to the one pin on google maps or something like that but actually even these labelings have a diffusive aspect to them

So outside of important and clarifying scholarly debates where we are like with both feet on one label and trying to knock others off their perch with both feet on their label, which we looked at in the sort of survivor context previously, the people in the audience and in the crowd and the co-creators that the Hippolyto and Van Ness paper really artfully focuses attention on

It's like, what about the fact that social cognition is distributed and inactive and in culture?

What about that?

They're in that trough between the signposts.

So those are a few aspects.

And then one last one was like, Dean, you mentioned relation as relativity and relation as entanglement.

And it makes me think about, as this legend helps us see aspects of, edges can mean different things.

look at a lot of base graph representations where edges have a certain interpretation in a statistical framework but even then with effective functional and anatomic connectivity we've also talked about different kinds of edges and now here we're in the space-time of semiosis and there are edges and some of those edges reflect relationships

amongst nodes and others are entanglements.

So the ankle bone and the knee bone might be like entangled in the physical real world.

Whether we know about that link or not, there's something to it that's real in the sense that Majeed is using realism.

And then there's also a relationship with a creative enough forger amongst everything.

because you can say the relationship between the ankle and the field of astronomy is they both start with letter a or you could do any other number or this is just not that that's the simplest relationship is they're not the same thing or they both are related to the same thing it's general it's not always a useful statement to make well forks are not spoons

Okay, but utility is just one of the virtues or the criteria by which we might evaluate a certain epistemic path.

And our harshness on grading or evaluating epistemic paths doesn't always have to be extreme and there doesn't have to be one rubric either.

So there's so many connections in that space.

pragmatism and the productivity and the social setting where all productivity is ultimately embodied brings pieces in that are hopefully of epistemic and pragmatic value.

Let's go to the comparisons or do you want to stay here, Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
No, I just want to point something because in order for the comparisons to make sense, I have to kind of keep up my context.

Okay, yes.

So these arrows, I want to just say quickly, the unidirectionality results from limits or constraints, things we've used expressions up and lower bounds.

And bidirectionalities result from parallel processing, things like arbitrary parameterization, which Blue and I and you talked about a lot last week, the arbitrariness of that.

Then the question becomes, does a bridge, right, as an idea, remain a bridge

as a materialization, as entailments.

Things like the relatives part that Carl talks about, the parents and the children.

And, and we've been talking about this a lot, and entanglements, meaning the relationship of same and different.

So how does that play out?

Typically from an academic way of producing that is to start with, well, we've got to come up with a process.

We've got to come up with a methodology to derive a product.

What I'm suggesting active inference does is it starts with a whole bunch of products.

It's like what Inez and Thomas talked about in their paper.

You co-construct that social space.

You start with a product and then you learn how to translate and interpret.

One other quick thing.

On the other side of this paper, it says a Markov blanket is a scale-free statistical tool.

Yes.

Yes, yes, it is.

And in Majid and Addie's paper, in order to stay in a non-equilibrium city, stay with its environment, an organism must regulate its internal entropy.

The Markov blanket of a node consists of its parents, children, and co-parents.

That's all true.

So it depends on whether you start with a product and move to the process or whether you start with the process and move to the product.

And that's where things really open up and optionality really becomes a thing with active inference, or at least that's what I'm trying to argue.


SPEAKER_01:
Also in that I saw a bridge, not as just the thing that you drive on, but a bridge is a stance.

It's a position like a back bend and it's a game.

And in that interpretive space is the difference between the signaling molecule at the cellular level and human linguistic communication.

So not to return only to that, but in that space, we can respect

whatever led that generative model of NS to say that and mean that.

And it's always going to be a yes and with our interpretation.

And to the extent that there are anti-virtues of model comparison, speaking for another cognitive entity could be something like that because you're never going to escape the fact that it's your framing still of their intentionality and

So how are we going to take that as a starting point rather than shut the door on discussion because of that being a real feature of social discourse, Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and this sort of further to that product process

and how that fits and the potential bridges that gives.

Dean, can I just ask you, are you saying as well, this links to the idea of the modeling, again, we're coming back to the idea of modeling rather than the model.

So with active inference, you're not wheeling in the Trojan horse with a model that you're going to take out.

We're bringing in a modeling process where the product can be

retro interpreted almost or reverse engineered or somehow maybe there's something in that.

Would that make sense to what you're talking about?


SPEAKER_03:
Again, it's easier to put down a critical path because people are familiar with that.

These are the steps.

Check these boxes and this will be your result.

All this is doing is showing the inversion of that

and what the possibility is.

So I'm agreeing with you, Stephen.

How do we bring both into people's front of mind attentional space?

Because I think it's both that are dancing with one another as we are figuring something out.

If we want to follow, that doesn't require both.

But if we want to forage or stigmatically arrive,

at a place we don't know other than as an abstraction, even the, I don't want, Daniel, you're the expert at this, but I don't know what the abstraction is for an ant that has faith that whatever they are doing in terms of following that trail is what they were put on this good earth to do.


SPEAKER_01:
The puns will come, but I might even say that that's how ants are.

Let's go to the first comparison.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

We're talking about, yeah, go for it.

Just describe this.


SPEAKER_03:
He does is remove the limits.

If you notice all four of the red lines on the outside of the previous diagram have been removed because this was the inactive social cognition paper.

And essentially what this does is divide up that space and

It takes the generative model and allows it to now be categorized if that's what you want to do.

If you want to move from the triadic of abductive, deductive, and inductive, this is how you actually create those different subcategories within the larger picture.

So there's a quote from their paper, from Menez and Thomas' paper, it's possible to understand active inference in two ways, a realist view,

that the properties of the model constructed by applying active evidence tools should also be expected to exist as an ontological property in the scientific phenomenon we're trying to explain.

A non-realist view that the model used is simply an instrumental tool.

Once applied to some activity, it allows the scientists to draw interpretations and explanations.

And then they go on to talk about why they use dynamical systems theory.

So we already talked today about, so what happens when you cross a threshold?

Is that when complexity arises versus when you're below the threshold and that's when something different than complexity exists?

And so my argument would be, yes, you can have something that's complexity and then you can have something that's complicated and tools and instruments are still complicated, don't get me wrong.

There's a huge technical investment that you have to make in terms of being able to make them function.

But the note that I wanted to put down here was,

Is causal order being explicated, not as some generality, as in I'm being imaginal now on some abstracted level, but rather as a specific place in time, the relational causality patterns from which context and longevity, and I love Majid without any prompting, talking about temporal depth.

We started down that path two lifetimes ago.

That can be gapped, can actually be addressed as placed.

in that distribution, right?

Because we respect both difference and distance within the collective as a new scale, as relationally causal.

Now actively inferring, which includes selection from with and in a distribution, the counterfactual, which if, this goes right back to what Majeed said about, we could use it as a grounding for the model selection.

is not only able to function as a tool, but of selection by the selector processing, the action taker with the real realm by the free energy principle.

So we must first deconstruct, meaning if there's anything within this that needs categorization and separation, we can do that in order to co-construct or choose.

Choose how to move from a product to this is entailing that, or this is entangled with that.

All we have to do is see it without the bounds or the horizons.

Same image, one last thing.


SPEAKER_01:
Let me contrast that with two slightly more technical notes.

The first is figure 9.1 in the March 2022 Active Inference textbook.

This is what's described as the meta-Bayesian perspective.

And so here, the outer shell

is the experimenter and the experimental context that they're providing in terms of stimuli and then the behavior that they're observing of the entity in system and they are making a cognitive model of an entity so this is cognitive modeling as a process that's one aspect and it can be an active inference process from the experimenter

without falling into the all minds are scientists fallacy that Jelle Brunberg has adequately sketched for us even in 2016, but we can still see an active inference framing of the outer experimental loop and use compatible frameworks for modeling the inner cognitive loop.

And then one other note there

with this last section of what you wrote is when we're using the active blockference package, which is implementing active inference in CAD-CAD, a complex systems modeling framework, CAD-CAD enables parameter sweeps.

So you can have a parameter inside your simulation, 0.1, and then you could test and run a bunch of simulations concurrently or in series, like what if it were 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4.

We've also thought towards using active inference exactly in this meta Bayesian way, because the parameter sweep space can become vast.

If you have hundreds of parameters, the sweeping across hundred dimensional spaces is massive.

The space is large, which actually motivates an imperative for searches.

And that brings timeliness back into the picture through the scientific modeling process in finite lives, finite resources, and so on.

where we're using active inference and finding optimally informative experiments of parameters to test about the inner system.

And so this is like a case where in the visual, graphical, analytical framing shown here in figure nine one, or in the computational implementation with active block inference,

In both of those technical settings, mathematical and computational, and then this setting, whatever it is that's on this slide, all of those are showing it's not even just like left eye open, right eye open.

This is binoculars.

We're not just switching the monocle from one eye to another.

It's actually able to be like wrapping and gripping itself in this way.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
thanks if you go back to that previous slide that ties to this from the textbook um i don't know if you still got it there the text image yeah um the there's where it says subjective model i would imagine

that itself could be called, you know, might be thought of as an instrument of sorts, or a modelling process.

There's a question about how this can be interpreted, and it's useful, maybe this is a sort of a bridge, because even within this, it's like, well, subjective is an interesting term, where it's actually now being modelled out, where is it objective, where is it...

where would that then be in terms of, is it a case of really getting a feel for these parameters as they sweep, you find the sweet spots, you find that scale friendliness that starts to emerge

could be enough i mean that could be what a lot of organisms are doing as well although it's refined obviously through evolution but you know as you sweep it is what pragmatically gets you where you need to be as opposed to being real values that have been aimed for

um so you get into this interesting loop i think that dean was showing there between the realism anti-realism i mean there might even be times to break realism to get out of that hard lock and say this is really what's going on no it's a sweep to find a scale friendliness it's uh you know dean was going to say something i'm going to pass it over no no no i just love love this because without any sort of prompting that that diagram that i put up


SPEAKER_03:
I don't know when Carl built that diagram.

I know when I built mine and ported it over to this set of slides.

It was many, many years ago.

And the thing that I always said to people who I shared it with and I tried to unpack it and explain it was I want you to manipulate it.

Well, the fantastic thing is many, many times Daniel in his capacity as a

host and moderator of these live streams, he takes information and he manipulates it, which is exactly what I had participants in the programming that I was doing actually do.

Because if it's left as the representation and the person isn't allowed to move things around and actually play with it, then they have to take, I'm imposing on them, where the person reading Carl's books and Carl's representation, that process

to product, like there's a product now in front of you, that's already been established.

And now you're interpreting that.

But every time you manipulate it, you actually start by creating your own product first, and then through the manipulation, discover the relationship and the relativity.

So one of the things, whether it's Carl's representation or my much cruder one, it's still when the person picks it up,

and literally sweeps through it, Steven, as you were describing it, that's when the inversion actually takes place.

If you leave it static, if you leave it as a bridge, and then you don't get a chance to move it around and manipulate it and re-represent it through your own inaction, that's when we tend to get, I mean, some of us are super bright.

I'm not one of those people.

That's why I had to give people like me

the opportunity to say, don't just leave it on the page, play with it, do something with it, enact it into your own set of comprehensions.


SPEAKER_01:
So here's a little,

evocative image meme but let's to complete the comparison we discussed how we had the open edge quadrant model here and some quotes from the inactive dynamic paper now we're going to go to the next slide where the bounding of the red is on the outside of the

visual, and we're taking quotes from the abductive paper.

So what quotes did you highlight from the paper, and what does the change in the visualization represent?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, so first thing they see is that the rows and the columns have disappeared, and all we've done is made sure that there's those edges on the outside.

So just to confirm that.

So remember, this is just comparison one.

There were six comparisons between these two papers that I pulled.

So I want to make that clear too.

But on this first comparison, just to show what the difference is between an edgeless and an edge-constrained, this is especially the case, this is a quote now from Adi and Majid's paper.

This is especially the case if we assume that the development of markup blankets by Friston now eclat Friston blankets

unlike their original characterization works by Judea Pearl on probabilistic causal networks, admit of a realist interpretation of the relationship between the organism and the environment.

While the role, so it's variability retained, the role of the concepts of the Markov blanket and Pearl blankets and many treatments of the free energy principle is an instrumentalist one, whereas in Pierce's even stronger terms,

concede to a nominalist interpretation of meaning, Frist and Blankets are realist, not only in the non-instrumentalist sense, but also in the sense of being non-nominalist entities.

The modal terms of references are two real possibilities, such as what's conceivable or produced by imagination, anticipatorially related to the future states of affairs, are used in making sense of the key aspects of the theory.

We will argue in this paper that free energy principle has been put at the center

of a viable picture of an organism's insight into the consequences of its action and its ability to choose the best or most efficient strategies that contribute to the fulfillment of best possible consequences.

So not just consequences now, but over a temporal field.

And all I noted was realism is the philosophical position that posits that universals are just as real as physical,

measurable material.

Nominalism is the philosophical position that promotes that universal or abstract concepts.


SPEAKER_01:
I just lost my place.

Sorry.

I just made a new line.

Abstract concepts do not exist in the same way as physical, tangible material.


SPEAKER_03:
From instrumentalism to insight and insight or minimum to, we talk about that all the time because we're talking about relational and not just relative, to rules.

We build categories, we generate hierarchies, and eventually we see patterns to model.

We gain an insight.

Then the pattern is tested.

There's another paper that I read about it that's fantastic called The New Light on Peirce.

And I quote it from that.

This is what Peirce had in mind when he wrote Lady Welby.

That's reasonable to adopt a given hypothesis.

Reasonable, right?

if it will be wise to go to some expense to put the hypothesis to test, dependent upon the advantage that that would accrue from knowing the truth of the hypothesis.

From that testing the result of consistency, i.e.

repeatability, comes universal things like laws, rules, actions, etc.,

That's the stuff that in my diagram is on the right-hand side.

This is the entirety of the pro.

It is the entirety of the process real.

Yes, because it's complex.

A reality made up of processes, some of which have no basis in reality.

Again, from the new light on Pierce again, Addie's paper.

The fourth memoir entitled Analysis of the Methods of Mathematical Demonstration opened with the affirmation that his first real discovery about mathematical procedure was that there are two kinds of necessary reasoning, the collateral and the theoretic.

These he explained as follows.

Collateral deduction is where it is only necessary to imagine

any case in which the premises are true in order to perceive immediately that the conclusion holds in that case.

The aromatic deduction is a deduction in which it's necessary to experiment in the imagination upon the image of the premise, then in order from the result of which experiment to make, sorry, collateral deductions to the truth of the conclusion.

So again, this kind of hints that if we

remove too many things and reduce too far, we are left with nothing but instrumentalism.

So within those bounded contexts that we've now arbitrarily parameterized, there's a whole bunch of things that we can pack into that silo.

And those things can move around and float around in there.

They're not constrained

to the upper right and the lower left corner.

Now all of a sudden, those bidirectionalities are indicators of just how much fluidity is going on as we pass from product and sweep across to insight.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Dean.

Let me add a thought here.

So just for reminder and reference, other resources you'll find so much more.

But deduction is the inference of or about particular instances by referencing generalities, laws, and principles.

Induction, in contrast, is where we go from what we've observed with the instances up towards forming generalities.

So deduction, going down in that kind of a top-down framing.

It's very interesting that the deduction is split into two components here.

You said collateral, I believe, and I think that may be totally valid, but I at least would read this as corollarial, as in of or related to a corollary.

Well, what have we heard?

Nowhere else but here and elsewhere.

Active inference is a corollary process theory of the free energy principle.

So from a more general principle in the definition, the corollarial deduction is a situation where a case is only needed to be imagined, really imagined, where the premises are true.

Propose a blanket where there's a particular entity and the blanket is separating them from the generative process in such and such a way, such that the entity is a generative model and the internal states are doing some kind of mode tracking or path tracking of external states in a cybernetic good regulator framework.

The premise is merely a premise.

It's not the culmination.

So that's what we see in the corollarial deduction.

All you have to do is consider the premise to perceive immediately that the conclusion holds in that case.

Well, yes, if you propose setting up the Bayes graph to be truly just that way as a corollary of the free energy principle, then that is already like a story arc that's been completed.

No one's saying that you wrote the paper or that you had the startup that's profitable, but also no one can say that it's incorrect that you made a premise that kind of completed its arc.

And then in the second case, we're still within deduction.

However, it's necessary to experiment in the imagination.

So a thought experiments

which we can place into a setting of mental action and attention and counterfactuals, counterfactual generation requires the generation of counterfactuals.

Ergo, it is abductive.

It requires a generative phase and a selective phase.

So we're going to generate and select.

That's the abductive loop that's happening with a when in a semantic space.

as part of this theorematic deduction.

And then the results of that experiment can be used to make corollarial deductions to the truth of the conclusion.

So that's kind of counterfactuals on imagined premises.

And guess what?

It's real.

Steven?


SPEAKER_02:
Can I add one question in there?

We make our deduction from a particular instance and we abduct the kind of best policy selection.

When we induce generally this induction, I see that as kind of a narrowing the gap often.

There's a generality and then a bit like reinforcement learning, like trying to, you're inducing between.

And that's often what we see is most visible.

Someone's trying to reduce the gap in the physical world with the product that we've got that we're manipulating.

um because that's kind of what we can see i was speaking i think earlier to dean about this you know someone's making a pot and that you know they have the piece of clay that goes wobbly and they're sort of making it into a pot you know so there's kind of like they're inducing inductively trying to make it closer and closer to something that's more like the general idea of a pot but that's what we see

And at some point, we might not know what they're even doing.

Then suddenly we deduce it's a pot.

Because like you say, there's a particular instance of being evoked.

But behind all of that, there's abductive processes.

I don't know whether the word biosemiotics is the term.

Actually, I'm still not quite sure how to put that in there.

But I think that fits in with what you're saying.

I wonder what your thoughts are on that sort of inductive take.


SPEAKER_01:
If I can just highlight how this comparison one relates to the realism instrumentalism and the clay pot creation.

So here we have the quadrant separated again, totally speculating, working with Dean's graphical artistry.

In one totally defensible and absolutely scientific framing,

The viewer of the pot construction could see their entire logical apparatus and inference about what is happening as an instrumental process happening.

I'm not saying that they're really making a pot.

I'm just saying that's a socially constructed term, and it's totally contingent on my enculturation, what I believe is a pot.

Maybe they're making a piece of art.

Who am I to say that it's not something else?

Maybe it could be used as a hammer.

So...

that places the inference about the system at the forefront and provides clarity as well as openness the edges of the drawing are open because it does leave a lot of structuredness surrounding the origin point again but also room to go off in many many directions what majid returned our attention to was the

nature of observations coming from the generative process, coming from the niche, if it's whimsical, as I think he said, well then yes, instrumentalism is fine in its totality.

However, if it's not whimsical, if there really is a table that you're going to get hit by, if that is really something that you're buying, if that is something with limited resources we're doing, are we making a pot or are we making a pan?

Then the boundedness

is now moving to that scenario, which includes the mindedness of all of the entities.

One entity is not speaking for the other, but that entity is seeing the situation as real in that it is truly providing pragmatic implications for survival, and it's real meaning.

It's really biosemiotic meaning.

And so here, the boundedness is more around the situation.

And in that space, in that room, there are paths amongst the theory where if you go into a different situation, you cross the line.

Now, crossing a line is not like always a bad thing, but all of a sudden, if someone's daydreaming about a totally different topic, they've exited the situation.

But within the situation, there are a diversity of approaches.

Here, the situation is actually being used just as an experimental context for a theoretician or a researcher in their removal to be able to consider different ways of modeling.

So I'm not sure if this is consistent or Dean orthodoxy or heterodoxy, but I see the boundedness as

allowing for that center of action to be approached in a pragmatic, not a theoretical, but not academic approach.

Whereas by making the divisions, cutting nature at the joints and like, oh, wow, those joints correspond to longstanding philosophical debates in academia.

Who knew?

And maybe they don't always correspond to those joints.

Yes, Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
I know we're getting close to the end here.

So thank you for explaining that in your words.

That helps me because I'm always curious to whether or not the things that I'm trying to share actually are making sense to other people.

And it sounds like it maybe is gaining some traction.

I want to say this one thing before we have to sign off here.

Traditionally, in most academic settings, and I'm as guilty of this as anybody because I was a curriculum designer for a part of my life, we start out trying to figure out how to construct a plan.

And I think what activism affords is this idea that instead of we construct a plan and then others follow it, called a curriculum,

What this potentiates, in addition to that, this is not dismissing that or saying that that doesn't have its time and its place.

What this does is asks us whether or not we could forage a plan.

Could we figure out how to fly, how to build the plane on the fly?

That's all this is entertaining.

So that you actually have both.

So when you're a Sully and Hudson River has never traditionally been a landing strip

it becomes one, but you need both.

You need to think and to do, you need the action and the abduction.

And so if you limit yourself to one or the other for the sake of not being cognitively overloaded, I get that, that's the deconstruction piece.

But if you are foraging for a plan, the plan falls out of a product.

Your priors meld with your priorities

And then it becomes self-evident what the plan is, as opposed to somebody handing you a list and then you simply following.

So I wanted to get that in before we have to call it a day.

But I think that's important to sort of put that context both in gripped and as gripper, because it's no more complicated or simple than that.


SPEAKER_01:
thanks we are on our last slide now we got through one of the six comparisons and the six were the tip of the iceberg of the tip so we know that we can never linearize or vocalize everything that needs to occur but we also carry on so we can pause here reflect on

the last three videos in this series, 47, 0, 1, and 2.

Where to now?

How are we different after 47.2 than before 47.00?

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
My suggestion is that when we reflect, we are literally abducing.

We are literally looking back at the entire

narrative or continuum or whatever you want to call it, and trying to figure out what just happened.

So yeah, and I think that's when a lot of the stuff that's, that's not instrumentalist turns real.

I don't think people actually get a real sense of real until they do the reflection.


SPEAKER_01:
the classical scientific communication, public speaking advice, which I look forward to seeing how what Majeed shared about economy of research also re-imagines the doing and the communication of science, of course, but some of the classic advice is tell them what you're going to tell them, tell them, and then tell them what you've told them.

We can turn that into a bit more of a inactive or a planning based

framing like consider what is about to happen abduction during the live stream think about what is happening attention and then after the live stream consider what happens reflection all of those processes are happening in the dot zero one and two of each sentence of each person speaking turn

in the videos and at all these different scales that's as real as anything so it's really a nice hopefully sequence that we've engaged on and there may be more decimals to come on 47 certainly 48 and beyond will also carry forward in this historical way

in which when we talk about concepts beyond 47, we'll have this shared basis of bringing abduction in and so on.

So, Stephen, any last thoughts?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I'd like to... Thanks for going here.

I think...

we've had enough traction to show that there's a lot of value in trying to wrestle between.

And there is, as well as that idea of the scientific, you know, like Daniel, you mentioned the scientific communication where you have something that's quite clear to communicate.

There's also when it's opening up a space for something that could go down multiple

different routes once it's contextualized.

So I think this speaks to contextuality, situatedness, and may require some

I'm interested in how this may require some nonverbal kind of more experiential processing to like of certain places to explore.

So I think that might be open up the potential to sit in between and just take something from here and say, Okay, what would that be like experientially, and just groove in that.

So that's something I'm going to explore what that might be like, Dean penultimate words.


SPEAKER_03:
I want to thank the two of you again for creating a kind of, in Stephen's point, a kind of a safe space to take these kind of risks.

Because again, we're not just sticking to the script.

We're kind of maybe triangulating off two scripts.

And that doesn't mean that you're always going to be right.

I mean, if people come back and say, wow, were you ever wrong about this?

I get to learn.

But I think before that opportunity even arose, prior to that,

There were two people that are now sitting on my desktop here who shared in that risk analysis effort.

And I want to thank both of you for being so supportive around taking this kind of, let's hang it out there and see who salutes and who takes it down.

Because if it's taken down, I'm okay with that too.

But just being able to have the opportunity has been spectacular in terms of developing how I think.


SPEAKER_01:
Ask not what you can do for your corollary process theory.

See you fellows later.

Thank you.

Thank you.