Daniel Friedman:
Hello, welcome.


Daniel Friedman:
It's July 14th, 2026.

We're in active guest stream 128.1 on active inference as the test time scaling law for physical AI agents.

Thank you, Omar and Christo, for joining, and please take it away for the presentation.


Daniel Friedman:
Okay.


Omar Hashash:
Thank you, Daniel, for having us today in this presentation.

Today, as you said, we'll be presenting one of our new works.

So first of all, for the people that don't know me, I'm Omar Hashash.

I'm a postdoc at Virginia Tech.

And today I'll be also joined with my colleague, Christa Thomas, which is an assistant professor at WPI.

And together we'll be presenting one of our recent works, which is active inference as a test time scaling law for physical AI.

So it's a bit of an interesting work.

It gives a bit of new concepts to the role of active inference and how it plays it in physical AI and why is it really necessary to be posed as a scaling law for physical AI agents.

So just as a brief

introduction uh so i recently finished my phd at the brand the department of electrical computer engineering at virginia tech back in december 2025 and where my focus was on wireless communications and ai including topics like world models and digital twins and edge intelligence and i'll pass it over here to crystal just a little bit to introduce himself


Christo Kurisummoottil Thomas:
uh yeah thanks for more uh i'm christopher thomas i am currently an assistant professor at uh wpi and i lead a research group uh named trustworthy resilient ai and networks um and i did my prayer to this i did my post postdoc associate at virginia tech ec department

And my research mainly lies at the intersection of AI, native wireless networks, semantic communication, physical AI, and mathematical foundations of AI.


Omar Hashash:
Yeah, so both of us have this kind of hybrid background on AI and wireless communications at the same time.

And we're going to see how that plays a role in extending us more into neuroscience concepts like active inference.

So without any further notice, I think we can start first with the fact that AI has become the most transformational technology that is changing all our worlds.

And of course, one of those worlds is actually the wireless communications world, and especially the 6G, the next generation of wireless communications that we're expecting to see roughly in a couple of years.

So we already started to touch on improvements with the current generations of AI that we have.

We call these networks as AI-native networks.

We started to see improvements in terms of efficiency and latency.

The improvements are massive, actually.

But that's only the good part of the story.

But there's also, as any other story, there's also the bad and the ugly.

So how do the bad and the ugly look like?

Well, they look something like this.

So the fact that we're training what we call as an AI native interface, for example, we train it to send beams to users in the network.

So these users can be humans, they can be physical agents.

So a part of these

uh beams actually work very well but the fact is that the world is always non-stationary and dynamic and it's always changing so these so these kind of uh tasks hold some sort of problems and even fail at test time um so even if we look at the level of the agents themselves that are connected to the network we can see that we have plenty of examples on failures as well so for example we have autonomous vehicles that are trained on millions and millions of driving trials

They still continue to fail in ways that we just can't comprehend in the world.

At the same time, we have these kind of robots that are trained to win Olympics, for example, like this robot over here, but still crash into a man on an athletics track, even though it's trained to win an Olympics.

So there's a lot of things that don't make a lot of sense over here.

And ironically, with the current generation of AI, we do have these big, large language models that can actually win in math and math.

So I think here now we can pose a question, which is, why is it that today's AI is good enough to win math Olympiad, but it fails at this type of Olympiad, or more generally, in very simple green world scenarios that are very easy for us, especially with this massive amount of training?

I'm not going to answer this now, but I'm going to use it as a motivation for the rest of the presentation and to say that we're actually missing something very big over here.

so so if i want to look now at what do we want from these ai ages so the real the physical agents the robots the the vehicle the network so what we want from these ai agents is to become adaptive to the worlds that are happening we can start from the first one the fact that the world is always changing uh we need to train it on something but there's always going to be more data that we didn't train on so we need to have a um

a principled way that we act in the states that we didn't actually see before.

At the same time, we want those agents to be generalizable.

So we want them to train them on something, but at the same time, to be able to use them on something else.

At the same time, we want to be autonomous.

We don't want to stay in the loop or probably minimize our presence in the loop with the AI system as much as possible.

At the same time, we want them to have this continual learning capability.

So we wanted to learn on top and top and top of other things.

So we're starting from a very far away part over here with the current generation of AI, which is mostly based on large language models like the GPT models that we have, which are a massive success.

So part of the success that started with GPT, at least the new part, was introducing these reasoning capabilities.

So I think back with the old models, the old three models, the old one model, we started to see how this reasoning can pop up into these models and actually give you a better answer for the agents.

So for the first time, we had this new kind of test time scaling law, which started from the fact that if you give it more computed test time, you give the agent more computed test time, you can have a better answer.

So this was followed by another kind of capability, which is called planning.

And this is what ushered in the agentic era or AI agents that we see today.

And this is where GPT-5 and all the clouds that we have today.

So basically, planning is the capability of breaking down a complex task into a sequence of actions in order to achieve a goal.

So this is where we currently roughly are right now, probably more or less.

But we can see here that we're moving on a cognitive path.

so what we can say is that the current forms of reasoning and planning are good for language models are probably good enough for language models but are not enough for real world agents because the world works in a different way than language so the world is driven by laws that works apart from language how language works in terms of syntax and all those stuff so but that that route seems to be right

so if we were to build on these cognitive capabilities and the fact that they were starting to work so this means that there should be other cognitive capabilities that we're searching for in order to reach the characteristics of the AI systems that we're searching for so if you want to dig deep here and try to search for this missing cognitive capability that's needed to move forward with the world

we can see that it needs to be a cognitive capability that is in direct touch with the world and it's focused on the world.

And that capability is nothing but something called common sense.

So what is common sense?

Common sense is, as the name implies, it's the common amount of knowledge of how the world works that we humans use in order to make sense of our world.

It's our ability to understand the world and make use of it, which is something that is found in each human of us.

So that's great.

How can we plug in this common sense?

So common sense is a broadly defined term, but we kind of know if you want to introduce this common sense into AI age, we have to search for the component of the cognitive system that drives it.

So that component is actually what we call as a work model.

So what is a world model?

A world model of the physical world allows humans to understand the world in terms of its real-time state, in terms of the causal structures that exist between the elements of the world.

And at the same time, it allows us to understand the dynamical evolution of how this world will evolve with time.

so but the introduction of the world model itself so the fact that you're taking a state of the world and trying to understand it and trying to see how it's going to evolve in the future this requires other cognitive capabilities such as perception for example so perception is the capability to actually understand the world and try to grasp it and to make meaning of it but if we try to zoom out now at this specific moment

What are we trying to say with all of these cognitive capabilities?

So we said that we have that ladder that started with reasoning, we added planning, we added common sense for the world model, and now we're saying that we need perception.

What are we trying to say with all these cognitive capabilities?

What we're indirectly acknowledging over here is the fact that we need a cognitive solution that includes all these cognitive capabilities on top of today's AI.

So, and this is not something new.

We already know that because we already know that the AI that we have today, that's roughly based on neural networks, they're called system one architectures from psychology.

They're called system one architectures because they're reactive.

uh but we know that we're missing these system two type of architectures so we know already that the system one it composes around roughly 95 of how we take actions in the world and this is what we've based ai systems on since the beginning and now

What we're trying to do is to look at these other system two rational type of thinking ways and trying to see how can these come up with a new architecture in order to solve the problems that we have.

so how does this architecture look like it looks something roughly like this it looks something like these cognitive modules that we have that i talked about the perception module and planning the world model all connected together uh of course over a network and the network acts here as a bridge uh or additional computing resource for the ages that exist in the world

so that it benefits itself for the decisions, intelligent decisions that it can take, just like the beamforming example I was giving at the beginning, and all the other intelligent actions that it can help the agents do in the world.

So this was based on one of our previous works.

And here, I'll shout out to one of our colleagues

which mentioned our presentation in one of the theoretical neurobiology groups before and

gave us credit for this nice work.

So this is actually us, yours truly over here with Crystal.

And what he was presenting is that our work is kind of an intersection with other leading works in the field, like, for example, Yann LeCun's vision of modular cognitive brain architecture and his famous model of the world.

But what we did over here is that we actually

We push things a little bit forward.

So what we kind of did is that we saw the other intersection with what Carfis is actually also presenting with active inference and the free energy principle.

And we tried to combine all of these things together into one kind of coherent story around world models that we're going to see here today.

So going back to this architecture that I was talking about, the first step to actually use this architecture is to sense the world.

So we already, in terms of wireless networks, already studied this before.

We have the abilities now in next generation networks to develop sensing capabilities that allow us to divide this world over wireless networks.

We said this before in previous works.

And I'll try to highlight here a little bit on the fact that we have these little

red dots that i have over here in red which are called digital twins so digital twins are the copies or the replicas or the different models of the ai agents of these physical ai agents so they're the models of the agents the physical agents that exist in the world and we have the world models

that are basically the other things around it.

And digital twins are a part of the world model itself, along with the different elements that exist in the world.

So basically, this is just the high-level concept how digital twins work.

So they're based on the fact that they're a part of the world model.

They intersect with world models.

Both of them, they allow

Basically, with a digital twin, you can actually move that work model forward.

And this intersects with the notion of AI, which is called action-conditioned work models.

So digital twins allow you to move forward in time.

At the same time, they allow you to send some configuration back to what we call the physical twin in the physical world.

So these configurations, we still don't know what they are, basically, in 6G.

And this is actually what we'll be uncovering in this work.

So basically, as I was saying, digital twins, they take real-time updates from the world, and they return some real-time optimization feedback back to the agents in the world.

And their role is roughly somewhere around what-if analysis and doing predictions and monitoring for the AI agent.

And we've also shown in one of our previous work before that these agents can have continual learning capabilities, but we're going to show it more in depth over here today.

So roughly going back to that architecture that I was talking about, now we can look at that part where we talk about the agent, the digital twin.

of the agent as going forward in time as a process of reasoning, because we're seeing it from a different lens, not from a 6G wireless communications lens, but probably from a neuroscience or AI point of view, where reasoning is actually trying to optimize some certain action for the agent in the world.

But at the same time, what we want to do over here is similar to what LLMs do.

So we want to reason in order to take, just like LLMs reason to give you a better answer for some harder prompt, for example.

What we want to do is that we actually want to use this reasoning capability that's now on the network in order

to allow the agent to reason to take a better action in the world.

But that will require something like test time scaling, the one that was shown empirically in large language models, but is basically missing today in these physical AI systems.

so this is basically the goal of our work today we're going to present how these how this reasoning over the network can benefit the ai agents so that it reasons to make to take a better action and generalize in new unforeseen scenarios that it hasn't been trained on and to see how this actually results once built from first principles like active inference it results in a test time scaling law similar to the test time scanning law that we saw with large language models

So this is our work that I'll be presenting today.

And it has been recently released on archive for people that want to read more in depth about it.

So let's start with test time scaling in the real world.

So before we start, we have to look at the story from the beginning.

So what we were doing before with our L agents, for example, is that we used to train them.

And then after a certain time, we would reach a, for example, we're talking, of course, you were talking, for example, about some example of autonomous driving.

what we used to do is that we used to train these autonomous agents and then we used to plug them in the world after some convergence of policy we just to plug them in the world and just we just hope that things work out perfectly fine but that's not always the case and ai fails once the world changes and of course we have a lot of examples about that

so before before we go to solve the problem what we have to do is to actually go back to the origin so what are we actually doing over there how does the brain actually does this type of learning and to see what we are actually missing from the story

So to start first, we have to acknowledge that we have two regions of the brain that are working together.

Basically, we have the prefrontal cortex where all the learning, reasoning, planning, the world model, everything happens over there.

And then after that, once we reach that convergence that I was talking about over here, what we do is that we take the policy and plug it back in the basal ganglia.

And after that, roughly what we do is that we really don't need all the effort from the prefrontal cortex anymore because that's the smart part of our brain.

We don't need to devote any big effort for that task.

And it becomes somehow a subconscious task at that specific moment.

And we start to rely more on our policy while working.

And this is actually what we did before.

But the question is now, if I were to ask you, how much do you think about driving while driving?

the answer would probably be around zero.

You don't think about driving while driving.

And this is something we know, and this is something agrees with what the famous psychologist, Daniel Kahneman, was a Nobel Prize winner, actually identified before.

So he roughly said that we use our intuition system one around 95% of the time in order to take actions.

but at the same time there's this five percent that we also take actions with so when does this five percent pop up actually and why is it just five percent so one example of how we can use that is through surprise

So for example, if you're here driving a vehicle, and let's say you're on a highway, and then you get a jaywalking pedestrian, for example, that suddenly wants to cross the road, you weren't expecting it.

And actually, after that, you got a surprise that you didn't expect, right?

Because if you didn't expect something, you wouldn't get a surprise at the beginning.

And once that happens, what you do in that case is that you start to think.

So if I move forward, I probably hit the person, but I don't want that to happen.

So this is what you'd likely be saying, or probably saying that if I possibly go slower, the person behind me will probably bump into me and I'll head into a crash, another crash.

So probably what I need to do is probably just lower my speed just a little bit to allow the person to move in front of me, cross whatever they want to go.

And then after that, I can just continue my path.

So this type of thinking over here is exactly necessary in order to pass that certain situation that I wasn't really trained on.

I didn't really expect in front of me.

So roughly, if I want to combine it now, so this is kind of how we do this type of decision making.

So basically, when you're driving, if there's no prediction error in front of you, you did not expect anything surprising.

Everything in the world is working precisely as you would want it to do.

You basically use your Bayes of Ganglia and basically the policy that exists in your Bayes of Ganglia.

But at the same time, if you do have a prediction error,

this means that your policy is somehow sub-optimal and you need to go through your frontal cortex again you need to kick it in again until it handle this new situation for you so what you would do in that case is that you would reason before you take the right action at that specific moment

So now I probably ask you, where did we see the system before?

This kind of system that toggles between reasoning and not reasoning.

This is exactly what we've seen in

models and large language models like GPT-5.

So that's smart routing.

So this is, you could say probably this is from where it came from.

I'm going to see how that connects afterwards, but basically what the agents, the soft kind of agents, digital agents, language agents that we see today, when they reason or don't reason, they follow that specific scheme that is in the brain.

So basically the prediction error is the, um,

is the natural trigger, rather than having a holistic router.

The router is trying to approximate that trigger, natural trigger.

But the question here becomes, how do we actually deal with the scaling at that specific moment?

I said that we thought and took an action.

how is the action actually resulting over here?

How is it actually coming into place?

We still don't know.

And that's something still mysterious in the AI space.

But you see here what I presented just now in terms of that

prediction error and trying to reason or to move that prediction error.

This is exactly what active inference is.

So active inference is a first principle that describes how all living systems survive in the world.

And returning back to the example that I presented in the beginning, that humanoid robot and that people that is crashing.

So this is how that in other ways that

the absence of this minimum amount of freezing on top of the AIs that we have today can actually explain why those systems are dying systems in the world.

If this is how all systems survive in the world, all living systems like us, humans or animals,

survival in the world, and the fact that this is absent in those autonomous agents, autonomous physical AI agents that exist in the world, you can possibly find an explanation to the fact why these systems are dying.

So of course, uh, in contrast to what, uh, to what we have, uh, we can see here that what we need to do actually is to allow those systems to survive at this time, because as I said, it's the first principle of that explains how we survive in the world.

So survival at that specific moment over here, when we reached the conversions, so we were reaching something in non equilibrium steady state in terms of physics.

So from a genetic point of view, you need to maintain

non-equilibrium steady state by preserving the policy and the world model so that you can survive in the world.

So preserving that actually has two routes.

The first route is what existing works do, which is that they assume stationary conditions about the environment.

So in that case, the system works just in the states that you actually saw on the training set.

And survival is limited to just those conditions.

But

There's an alternative route for the system to survive, which is by integrating the first principles of survival from the beginning.

So you don't need to actually make your world frozen at this time.

You can keep it dynamic and non-stationary.

but give the agent the first principle of survival so that it survives in dynamic, non-stationary worlds.

So in that case, survival is no longer limited just to what the agent saw in the training set.

Now it actually survives even in new situations, and it allows it to generalize, which was our main goal from the beginning.

What we want is an agent that generalizes in unforeseen scenarios that we haven't seen before.

And in that case, by definition,

Surviving in the world is the main facet of a system, of an AI agent, basically, that generalizes.

So by guaranteeing survival, you're actually guaranteeing that the agent generalizes.

So, roughly speaking, this is what active inferences and what Carl Friston presented it as a way to remove prediction errors from the brain.

Of course, we always have these sensory information.

We're seeing if we don't have a prediction error, it means that we're in the region that minimizes free energy or basically surprised and we don't need to take any action.

However, if we do have a prediction error, we will try to act on the world so that we minimize that prediction error.

uh so of course in this way we can see that reasoning to reduce surprise is the minimum amount of reasoning in any in any living system to survive in the world that's the minimum amount of intelligence that you need to have in order to exist in the world over a long time so what we kind of did over here is that we tried to integrate this into what we know in terms of agents that we just don't need them to just survive we want to make them usable so that they can actually perform tasks

So we went back to integrate this with what we had in terms of reinforcement learning and the policies that we had.

So what happens in this case is that what we saw is that if we take in states and if those states are somehow unforeseen, it means that we can go reason

in order to remove the prediction error that results from this unforeseen scenario.

And at the same time, if we can use that test time scaling, we can use it to alter the actions to fit the specific scenario in order to make it optimal in that specific scenario so that the agent can actually generalize in that specific moment.

So roughly speaking, if you want to put it down graphically over here in the figure, what we were doing with reinforcement learning is that we were looking at those states that are highly probable and trying to focus on those states.

finding a policy that fits those states.

This is basically what reinforcement learning is doing.

And after that, what we did is that we froze the world.

We said that the world is not going to change.

So we're always going to be stuck in those states over there and those policies.

But we know that that fades in the real world.

What's actually happening in the real world is that because it's non-stationary, it will probably push you to a state

That is not a problem for you.

It's not a part of the set that you've seen in your training distribution.

What you need to do with that type of reasoning to minimize prediction errors is actually what pushes you back or scales you back to your characteristic set, which is the set of states where you can use your policy again.

So this is basically what we mean by test time scaling.

In this case, we can see, and this is a very nice viewpoint on the story, which is that every living system, in this case, shows a general objective to survive in the world.

And specifically, I'm saying here something general, because this is something that all living systems perform in the world.

So the fact that you are a living system, it means that you have an objective to survive in the world.

or else you would die so in that case we are governed by general objectives like survival over here and at the same time we have narrow objectives which allow us to achieve our specific tasks and goals with subsumed within that specific region of survival that we have

So I'll just give here an example, just like the jaywalking example of here, just to say how this system kind of works.

So basically, what we have is the fact that I have an autonomous driving vehicle, for example.

It's driving.

And everything's fine.

I have no prediction error.

This is something that we call passive influence in that case.

So we're just taking in sensory observations.

Everything is working as expected.

I have no problem.

And then suddenly what I have is that an agent that decides to jaywalk.

Sorry, a human that decides to jaywalk.

In that case, the network, of course, the network is acting here as an additional computing resource in addition to the agent that we have.

you don't need to focus a lot on what the network is doing.

The network is similar to the agent in that case.

They're kind of one system together.

So in this case, the network that we have will detect that there's a prediction error, and it will switch from passive to active inference about the world.

So what that means is that the network will engage in reasoning in order to minimize the surprise.

And it's going to use those digital twins that I talked about at the beginning, which capture the model of the agent and the work model itself in order to reason.

And what we want to do is that we want to reason, just like I was talking about, I was giving an example here, should I move forward faster?

Should I move slower?

So all that thinking together, we're going to use it in order to put down a value function.

So the value function here, we call it as a delta v. So basically, I'm trying to measure which action allows me to resolve my prediction error in that specific state that I am in.

And then what I want to do is that I'm going to take in that feedback from the network and send it back to the physical AI agent.

The physical AI agent

What it's going to do is that it's going to use this feedback.

It's like the prefrontal cortex sending the signals down to the basal ganglia.

So the policy is over here at the level of the agent of the vehicle here.

And it's going to use it in order to reason and do inference.

So it's going to scale its policy from pi node to pi node prime, for example, here.

So in that specific case, the action that it's going to take is going to be different than its normal.

It's going to be possibly to decrease its velocity in order to avoid an accident, for instance.

And then what happens is that after this jaywalking pedestrian just passes, I go back to my regular cases where I have my prediction error resolved and the pedestrian passes.

So I can go back just to my passive inventory.

So what you can see here is that our world is basically a transition always between foreseen scenarios, unforeseen scenarios, resolving these unforeseen scenarios, and then going back to foreseen scenarios.

This is how we survive in the world.

We're always transitioning between those different states.

So now I'm going to go into the system model.

So as I said before, we have an agent that is in the world.

It has a policy panel.

And we have a world model that exists over the network in this architecture.

One part of the world model is composed from these digital tools, these different alternative policies that the agent can have.

or models of the agent.

At the same time, we have other things that are called assets which capture the different things that exist in the world, just like the human, the houses, everything else besides the agents themselves.

And what's going to happen is that we're going to take sensing observations.

So it's not the agent itself that's doing the sensing, it's actually the network that's doing the sensing on behalf of the agent.

And what we're going to do is that we're going to do perception.

So we're basically going to map our observations to

the set of states that we have trying to make sense of the states, trying to infer what's going to happen over here in terms of the states.

And then once we have a surprise, so we have an unforeseen scenario, what's going to happen is that the network is going to engage in counterfactual reasoning to minimize surprise.

So it's going to think about all these different alternative routes with the different policies that they may have over here, different alternative policies.

And then, as I said, it's going to send back these digital twin configurations.

back to the agent in order to scale the policy and generalize in the unforeseen scenario.

So mathematically, we can look at perception, of course, as an inference process.

But to do that, we have to first define our generative world model in terms of the states and observations and the policies that we have.

Of course, before we do perception, we have to predict what the expected observation is going to be.

And then we're going to get our sensing observations from the world.

And then we're going to measure if there's a surprise or not.

If we do have a surprise, of course, this is how we measure the surprise.

It's just the easiest surprise.

And after that, if we do have a surprise, it means that we're going to cross some threshold epsilon in order to signal that there's an unforeseen scenario in front of us.

so the first thing that should happen in that case is that we should actually calculate the posterior because basically what we predicted about the world is not right we have an error so we have the first thing we have to do is to make sense of our world again by calculating this posterior after we saw our observations which is basically an inference process of it just we can see before we engage in plan and reason

So, the planning part, it constitutes these digital twins and work models that engage in counterfactual reasoning.

So, basically, the what-if analysis that I was giving an example about, in order to plan the plausible future world states.

And the goal, of course, of this reasoning is to actually minimize future surprise.

So our goal is to see how much surprise is going to result from each of these policies over here.

And you can see that it's going to be nothing but a measure of the entropy at each of those states in the future.

So from t plus 1 until the end of the time horizon that we have.

And then after that, what we're going to do is that we're going to use this reasoning that we did in order to build a value function.

We call it delta v.

And where the reward is actually minimizing surprise.

So as I said at the beginning, we have a general objective in the brain, which is to survive.

So basically it has a value function over here.

And then what we're going to do is that we're going to take this value and we're going to send it back to the agents in the world in order to scale the policy.

how that looks like it's a little bit similar to what perception did so we have the perception as inference of course planning is also as inference over here because planning is an extension of minimizing surprises in the future so it's also planning as inference and now we have also we have to model action as inference but here it's a different type of conference

the fact that when we did perception as influence the evidence that happened in front of us was 100 true it happened in front of us in the world so we're confident about it but when you want to do action as influence it's a little bit different

So it's based on imaginary virtual data in our brain, right?

When we were thinking, we were actually generating data.

That thing didn't happen in the world.

It happened inside our brain.

But luckily, we have Judea Pearl, who came up with this method of virtual evidence.

So he has a nice technique in order to update the beliefs in that case.

So we can see here, if we write it down, this is going to be something called a soft Bayesian update.

So it's soft because you don't really need to do a complete inference update over here.

So if you write it down, you can see here at the last line, you can write it in terms of a feed forward and reasoning or inference term.

which is something very nice.

Because if you really look at it, if you put that theta, which is basically your normalized surprise, if the world is mostly predictable, so your theta or surprise is basically equal to 0.

And if you put that exponential part over here equal to 0, you basically result in the feedforward policy that we had in reinforcement learning.

The fact is that action is always an inference process.

It's always modulated by that exponential term that we have over here.

And this is what scales the policy once we have prediction errors and once we have an unforeseen scenario.

So the policies in today's solution, they remain limited to the case where surprise is null due to the stationary assumptions about the world, just like we do in reinforcement learning.

So reinforcement learning is not stationary by itself at this time.

We made it stationary because we did not compensate for this factor over here in equation 5, which is clearly a special case of the equation.

However, the inference at this part can be challenging if you want to really solve the problem.

It can be challenging because marginalizing over all the possible states is computationally intractable in practice.

So to find a better solution, we need to resort to a variational Bayesian inference solution.

And I'll keep it here for Christo to present the solution.


Daniel Friedman:
I think I'll stop sharing for Christo to share.

Thanks, Omar.


Christo Kurisummoottil Thomas:
So I will go over the solution roadmap first.

As Omar mentioned, our solution is grounded in variational variation inference principle.

So this evolves as a four-step cognitive loop, starting with perception, which is about perceiving the current state by minimizing a variational free energy.

and then uh you know we go to the future time steps where we you know estimate the expected free energy static from the inferred state and then uh you know infer policy for actions that minimize the future surprise so that's the planning phase

and then in the action phase uh so there is we introduced the concept of marco blanket which acts as a statistical boundary between agent and the environment and then policy scaling will be more modeled as a gradient descent on the free energy

um and finally okay we incorporate this uh updated policy as well as uh the land posterior distributions about the states into you know updating the world model that so that again happens via vfe minimization so

These four stages is grounded on the same or minimizing the same variation free energy concept.

That's about the solution.

Then first, let's look at the perception.

So perception is modeled as inference, inferring the posterior distribution of the states S given the observations.

But if you expand it in terms of the Bayes rule, you can see that this is interactable, computationally interactable because of the marginal distribution of the observations which appear in the denominator here.

so here we move to a to find a tractable posterior distribution we actually uh formulate the kl divergence between the approximate posterior q of s comma pi zero

and the KL divergence to the actual or the true posterior so that's that's the concept of variational inference so where if you actually expand this KL divergence we can see that it can be written as a variation free energy times variation of free energy as well as an additional yeah plus or so basically variation free energy can be written as a KL divergence plus a surprise time which is ln p of time here

uh and so minimizing the scale divergence become equal to uh yeah minimizing variation and then okay once we actually once we actually find a posterior that minimizes the kl divergence along with that we all we are also computing or we are also estimating the surprise quantity which is here uh so that's the advantage of this variational variation inference formulation here

um yeah so yeah so once we find an optimal or optimal posterior distribution that actually means that uh the resetting variation free energy is equal to the surprise quantity uh so which surprise the estimation of the surprise is actually needed for the policy scaling that uh homer mentioned in the previous slide

So now the question is how we actually go about solving this.

So this can be modeled as a sequential inference process, which can be formulated as a partially observed Markov decision process as shown here.

And this leads to the following factor graph as is shown here.

So where we can see that, okay, so we actually modeled the transition from the state's

to the observations using the matrix A here.

So we actually model all these transition probabilities as categorical distributions.

and we use the matrix b to actually model the transition from the previous state to the current state st uh yeah so now optimizing the or minimizing the variation of free energy this leads to an expression as is shown here uh so okay this basically leads to variational message passing uh wherein we can see that okay so there is the message one which is basically uh accounting for the

uh yeah basically a forward transition which basically depends upon the forward transition probability and message 2 which depends upon the backward transition probability which is the message 2 component here and then message 3 actually uh incorporates the uh observation likelihood distribution

And further, in order to compute the posterior distribution, which is basically defined as the s variable here, we basically take a softmax over the logarithm tense here.

So that's how we actually obtain the ln q of s or the posterior distribution here.

and uh so this posterior distribution can be shown to be okay so as we mentioned we started with minimizing the variation free energy component so at converge at the equilibrium or yeah at the convergence this um optimal posterior distribution should um converge to that of the true posterior so it basically is minimizing the um

variational free energy component so basically it's a gradient descent on the um free energy um component so that's what basically this uh yeah perception component basically shows and we can actually show that this uh variational free energy can be written to be uh okay the posterior times an error on the

uh posterior posterior distribution so basically minimizing the variation of free energy is equivalent to minimizing the error on the estimated posterior or inferred posterior distributions

and yeah so now uh when we go to planning so what we actually do is that uh so we look at future time steps and we we want to find the policy that minimizes the average free energy uh across time so that's basically so so for that we need expected free energy component

and we show that this expected free energy component can be nicely decomposed into two components so one is the risk component which actually uh measures the kl divergence between uh the you know approximate uh oh basically the inferred um

distribution of observations given the current policy how that so the inferred uh distribute inferred observational distribution how that is actually comparing to the uh expected or preferred observations or the preferences that we have uh for the agent so that's basically the risk component

plus there is an ambiguity component that uh so basically basically it's a entropy of the probability distributions which is basically the likelihood probability distribution here which so basically if you want to minimize the expected free energy you should make sure that the inferred world model is actually close to that or inferred observations are basically close to that of the preferred observations as well as

we should try to reduce the ambiguity in terms of the observations that the agent observe in future time steps.

So that's basically the expected free energy component.

uh yeah so now uh the the prior over the posterior the the prior over the policies can be written as s of max of uh minus gamma g so we should yeah the policy should ensure that it should always go in the direction of minimizing the expected free energy

and uh yeah inferred policy uh inferred action policy can be written as um yeah summation over all the policies pi uh where yeah corresponding to action a times the the prior distribution of the particular policy pi here

uh and we can yeah so that's that's the inferred policy and then finally as omar mentioned in the previous slides what we actually do is using this inferred policy so this inferred policy basically uh needs an estimate of the surprise so so basically inferred policy depends upon the expected free energy

which basically is equivalent to the surprise quantity, as I mentioned.

So basically, you cannot compute an exact value for the inference policy, but you can only estimate using the surprise quantity.

So to estimate the surprise, we need to perform reasoning.

So how much reasoning that you need to do depends upon this parameter called theta here.

So that is similar to that of the test time computing LLMs like Omar mentioned.

So that's how we perform the planning and do the test time scaling.

Yeah, so now the question is whether all these computations are really stable or not.

For that, we need to look at the concept of Markov blanket.

So an AI agent that generalizes is a random dynamical system

that exist over time so for the a for this ai agent to be able to generalize across unforeseen scenarios so there should exist a marco blanket which basically means that uh so marco blanket is consisting of those sensors okay so the agent interacts with the environment through the sensory state

and so so basically environment influences the agent through the sensory state and the agent influences the environment through the active state so this active so this marco blanket compose which is composed of the active states as well as the sensory state uh that is something which you know separates the internal agent state from the external states

yeah so that's how this the closed loop of planning um perception planning action and sensing happens and the key equation here is that so we can write the states x the flow for the state x just composed of this marker blanket states as shown in as is shown in here which is composed of two temps so one is the one is a great dissipative gradient time and another is the solenoid

uh time which basically both of this time depends upon the log of the model evidence which is ln p of x here

uh so yeah for the agent to exist over time so there should be a mod uh marco blanket which also means that it should actually maximize the this log p of x quantity or the model evidence quantity which is basically equal to minimizing a free and i mean minimizing uh my uh l minus ln p of x which is basically corresponding to uh free energy estimate

uh yeah so that's what basically this um concept of marco blanket tells us and also this also gives us a principled criterion for principle stopping criterion which basically means that uh so when do when do the agent actually stop reasoning so that can be written like uh yeah that can be written as depending upon this quantity called theta that i mentioned

So yeah, theta basically decides how much of reasoning that the agent should solve.

So the stopping criteria is written as like one minus theta times the KL divergence between the feedforward policy as well as the inferred or the tested time scaled policy.

So yeah, so that's basically about the stopping criteria.

Yeah, so now we talked about perception planning and action policies.

So now we have to incorporate this land policies or the land posterior distributions into the world model.

For that, we can actually write the generative world model as is shown here, which is composed of the joint distribution of observation state policy as well as the A and B parameters here.

We can actually write this joint distribution.

And then, yeah, so how do we actually compute this?

distributions a and b so if you do variation inference we can actually write the posterior distributions for these components a as is shown here so basically what we do is yeah in the variation free energy expression we can actually filter out all those stems that are independent of a then if you actually consider this prior distribution of a to be a Dirichlet distribution so we choose Dirichlet because

so as i mentioned i mentioned that this your a a is actually a categorical distribution so in order for the posterior to be tractable uh we need to find a conjugate distribution so that's the reason why we basically choose this dirichlet distribution so traditionally distribution can actually be parameterized by this quantity called alpha ij here and we actually can find a closed form expression for this alpha ij

um yeah a close to home expression for this posterior distribution as is shown here so as you can see here um so what basically this expression does is that it basically okay basically counts the number of joint occurrences of

uh the state um j as well as the the particular observation auto equal to i so basically but yeah so basically as we get more evidence about the world observations so we actually basically update the observation model based on that so that's what basically this observation model posterior inference does similarly

uh yeah i won't go into the details of these things yeah similarly we actually compute the posterior distribution for the transition model b again we use the same procedure of minimizing the variation inference and we also assume that the b also follows the dirichlet prior distribution which basically leads to a tractable posterior distribution as is shown here here again we can see that basically what we do is basically counting the number of co-occurrence of

uh s store minus one and s store so that's what basically this distribution does uh so this basically leads to uh okay given that um yeah so and given that we also assume that the states um corresponding to different um physical assets are independent in the posterior distribution we can actually write the posterior distribution as a scaled factor as is shown here

uh and yeah so so basically this b i j times basically compute the ij value of this b matrix uh and finally we also compute the posterior distribution for the policy again considering that the prior distribution for the policy follows a dirichlet distribution leading to a tractable posterior distribution as i mentioned uh previously so that's that's how we basically

um sold the transition model observation and the policy uh for the world model updates so uh to conclude uh the entire these four stages uh perception planning action policy and finally world model update occurred by minimizing a single quantity called variational free energy uh yeah so that's that's that's about the solution so i will um


Daniel Friedman:
give it back to Omar now.

Okay.

OK, thank you, Christo, for the solution.


Omar Hashash:
So as Christo was saying, just to recap both parts of the story, the first part shows how we can actually model everything.

So all the perception, planning, action, everything can be modeled as an inference process in this case, which is mathematically also equivalent to a gradient descent process, basically machine learning.

At the same time, we can find tractable solutions through approximate Bayesian inference in order to do the perception, the planning, the action, and the learning at the end to enable this continual type of learning.

So now what we're going to do is that we're going to see some simulation results around the jaywalking.

example that we have been covering since the beginning of the presentation so we're going to simulate now at test time basically our solution which is a test time solution in comparison to other solutions like Q-learning for example and see how they're going to react in that specific scenario

so what's going to happen is that we're going to train uh new solutions we're going to consider the base solution our solution to be a q learning on top of it we have this minimum reasoning active influence capability that we're talking about the reasoning to minimize free energy

At the same time, we have a Q-learning solution that does not have that capability.

So first of all, of course, when the world changes and now we're going to have a jaywalking pedestrian that the agent has not seen before.

So for example, when you have a green traffic light,

it always sees that there's no pedestrian over there.

So it's kind of confident that it needs to move forward and just go towards its goal.

This is what it was trained for.

But at that specific moment, when the jaywalking pedestrian passes, it should have a prediction error.

But the fact that it has no world model on top of its policy, it cannot do it.

So this is exactly what happens here on the left-hand side.

We can see here that the agent starts at distance 3.

It starts to move towards distance 1.

But then what's going to happen is that at step two, the agent, the jaywalking pedestrian appears.

In that case,

What's going to happen, as I said, because it relies just on its policy, it's going to move forward.

And it's going to still accelerate, because this is what it was used to in the beginning.

And it did not realize that its world changed in that case.

So it starts to accelerate, and it crashes on the pedestrian, of course.

This is typical with methods like Q-learning.

But however, if we look at our solution, the scale policy one, we can see here that what happened is that the agent stopped at distance two.

It did not move after that.

So you can see here in the background, there's a change towards a yellow color, which means that the agent is now in a reasoning type of mode.

So what happened is that unlike the Q-learning agent, it actually slowed down.

So the Q-learning agent actually sped up.

This one actually slowed down.

and kept itself in its place until the jaywalking pedestrian actually left, after which the prediction error is resolved and it starts to accelerate again.

Now, that's a scenario we haven't trained it on before.

But the fact that it has a world model and can reason in those specific cases, it can actually figure out a way in order to keep itself surviving.

And of course, after that, it continues after that specific moment from distance two until it reaches its destination at the other end.

behind that intersection.

So looking here at the rewards, at least, if we look at the Q-Learning rewards, of course, what happened over here is that when the agent crashed, it had a very big negative penalty over here, of course.

However, in our case, what happened is that the agent was able

uh to detect that there's something wrong okay there's a surprise so it detected the surprise and you can see it here from the purple line over here so the surprise went above the threshold which is this 0.2 this epsilon threshold and after that it started to reason so you can see here what happened is that the agent is still getting some kind of reward in the background for surviving

And after that, what was happening in this region between the two lines over here, the agent was actually reasoning.

So it was reasoning in order to adapt and scale its policy in order to avoid the crashing scenario that it may face over here, although it lost a bit of its rewards.

So we're going to see this now in a different state.

We're going to compare our solution with a Q-learning solution and a Bayesian RL solution.

Of course, Q-learning is a

is a model-free scenario, model-free solution, and Bayesian RL is a model-based solution.

So in order just to draw contrast with them.

So what happens here is that we're going to train the three scenarios.

We can see here that roughly they have the same training reward.

And then at test time, we're going to let them see the jaywalking pedestrian.

What's going to happen is that the reward will drop massively for Q-learning and Bayesian RL, and also for our solution.

It's going to drop, but not that severe as the Q-learning and Bayesian RL scenarios.

Although it does, it really drops.

However, this comes at the expense of success.

So our agent, in order to scale, it had to sacrifice its narrow rewards in order to ensure the success of its long-term objective, right?

Because this is what RL is about.

It's about maximizing the long-term reward.

uh in order to ensure success while efficiently utilizing inference so what it did over here is that it showed us that you don't actually need to do reasoning and inference all the time you just need to do it when needed so it can be adaptive not like what a lot of people think now that if you add always add reasoning on top of the models it's always better

So the efficient human-like way is that reasoning is only included once you know this is human behavior.

And so it showed around 36% improvement more than above the Bayesian RL solution in terms of utilizing the computing resources in that case.

So it shows a trade-off between model-based and model-free solutions.

And after that, what we did is that we trained the agent that we have with our solution on a jaywalking pedestrian scenario.

But we allowed it to see that scenario again and again in order to see what's going to happen.

So basically what happened in that case is that the first time it saw the scenario, it had a very high surprise.

after that the surprise started to decrease over time because it started to update and started to make sense that i'm always going to see a jaywalking pedestrian at that specific scenario it got used to it basically and you can see it here from the fact that it starts to predict from the other graph you can start to see in the blue graph that it starts to predict that there's a pedestrian whenever i have a green light

So it starts to update the probability of the agent having a pedestrian in that case.

So basically, it becomes less surprising for the agent.

And at the same time, at the level of the policy itself, it also updates the probability of taking that action in that specific state.

So basically what's happening is that every time it's seeing the scenario, it's reinforcing that I should see a jaywalking pedestrian at that green light in the jaywalking scenario that I'm going to see.

And I know very well what my action, that specific action that I was able to get through my reasoning, I know very well what that action should be and it reinforces it in the policy.

So after 50 episodes, what happens is that the decision making moves from being

controlled through inference through reasoning to become feed forward because basically it becomes a part of its work model and the policy after that in order to get it basically it gets reinforced over time at test time so you can see here that even with we have reinforcement learning now at test time and this is basically how the agent can become a continual learning agent

So just to conclude this now, this is just a comprehensive roadmap of wireless communication and AI working together.

Basically, our networks are moving forward very fast, just like AI.

And what we want is that we have this ultimate intersection between the two so that we can reach what we call as AGI native networks in the future.

So we're moving from AI native networks to AGI native networks.

where these things build on the different technologies and systems that we talked about today, the world model, the digital twins, our presented test time scaling, and more broadly, a big cognitive system to architecture of the brain.

And with that, I'll conclude the presentation, and I'll be happy to answer any questions you may have.


Daniel Friedman:
Crystal and I, of course.

Awesome.

Thank you.


Daniel Friedman:
Yeah, just one short personal comment.

I think this really builds nicely from Christo's previous presentation, which was about the semantic information theory.

And this takes it and really connects it quite well to the passive, active planning, online learning setting and how those features are being implemented in a functional sense by the different recent generations of LLM.

and sort of associated systems like the skills, tools, sub-agent dispatch, chain of thought, all those kinds of things.

All right.


Daniel Friedman:
Krista, do you want to add anything?

And then I'll read some questions.

Okay.

All right.


Daniel Friedman:
If anyone in live chat asks a question, I'll read it, but I'll start with a few questions that were submitted by email from Joel Robinson.

Okay, Jill wrote, I've been reading active inference as the test time scaling law for physical AI agents and had several questions that arise from my own work on regulatory architectures.

I'm asking these because the empirical literature suggests certain variables must exist in any physical or biological agent, and I'm trying to understand how they map onto your formulation.

So here we go.

Question one, inference capacity as a state variable.

You write that the scaling law enables physical AI agents to reason with their world models to generalize in unforeseen scenarios at test time, and that that policy update is modeled as a soft Bayesian inference process.

In cognitive neuroscience, inference capacity is state dependent and collapses under load.

So where in your formulation is the agent's capacity to perform inference represented?

Is inference assumed to be always available, or is there a state variable that modulates whether the agent can actually execute the Bayesian update?

And I'm going to paste this into the Zoom chat as well.


Omar Hashash:
Yeah, so I think it's the last part of the question that's really exciting.

So I do agree with the question itself as being there are limitations for the architecture.

But in our case, I think we're considering mostly kind of like optimal scenarios, optimal execution scenarios.

So the thing is that I agree is that I think inference collapses.

I think the word was collapses in certain scenarios.

But in our case, we specifically highlighted the fact here that we are using our system two, sorry, our system one most of the time to take actions.

So in that case, our resources for reasoning

assuming that we have a lot of time possibly not instantaneous reflective reflexive like a reflex while driving that i have enough time to think about the different scenarios that i can take in that specific scenario so i'm not considering here a where like an example where an agent where a human for example needs to take a split second action i'm feeling that there needs to be enough time

so that the agent thinks because assuming i'm on a highway and there's like roughly four five six seconds which i think is more than enough for a human to think in that case at least in the broad sense

So these are the type of problems that we're considering over here, which in that case, I think the inference part doesn't crash specifically in that case or collapses in that case.

But I do acknowledge the fact that there are situations where this kind of has to be all short circuited, I would say, and you just have to pass to just taking an instantaneous reflex.


Daniel Friedman:
Yeah, one point I'll add there, and this is often brought up by the RxInfer and sort of message graph developers, is that with the message graph doing local free energy minimization, you can have different frequencies or different number of iterations of optimization between observations.

You could be doing an observation slower or at a faster frequency.

You could have intermittent or a fix or a variable compute budget.

And so that's like an advantage for online methods is that you're kind of just doing as good as you can in an online fashion given the amount of cognitive or computational resourcing available.

Modulo, anything like a catastrophic failure, that kind of breaks out of the box of the performance on the self-driving car itself breaking down mechanically.

It's sort of the mortal computing.

That's like the embodiment side.

and here is like really scoping out a lot of the formalisms and methods for the computational the cognitive that kind of presuppose the integrity of the functioning machine even though that becomes also a question when you're talking about these like network systems yeah i i i believe you said it in the best way possible and so uh it's uh


Omar Hashash:
What you raised over here are the perfect times at that specific moment.

So of course, we're working on a strict budget over here, but we're considering that.

So I'm processing it in a different way.

So I think our goal of this work was to lay down the foundation of how can an agent exist in the world in order to solve the problem that

the problem that we were facing or possibly what we were missing before in that case.

Of course, the more practical sense that you were talking about, which is different frequencies that you may be taking in samples in about the world, the different noise

the noises that you may have, how much computationally feasible is that.

I think these things are right on point.

And they should follow exactly from this specific moment.

So I think this is roughly a

a i wouldn't say a sketch but i would say as a initial solution of a problem uh that we can start with and of course on top of that we can add a different uh feasibility type of thing i assume there's a lot of solution that needs to come up in this space more but the tricky part about it was uh as you were saying about the different um

connecting it into the broader AI scenario, like what was really missing.

Like we're seeing these different LLMs, chain of thought, reasoning, planning, agentic.

But we already knew that, like we already had agents before.

So what was actually missing?

What did we really not see before?

And it was actually that fact that I think that the new part in LLMs was mostly based on the test time part more than the regular vanilla kind of scaling the training part, the model size, the parameters.

So we try to focus on that more, try to see why is it really that I have an empirical scaling law with language models, and what's the intersection over there?

So yeah, it was putting down the theoretical part of the story, I think, at first.

But definitely, the next steps should be based on making it more computationally tractable.


Daniel Friedman:
Awesome.

All right, here's another question from Joel.

He wrote,

temporal depth and prediction window collapse you note that humans simulate counterfactual scenarios and plan future states of the world and this is central to resolving prediction error empirically temporal depth is not fixed it narrows under stress fatigue or overload is temporal depth treated as a dynamic state variable variable in your model if the prediction window collapse how does the scaling law behave


Omar Hashash:
So if I got the answer correctly, you were asking about the temporal depth?


Daniel Friedman:
Yeah, like the depth of planning.

OK, yeah.


Omar Hashash:
So of course, the depth here is, of course, focused on we're having it as the least shallow layer, I would say.

Of course, we're not considering that we have a hierarchical form of the world, of course, which we know about.

And we're not considering the different temporal aspects of the world that can exist over there.

Of course, the next steps should be that this world is composed in a hierarchical way.

There's a lot of structure in there.

At which level of planning should we actually limit ourselves in so that we don't fall into the kind of collapse that Joel's talking about over here?

So I think even there are some interesting parts over here related to hierarchical active inference.

So the hierarchical part of modeling the world, which I assume should be also our next objective over here.


Daniel Friedman:
I'm not sure if Christo wants to add a certain part over here.


Omar Hashash:
Yeah, so I think Christo, because he had some words on hierarchical abstractions and hierarchical representations.

So this is a different part of the depth that we were talking about, about the world model.

So we're talking about the depth of the world in terms of the aspects that it may have hierarchically.

And at the same time, we're talking about the depth in terms of time going millisecond by millisecond, or going in terms of representations that can possibly last longer over time, that don't change in an instantaneous manner.


Daniel Friedman:
Yeah, I'll just copy two more questions in from Joel.

on some related topics these are all great great comments so just so it's all um there the one one area was about generalization and again i think it speaks to this nexus of basically like

there's what is the computational, like structure learning?

There still could be novel situations that are outside your structure learning envelope.

There could be like unknown unknowns, or there could be things that were, or there could even be structural possibilities that aren't adjacencies.

Then there's the implementation of the computer resources.

The math is like the computer science is free.

And then there's these questions about the capacity and how the compute system's capacity re-enters into the test time.

And what if you develop the test time in one situation and then it has a poor drop-off

in a compute limited setting but i think that your that um point about this um training objective or constraint being an underappreciated or underutilized factor in large model training is very key and i hope that it comes through yeah so um


Omar Hashash:
I'll try to hit on the part which you're talking about, the unknown unknowns, those parts.

So of course, there are still room enough for a lot of things to pop up in the world.

And the fact that what we were dealing with the world is we're trying to deal with the part of the world

that we don't really know about so that's the whole premise of the whole story which is the fact that you want to escape from the training grounds and escape into the test time part

Of course, at this time, there's always going to be capacity.

I think we do have, we included some resources in our paper about like, for example, if you have a new scenario that that's actually not explained by none of our states, let's say if you're doing perception.

So in that case, you would need to, let's say, for example, expand your model.

So you need to go through from a Bayesian sense, you would need to look at Bayesian model expansion.

But of course, these have other limitations, and you have to specify the criteria.

Just like we said that we have a prediction error, and we have a certain epsilon, that if we cross that prediction error, this means that you're going to foresee the scenario.

would probably be in a case where you're trying to fit in your certain state of the world into one of the states that you have, but probably none of those states are actually explaining your situation.

So in that case, the most logical thing to say is that this doesn't fit anything.

This is something very new.

you might probably need to say that this is something like a composition of different states together.

I haven't seen this before.

But in our case, let's say we took the simplistic first step about this, which is the fact that just the probability distribution is changing.

So in a very simple scenario that all of us, I think, see roughly in our lifetime, which is the fact that someone is jaywalking.

So this is something very easy to grasp.

And the fact that we already know what a human is, what a traffic light is, what a green light is, we already know the traffic rules.

So this is something very well known.

In that case, we just flip the rules a little bit so that rather than crossing at a red light, you're crossing at a green light to see what the behavior is.

But of course, I'll keep your imagination

to help you in that case to see how much still we have a lot more to deal with in the future but i think that should be the main focus of this whole thing is trying to figure out step by step what are those critical things how can they actually be posed at this time so that we found find a

first principle kind of solution to these systems.

So building on the fact that all of us solve that problem in that certain way.


Daniel Friedman:
So I think that should hit directly on that point.


Daniel Friedman:
Yeah, one area that I see this being very relevant to is the distillation and the on-policy distillation, the teacher, the co-learner, all these kind of model transformation and training strategies.

All different policy training strategies and this as a comparable measure, even if one

um test time is well it's 30 hours for this long horizon coding agent it's eight hours for this camera image model even though they're totally different domains they're not going to have a domain benchmark that's comparable and then for the models that are multimodal

or they're used in a multimodal setting, there aren't benchmarks at the domain level that would apply.

So it ends up being a sort of weakest link question with these systems sometimes.

I think that connects to the model training strategies, which are upstream of how well these models do.


Omar Hashash:
And the fact, this is actually the first point that I wanted to talk about, which is you don't really have a benchmark of what's good or bad, which is the fact that you need to figure things out.

In order to do that, there needs to be a first principle kind of way to make sure at least that it's doing the minimum best possible thing that any human could do.

which is the fact of why we're looking at this active inference part, which is putting it as a limiting factor, actually than putting it as an upper bound.

So we're saying that this is the minimum amount of reason that you need to have in order to solve this type of problem.

But this does not mean that it's the only reason.

So you can add on top of that other things and you can just expand as much as possible, but at least,

to exist in the world and to solve problems like the problems that we see with these autonomous vehicles, Teslas, Waymos, to think about those humanoid robots that just crash down and fall.

So we're trying to at least address that type of problem.


Daniel Friedman:
But of course, that's bare minimum.

Awesome.

Yeah, and the paper.


Daniel Friedman:
really lays out that direction.

Do you have any last comments?

Otherwise, I hope this has been a good entry point to the topic.


Omar Hashash:
Yeah.

It's actually been a pleasure.

I think the questions were really great and exciting.

And I really enjoyed presenting over here today.

Thank you for having us.


Daniel Friedman:
Thank you.

Thank you to authors and to Joel for the questions.


Daniel Friedman:
So, bye.

Bye-bye.

Thank you.

Thank you.
