## SwUzTlGNI2A

SPEAKER_01:
Hello, this is Act and Flap guest stream number 21.1.

It's April 21st, 2022, and we're here with Shannon Proch, and Shannon will be giving a talk, Coordination Dynamics of Multi-Agent Interaction.

The talk will happen for maybe around an hour, and then there'll be time for Q&A, so feel free to ask any questions in the chat during.

So off to you, Shannon, looking forward to this talk, and thanks again for joining on Act and Flap.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thanks so much.

So I'm Shannon.

Daniel's already given you the title of our talk.

And I'm coming to you from the University of California in Merced, where I'm a PhD candidate.

And I'll actually be defending this summer.

So maybe the next time you hear from me, I'll be talking to you from Augustana University, where I will be starting a tenure track professor position later this fall as an assistant professor of psychology and neuroscience.

Oh, applause.

Nice.

Thanks.

So that said, I'm not going to talk to you about neuroscience today.

I'm going to talk to you a little bit about the behavior of crowds.

And I stole this roadmap idea from previous active inference lab sessions.

And this is kind of outlining where we'll be going today.

So first, the first thing we're gonna do is really dig into a little bit of theory and data.

I'm gonna give a bit of a brief introduction to multi-agent interaction and what kind of human behavior I'm interested in.

And I'm gonna walk through a couple of ways that

Active inference folks might be interested in crowd dynamics and behavior, but primarily I'm gonna be focusing on dynamical systems theory and the notion of synergies and the tools that come along with these concepts.

And then finally, I'm going to show you a model system where we apply these tools to a system of coupled metronomes before I look at some empirical data from real world interaction of musical performance and also of crowds

cheering at a basketball game.

So first, what is multi-agent interaction?

This is simply an interaction that's happening between two or more agents.

In our case, we're looking at people.

And each of these people, they'll have their own personal goals and behaviors.

But their individual behaviors are influenced in some way by interacting with other agents in their shared environment.

And I want to talk about two forms of multi-agent coordination today.

And the best way to introduce this is through a short thought experiment.

So I'll just have you imagine the sounds of a crowded coffee shop.

Consider how individuals in that coffee shop might be interacting with each other.

There might be some small groups, there might be pairs, but mostly it's many individuals engaging in small temporary interactions.

And these individuals aren't coordinating with every other individual in some sort of cohesive coffee shop group.

They're just a jumble of individual individuals who are cohabiting a shared space.

Now instead, imagine the audience on the floor of a rock concert.

They're cheering or singing along with the artists on the stage.

And alternatively, imagine the fan section at your favorite sporting event emerging into a synchronous chant or a course of resounding boos.

Imagine how individuals in these large crowds might be interacting with each other.

As they cheer, sing, chant, or boo, they're all sharing in similar behavioral states, engaging in similar actions.

They're likely sharing similar physiological states like breathing rates and neural states as well.

These crowds are changing together in time.

They're behaving and they're coordinating like one large interdependent group.

And you could refer to these as shared acoustic spaces, and they include various levels of interaction from dyads, pairs of individuals, or larger and larger groups.

And I might even call these acoustic social worlds.

The acoustic signal that's generated by these crowds, it carries some information about their behavioral dynamics that were employed in creating that signal.

And the sounds these crowd makes carry some sort of information about the status of that crowd, either as an incidental collection of lots of individual coffee goers or an integrated and coordinated crowd, like a crowd of concert goers.

And there are, of course, many important factors at play when we're evaluating these acoustic social worlds.

And we're trying to decide whether that crowd is acting as one integrated multi-agent system rather than a collection of independent agents.

And these include the social context.

A coffee shop is different than a concert arena.

The development of pattern cultural practices in these different contexts and different scripts surrounding what events happen and when these events happen.

and differing regimes of shared attention between each of these agents.

And these are things you've talked about in the active inference lab before.

And basically this is all a rather long-winded way of saying that we expect coffee shop behavior in a coffee shop and concert behavior in a concert arena.

If I were going to talk to you in the language of active inference, I might talk to you today about Markov blankets.

And we might talk about this statistical boundary that might be behind a pair of interacting individuals around a pair of interacting individuals.

separating their internal states of this interaction with the rest of the interactions happening in a coffee shop crowd.

And I might talk about how the statistical boundary expands as we start to engage or interact with larger groups of people from three to four to maybe 100 people or more if we're in a large group interaction.

And while this can be a really useful way to model multi-agent interaction, to talk about a suite of nested Markov blankets, we quickly run into questions of how a researcher chooses where to draw a Markov blanket at any given system, or where to draw each nested Markov blanket in a given system.

And this is a topic that you've discussed a lot in the Active Inference Lab.

You've spent some time talking with Jelle Bruneberg and colleagues.

after their recent BBS article commentaries and how there might be differences from me as a researcher applying some sort of Markov blanket around a system versus the actual agents interacting in that system.

But I just mentioned this idea of Markov blankets to situate the topic for the audience of these interactive inference lab live streams.

As far as measuring the emergence of an integrated interacting crowd, this is an empirical question that I'm asking rather than a modeling question.

And I'm not a mathematician or a modeler.

So for this question about groups of interacting people, I found empirical tools from dynamical systems theory and with the concept of interpersonal synergies.

So that's what I'm gonna introduce to you guys next.

So dynamical systems theory.

This considers a trajectory of behavior of a system over time.

And the concept of synergies arises from the field of motor control as a solution to the degrees of freedom problem.

So essentially, the degrees of freedom problem is that fine and precise control of every degree of freedom in a motor movement would be computationally intractable for the nervous system to solve.

And what you see here is a miner hammering.

And you see these light patterns.

This is really sort of the earliest sort of motion capture that we had.

And we're seeing the trajectory of his arm hammering here.

And you can see that even though the hammer is hitting the same place every time, you'll have to trust me that it's hitting the same place every time, his arm is taking a slightly different trajectory to get there.

But it generally covers this one swinging behavior.

And that's because the muscles in his arm here are self-organizing into coupled and locally constrained degrees of freedom, forming temporary soft assemblies of motor function that's enabling this flexible movement and coordination here.

Put another way, synergies are identified by their functional specificity, dimensional compression, and reciprocal compensation.

What are those?

Well, the need to perform a specific function, like hammering that anvil, that functional specificity temporarily shapes the coordination of several components into one system.

That's dimensional compression, in which

External and internal perturbations are flexibly dealt with via compensatory adjustments of the components, reciprocal compensation.

So each muscle in his arm is compensating for the activity of the other muscle.

And if he was bumped slightly, there would be compensation from other muscles to ensure that anvil hits its location.

And this is all done in order to preserve the functionality of the whole system for as long as it's needed.

And that last comment for as long as it's needed, that gets to the notion of soft assembly, where any of these units in this picture here might be functionally coupled just for as long as you need to perform that task.

So if we're talking about a group of people, this group of people might form some sort of complex system just while they're interacting for that meeting, while they're at that concert.

until they disperse and are ready to move on.

We can differentiate mere coordination, which might happen between two people as a result of engaging with the same stimulus and similar patterns of actions from a true interpersonal synergy.

And you see here, we might see the same patterns of movement if we have two individuals who are maybe just listening to the same set of music, but if these individuals are interacting with each other,

where the action of one person and the action of the second person is constraining each other, then this is where an interpersonal synergy happens.

And these synergies are the result of these micro scale structures of a system giving rise to macro scale dynamics.

When a synergy develops, we no longer need to describe the independent dynamics of each micro scale structure.

We can instead describe the behavior of this single interaction dominant system, which consists of complementary actions from each person's motor activity as it pertains to their role in this softly sampled complex system.

And you might even notice some similarities here between these graphics and a graphic we might draw of nested Markov blankets.

And these might very well be two sides of the same coin, just two perspectives with a very similar conceptual landscape here.

And there's a variety of methods for studying the coordination dynamics that underlie interpersonal coordination.

For example, we might ask two people to sit next to each other and swing pendulums or to rock in rocking chairs.

And we can measure how these individuals intentionally or unintentionally synchronize their behavior as each individual's action becomes coupled to their partner.

Or we can ask musicians to play together in a musical ensemble or a duet.

And we can measure how these quartets or duets move together in time, forming these loosely coupled interpersonal synergies.

But in each of these interactions, a motor or acoustic behavioral output of each interacting individual was measured and analyzed for meaningful correlations between these individuals.

So importantly in these experiments here, it has been possible to obtain clear measurements of individual behavior

in order to correlate the behavior of these individuals and examine the emergent coordination dynamics of multi-agent interaction and social self-organization.

But what happens when we have this massive crowd of people?

When we measure the interpersonal synergies that form in such a large crowd, how does a group of people move between novel and habitual patterns of coordination?

How does a multi-agent system navigate transitions between chaos and stability?

And let's make it a little bit trickier.

The real world is messy and measurement is difficult and a naturalistic social interaction and a very large crowd.

I probably can't measure the behavior of every single individual person.

I probably can't give everyone an individual microphone.

I probably can't track each person's individual brain states.

And I might not even have access to a camera, let alone a set of motion capture cameras and hundreds of markers to track everyone's head and limb movements.

So let's come back to the crowds we imagined at the start of this discussion.

When you're imagining this coffee shop crowd and the crowd at the rock concert, you might have also been imagining how these crowds sounded.

So the difference between this disjointed noise you might hear at the coffee shop and this altogether coordinated stinging maybe at a rock concert, it's trivially easy for you or I to identify.

An uncoordinated group of independent individuals happening to coexist in a shared space versus a coordinated group of interdependent group members in a crowd, we can simply hear that these two groups of people sound different.

Similarly, we can simply hear when we ourselves are engaged and participating as a collective sort of agent while we're interacting with a large group of people or in a very large musical ensemble.

So I'm taking that idea and I think we can measure the sounds that a crowd makes.

And with a well-placed microphone or a few microphones, we can generate a single audio recording of the sounds that an interacting group makes over time.

And I know that a human can make inferences about the interactions and the acoustic social world of a crowd just by listening.

So similarly, I want to know if this dynamical systems toolkit that I have can allow us to make inferences about the behavior of an entire complex system based on this one acoustic measurement that we have access to.

So for the next little while, I'm going to walk through a bit of theory and then a toy example.

until I eventually end this talk with data from real live multi-agent groups that we're analyzing with tools from dynamical systems theory.

So one of our most simple complex dynamical systems is a metronome or a pendulum.

So Christopher Huygens first discovered

this activity of two pendulums from pendulum clocks will be related to each other when these clocks are hanging from a shared surface.

And what he found was that these pendulums would swing in anti-synchrony with each other.

And since then, in 1600s or so, there's been lots of research on pendulums and on coupled metronomes

And if we put these metronomes, a timekeeping device for making music on a shared platform, and maybe that platform rotates like this, you'll see each of these metronomes come into synchrony with each other.

These are just static pictures.

So to really help you visualize this and hear this, I'm recruiting a little bit of help from the Mythbusters.

The Mythbuster's on YouTube, so hopefully it is free and uncopyrighted.

And I'm just going to skip ahead here to partway into their episode.


SPEAKER_02:
Friction and momentum as I can so that only the metronome is having the effect.

Now let's try two.

Adam doubles his trouble with two metronomes set to the same tick mark.

Look at the movement on this platform.

And after two minutes, the shimmy takes over.

Stay with it, boys.

Nice.

Nice.

It's totally working.

It just took them a little while to find each other's rhythm.


SPEAKER_03:
Cool.


SPEAKER_02:
I have an idea.

If I stop the platform, they should drop out of phase.

There it is.

the moving platform is totally, totally critical to this experiment.

So.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, so that's Adam Savage there with two metronomes, one on earth, why does this matter?

Well, what he's done is replicated the findings of that centuries old experiment that was originally conducted with pendulums on a clock.

And he noted that this moving platform here is what's totally, totally critical.

But what I want you to also think of is that you heard these metronomes slowly coming into phase with each other.

They were becoming interdependent on each other's behavior because they are connected by this coupling mechanism here, this shared platform.

And as Adam correctly notes, this moving platform is totally, totally critical.

And in fact, when you saw him stop the platform, the metronomes were no longer coupled and their behavior no longer affects the other.

This platform here can take many forms as long as it is freely flowing and responsive to the metronome's movement.

And for the metronomes, this platform is the essential coupling mechanism for this emergent of coordinated acoustic behavior.

In humans, this coordination doesn't have to be a physical platform.

In fact, I argue that it is the interaction itself which serves as a coupling mechanism for multi-agent human behavior.

And we're going to spend just a little bit more time with metronomes before I get onto real human groups here.

So when you have many metronomes on a shared platform, you can have more than two, they're going to transition from uncoordinated random phase to coordinated synchronous phase.

And what you're going to hear next is the acoustic output of 32 metronomes on a freely moving platform.

And I'm going to justify to you two things that we can identify emergent coordinated behaviors in acoustic data

And what all I'm going to justify what state space reconstruction is and how this tool from dynamical systems can help us to analyze that acoustic data.

So I'm going to start at the beginning with each of the metronomes in random phase.

And this really takes a bit of a time, so we don't have to listen to that for so long.

I'm going to skip ahead.

So what you heard was 32 metronomes all ticking at their own tempo at their natural period.

It sounded like a bunch of random noise.

But this platform, again, served as a coupling mechanism

And synchronization between the metronomes emerge.

So they begin to sound like one group ticking together.

And this is an example of the type of data we'll be investigating for the emergence of coordination and acoustic signals.

So keep these metronomes in mind.

No, don't play the metronomes again.

The platform is serving as a coupling mechanism.

As synchronization emerges, they begin to sound like one group.

So we're going to visit some theory.

I'm going to introduce you to Totkin's theorem and phase space reconstruction.

So if we take one time series from a system,

This is the Lorenz system here.

It's defined by a set of three differential equations.

But what you need to know is that we can reconstruct the behavior of this system as a whole by measuring only one of its parts.

This is accomplished by embedding delayed copies of a single time series into multiple dimensions on some delay.

So here's

one of these time series extracted from the Lorenz system.

And we delay that time series to make another time series, delay once more to make a third time series.

We take these three dimensions and we use them to reconstruct a projection of the Lorenz system.

And this is phase space reconstruction.

And you can see that it maintains the topography or the same shape as the original Lorenz system.

In the case of our acoustic data, I'm going to take a time series of that sound, that acoustic signal, and I'm going to follow these steps here to reconstruct the behavior of those metronomes over time.

And once we've completed this face-to-face reconstruction, I'm going to visualize the behavior of our reconstructed system by generating what we call recurrence plots.

This is done by plotting recurrent points from the reconstructed phase space within some radius that we set.

And we can evaluate the structures in these recurrence plots using recurrence quantification analysis.

So on the right here, you're seeing a few examples of different time series.

And you're seeing the reconstructed phase space here.

And on the bottom, you're seeing the recurrence plot that we generate from these reconstructed phase space.

So one of the simplest measures that we can glean from recurrence plot is the rate that states recur.

And this is called recurrence rate.

And on the left here, we're seeing a time series of a simple sine wave.

And when we reconstruct it, we end up seeing something a bit like an oval or a circle.

And when we plot a point on our recurrence spot here, every time our system revisits a space on the circle here.

So in the sine waves recurrence plot, we're seeing these diagonal lines.

These diagonal lines are reflecting deterministic behavior and they track how similar sequences of values change over time.

So this sine wave here, it's reliably deterministic.

If it starts here, it's going to go here next, then it's going to go there next.

And that gives us these long recurrence values here.

And as you probably expect, this measure is called determinism.

In the middle,

we see uncorrelated white noise.

And you can see the signal already looks much more random than our sine wave.

And when we reconstruct it in phase space, I don't really see a shape here that we can get much out of.

And underneath, you see our recurrence plot, and it looks similarly random.

You could think of it like white noise on your television even.

Finally, on the right, we see a time series extracted from speech.

It's a little bit deterministic, like our sine wave.

If it goes up, it's going to come down.

But it's also drifting a bit.

And you can see if we reconstruct that face space instead of a simple oval, we're seeing a sort of transient signal here.

And in the recurrent spot, we're also going to be seeing variation in length in these diagonals.

And finally, recurrent spots can contain these vertical structures that you don't see here in addition to diagonals.

And these are indications of periods of stability.

We measure these with a value called laminarity.

And laminarity, you can contrast it with determinism.

It measures how a signal is organized in terms of similar absolute values that are stable over time.

And this is one representation of recurrent spots.

It takes a little bit of time to get comfortable with what a recurrent spot is, so I just have a different visualization to show you a little bit of the same thing.

So these are the same set of RQA measures that we take from our system and plot on recurrence plots.

This is demonstrating recurrence rate.

It's just the percentage of recurrent points that we see on this recurrent plot over time.

And it represents patterns of behavior that repeat over time.

Determinism.

It's the percentage of points that fall in a diagonal at any time, and it represents behaviors that belongs to a longer sequence of behavior.

Entropy, this is the variability in lengths of these diagonal lines down here.

And it represents the amount of disorder that there might be in these sequences.

Finally, laminarity here are the percentage of points that fall on a vertical line.

And this represents clusters of behavior that might repeat for a length of time.

Like when a system revisits a period of behavior, leaves and returns to that behavioral state again.

All right, so it's a lot of theory.

I need to bring you back to the metronome so we know what's going on here.

So what you see here, this is a picture of our uncoordinated metronomes.

They're moving in all sorts of directions.

And finally our coordinated metronomes at the bottom.

And I took a 30 second acoustic signal from each set of behaviors here.

And on the right, I have signals from this uncoordinated metronome and the recurrence plot we generated from them.

And you can see this first recurrence plot, it resembles that kind of uncorrelated white noise.

I don't see a lot of structure here.

And then in our time series for the coordinated metronomes, you start to see some periodicities kind of in this signal here.

And you see a lot more of these laminar structures down here in the bottom, these vertical structures, which indicate these periods of stable states in this group metronome behavior.

I could break that down even smaller and I could look at five seconds of sound and we see the same structures emerging.

You can also see a bit more clearly the spikes that occur in the coordinated metronomes that correlate with these vertical structures than we did in the last plot.

So this is great.

Now you're experts.

You've learned everything you need to know to evaluate the emergence of coordination when we measure it from a global acoustic signal.

And you know how to visualize it in a recurrence plot and how to interpret that plot.

So we're going to apply all of this to human data.

And I want to remember for the metronomes, this platform is the essential coupling mechanism for the emergence of coordinated behavior.

For humans, the interaction is totally, totally critical.

So say me and my colleague Marlee Reeves from the Applied Mathematics Department here at UC Merced.

So we don't need a shared platform.

Instead, we just need to interact with other human beings in order to couple our multi-agent human behavior.

So now that we've got this far, I promised you some empirical data.

And I'm gonna tell you about multi-agent interaction first in a specific musical ensemble performing a specific musical work, and then in the crowds at a basketball game.

So first our musical ensemble here, they're performing a work called Welcome to the Imagination World by Tasuki Shimizu.

And this group of musicians, they're performing this piece that was composed to do something interesting.

So the composer wrote the first few minutes of this musical piece to be completely random.

In music theory terms, we call this aleatorque.

It's when some element of the music is left up to chance or to whatever the performers decide to play in that moment.

So the start of this piece sounds a little bit like this.

Okay, that flute gets a little loud for me.

So this is not the musicians warming up on stage, this is the actual music.

The musicians themselves are instructed not to interact with each other.

And you can see this is kind of hard for musicians because you do hear musicians sort of taking turns starting each musical line a little bit.

And it's a little bit hard to play completely random.

You hear some folks playing scales up and down, but in general, this is supposed to sound random and they're not supposed to be coordinated.

And after a few minutes, the musical score actually directs the musicians to begin coordinating with each other.

And when this happens, I'll show you what that sounds like.


SPEAKER_03:
so


SPEAKER_00:
I'm gonna stop it right before it gets exciting.

So once they've been coordinating with each other, they begin to sound like one interacting musical ensemble.

So this musical interaction is serving as the coupling mechanism and the coordination between the musicians

arises and they begin to sound like one interacting ensemble.

Now we're not seeing emergent or spontaneous interaction in this particular musical composition and this performance.

The musicians are told by the musical score precisely when to begin coordinating their actions.

And in this particular performance, the divide between uncoordinated and joint music making is made even more apparent by a theatrical trick.

The lights turn on and then the conductor arrives on stage just as the musicians began to play together as one ensemble.

But I'm using this as a model system because I know the behavior they're supposed to be engaged in, and I know that there's going to be a transition from uncoordinated to coordinated behavior.

So I can use that knowledge to ask the questions.

Are there any differences in nonlinear recurrence dynamics measured by RQA between the uncoordinated acoustic behavior and the coordinated behavior of this musical ensemble?

And.

Spoiler alert, there absolutely are.

So at the top, you're seeing the first and last 30 seconds of that first piece, that first part of the performance.

On the bottom, you're seeing the first and last 30 seconds of the second part of the performance once the musicians have become coordinated.

And we can see that the acoustic behavior from these musicians in the coordinated section of the music is more structured.

We see these bursty vertical lines here.

where you have these stretches of connected stretches of sound for periods of time.

Again, we can look even closer at five-second samples, and we can see the same vertical structures in the coordinated but not the uncoordinated sections.

If I take just these little blocks here,

zoom in to five seconds, we see a little bit more structure here and a little bit less or a little bit noisier structure here.

These are just for visualizations.

This is not actually the five second snippet here, but it works for getting the idea across.

Okay, so cool.

I see these structures in the recurrence plot, but is it really more structured when musicians are coordinated?

We can do some statistics and we can visualize our data

in another way.

So these are distributions of all of those measures that we extracted from the recurrence plot.

And you can see coordinated sections in blue, uncoordinated sections in red.

And we're seeing that when the musicians begin interacting with each other as a coordinated musical ensemble, recurrence and stability measures increased overall.

So we have higher, also more variable RQA measures when they're coordinated, and we see lower and less variable RQA measures when they're uncoordinated.

And we can see this even a little more clearly.

if we can plot those same measures over time.

And the blue and purple lines here are representing uncoordinated section of the piece, orange and green is represented, sorry, blue and purple is coordinated, orange and green is uncoordinated.

And we can see that over time when the musicians are coordinated and acting like one interacting ensemble, they're able to explore a greater variety of recurrence dynamics.

They're able to explore more behavioral states than when they're uncoordinated.

And we see all of these measures, no matter what they are, hovering around a small subset of dynamics.

Now,

You would be forgiven if you are skeptical of these results.

After all, the entire musical performance is over eight minutes long.

Maybe I simply chose the most uncoordinated sections and the most uncoordinated sections of the song.

And you'd be smart to have this worry.

Our peer reviewers shared the same worry.

So we graphed

the time series of RQA metrics for the entire piece.

And it's pretty clear, even if you don't know what these values are, that there's some difference in all of these top pink and blue kind of graphs and these bottom orange and green type of graphs.

We're seeing this same greater variability, greater values and more variability in each of these RQA metrics when the musicians are coordinated than when they are performing as a bunch of individuals on stage.

And the takeaway here is that these musicians, when they're interacting together as a musical ensemble, they're able to explore a greater variety of acoustic behavior when they formed a single complex system, an interpersonal synergy, than when they were acting as a lot of individuals on stage.

And we were able to use these nonlinear statistical methods from dynamical systems theory to measure that change.

Cool, so that's a musical ensemble.

I'm using it as a model system because we know what the behavior should be.

Can I measure this from a different kind of system, one that doesn't have a script dictating the behavior of what's going on on the stage?

So to do that, I look at data recorded from the student section of a BYU basketball game.

And this data

was collected by Butler and colleagues and labeled by many hardworking undergraduate students.

And we have basically recordings from the crowd that are labeled based on what kind of

Crowd sounds they're making whether they're cheering.

This is like a loud positive crowd book vocalization vocalization Whether they're applauding so this is mostly clapping but can include some vocalization Distraction noise when you're trying to distract someone from a free throw mainly positive chants, so this is the fans chanting their their BYU Cougars chant or defense

Negative chanting, it's when they're angry rather than cheering positively.

Singing and then silence.

So we're taking this data and we're going to ask a similar question.

So we don't have a clear transition from uncoordinated to coordinated behavior, but we do have all of these different types of behavior.

So we're going to ask, is there a relationship between nonlinear recurrence dynamics measured by RQA and these different categories of acoustic behavior at the crowd at this basketball game?

And we follow the same process.

We extract acoustic signals and we cut them up into five second samples here.

And we use these signals to generate recurrence plots.

And we take the measures from that recurrent spot to see if there's anything different.

And I'm going to show you just two recurrent spot on the next slide.

I'm going to show you a plot from positive chanting and from distraction noise.

So here's distraction noise.

It looks like white noise.

It looks like what you would see.

on your television screen.

And when I show you positive chant, there's clearly a striking difference.

There's almost no structure in this distraction noise here, but there are very clear laminar bursts of activity represented in these vertical lines.

And in fact, these two plots look very similar to our unsynchronized and synchronized metronomes way back from the middle of this talk.

And intuitively, this makes sense.

If you're trying to distract someone during a free throw, you're making all sorts of random sounds.

You might be shaking your keys around.

People are stomping on the stands.

But if you're cheering your team on, trying to motivate them to score more points, or if you're mounting a strong defense, you're going to be working together, shouting whatever your chant is.

Go team, go defense.

And it's going to occur in a very rhythmic metronomic faction.

And we can compare how all of these distributions of our QA metrics look between each different kind of crowd noise.

And you can see there's quite a lot of overlap, but there's also some difference.

So positive and negative chat seem to be a bit similar to each other in every category, which makes sense because whether they're chanting in a positive or negative energy, it's still this rhythmic, isochronous behavior that's happening.

Distraction noise, cheer, and applause, on the other hand, all seem pretty similar to each other, no matter where we look at them.

And then finally, all the way on the lowest scale is angry noise here.

And one

thing to note is we had very few samples of angry noise here.

So that could be why we're seeing a few of these differences.

And if we had more samples, maybe angry noise would look a bit more like distraction noise.

So visually, we can see there are differences in these RQA metrics for all of these crowd sounds.

And we don't want to just do visuals, so we can do some statistics here.

This is just another visualization of our estimated marginal means showing pairwise comparisons between every crowd sound category.

And it's a graphical representation of the estimated marginal means.

If these red lines overlap, that means there are not significant differences between, for instance, distraction noise, cheer and applause here.

Positive and negative chant do look different, however.

Interesting.

And then angry noise is far out by itself.

So knowing this, I mentioned very briefly earlier, I have a colleague in the applied mathematics department.

And one thing she's interested in is whether we can give a machine learning algorithm some of these RQA metrics to tell the difference between these different crowd sounds.

Um, the researchers at BYU have done this with traditional sound metrics, spectral analysis, captural analysis, and we're doing it with our RQA metrics.

So we're focused more on the rhythmic content rather than pitch or spectral content of the sound.

And she's, um, is doing this in two ways.

Uh, so one is training a neural network with image classification, um, and

What I'm going to show you a few results from is a random forest that is using these recurrent features as input and doing some feature vector classification using decision trees and doing some stuff that if you ask me questions about, I will not know the answer because I'm not the mathematician in this context.

But once she's trained that algorithm,

it can actually learn the differences between these crowd sounds.

If these are dark blue along the diagonal, that means that it categorized cheer very well.

If they're light blue, that means there was some confusion here.

If we remember,

through one of the previous graphs, applause, distraction, noise, all kind of look similar to each other.

So if we sort of smoosh those into one distraction category, put applause and cheer together and put positive and negative chance here, we get even better classification.

And this part is something we're still working on.

Hopefully we will be ready to submit it in a paper kind of soon.

But now that we're ending on this really complex point, what have we learned?

First, we took a quick dive into dynamical systems theory and the notion of interpersonal synergies.

I told you that interpersonal synergies form when a functional coupling emerges between the behavior of two or more individuals.

This kind of synergy can arise when individuals begin to coordinate and

as an integrated multi-agent group of people.

But measuring this emergence of coordination in large groups of people is difficult, even if we can intuitively hear the difference between a coffee shop crowd and a crowd at a concert or sporting event.

Without individual signals from each person in this interacting group, it's very hard for scientists to measure when the coordination occurs.

But if we can hear this difference, then maybe we can measure it.

So we practiced with a toy model, a pair of coupled metronomes transitioning from uncoordinated to coordinated activity, unsynchronized to synchronized.

And then we applied these same nonlinear statistical analysis techniques from dynamical systems to measure uncoordinated and coordinated behavior in a musical ensemble.

Transitioned once too far.

Ah, my musical ensemble is behind our graphs here.

Apologies about that.

I can come back to this slide.

So when we want to learn something about social behavior, music provides a good model system.

You know roughly and can manipulate what roles each member of the musical group is performing.

And sometimes you even have the aid of a musical script like we did to be able to carefully measure the coordination dynamics that emerge in this joint music making.

These same intentional interdependencies which arise from a group of musicians co-creating music together can also emerge as the result of local interaction between individuals in large interaction groups of people, like crowds at a basketball game.

And we investigated that by measuring the different crowd sounds that these fans made and the different acoustic behavioral dynamics we could observe in each of these crowd sounds with fans at a BYU basketball game.

And all of this work was not done just by me, but also my colleague, Marley Reeves in the Applied Mathematics Department, my advisor, Ramesh Balasubramaniam, and also our colleagues, Chris Kello and Michael Spivey.

So that's all I got.

Thank you so much for having me.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

Thank you.

You can unshare and I'll ask some questions.

And if anyone in the live chat has questions, they can also ask.


SPEAKER_00:
Sounds great.


SPEAKER_01:
Are you going back to the slide?


SPEAKER_00:
I was going to go back to the slide.

I also cannot find the unshare button.

Ah, it's fine.


SPEAKER_01:
It's the same as the share button, but yeah.

Cool.


UNKNOWN:
Oh.


SPEAKER_01:
all right well a lot of very interesting research and really appreciate the care into kind of speaking it very concisely and clearly so just if i could give one takeaway that i thought was really fascinating so you in the fusaroli 2014 quotation

you talked about how there was like synergy and about the continuum and the spaces that are uncoordinated versus increasingly coordinated from the sheet music, which is one type to the emergent coordination.

And then, um,

I thought that was an interesting way to open up coordination, not in a framework of either strong versus weak emergence, but rather within a directly measurable dynamical systems perspective.

And then at the end to do the machine learning and be able to train a model on the recurrence statistics and then identify the system, it's like,

there's information about the system state as identified by experts, which is what that labeling task was about, that's retained like just in the coordination pattern.

And so there's something about the patterns across systems that can be generalized that captures also important information.

And that's an intuition that I think people often bring up when talking about dynamical systems.

But I really thought it was made clear with how you presented it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, thanks.

I'm glad that I got across those kind of message I was trying to share.


SPEAKER_01:
One place to maybe start is this soft assembly.

So where does this soft assembly come into play?

And I guess just what does it mean in human teams or communication?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

So this notion of soft assembly, let me think of something that's not soft, something that's

Oh, I don't have an opposite example to soft assembly.

So if you take like a...

a tool, like, I don't know, a wrench, it only can move in one way, the parts of the wrench or the parts of a set of pliers.

They're not softly assembled.

They're always attached and they're always going to perform that function, right?

But if we think about lots of kind of systems, if we think about human systems, if we think about

ant colonies, or if we think about anything where an individual member of that system could leave if it wanted to, or could leave when they're not interacting, that's what we would call a softly assembled system.

And a group of humans, the example that I was thinking of was any group of humans that comes together for some amount of time.

If we're talking about musicians on stage, they're together and they function as a string quartet or as an orchestra, so long as they're on stage and performing together.

But then they can pack their instruments up and they can go home.

So there's not a strong bond or like a strong physical mechanical connection that's forcing their interaction

to occur.

It's just happening during that process.


SPEAKER_01:
Because you also connected that to the transient motor chains.

And so that was pretty interesting.

Again, anyone who's watching live can ask a question.

Otherwise, I'll just keep on asking about a few points.

So you use the metronome as a example of synchronization.

but also there's listening to repetitive music, whether it's like electronic music that's repetitive or other kinds of music, binaural beats.

So what is this repetition listening nature and what kind of makes us select a given level of repetition to desire?

How do we think about that in terms of how you presented it with the recurrence here?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so there's two things that I would think about.

So first you mentioned binaural beats and we wanna listen to these very repetitive musical patterns.

And so there's two ways that our brains might be interpreting rhythmic patterns in music.

One notion that is probably very amenable to the active inference lab and what you talk about is predictive coding.

And the idea that we have these hierarchical predictions that are happening in the brain.

So when we perceive this low level stimulus, this rhythmic input, we're constantly predicting when the next input is gonna arrive.

And we're only passing up areas when our prediction is wrong.

And isochronous, these very rhythmic beats, are really easy to predict.

But there's another option.

It could be that we're not doing any prediction at all.

And we just have these inherent oscillations, these natural frequencies of oscillations in our brain.

And when we hear a rhythmic pattern that is similar enough, we naturally entrain to that beat or that rhythm drives this oscillatory behavior.

And so you have this emergent entrainment and no predictions necessary.

And you could be in either camp.

I alternate between being a firmly predictive coding camp and being a entrainment camp.

But this, either way, what seems to be really important in this activity is activity of your motor system and your ability for your motor system, which is really good at making periodic movements like moving, walking, the ability of the motor system to help the auditory system to communicate with the auditory system.

in predicting when the next beat occurs or in training to the beat of a sound like that.

And that's with binaural beats.

The second thing that I would bring up is we like these binaural beats, maybe they're relaxing for some people, but we're listening to music.

There's a phenomenon called musical groove.

And this is when it's very scientific.

No, it is actually the scientific term.

Peter Janata in 2012 coined this.

And it's when the rhythm of the music is just complicated enough that it makes us want to move to music.

So it's just in that sweet spot where it's predictable, but not quite predictable enough.

And it engages our motor system instead of just passively engaging it.

It actually makes us move to the beat of the music.

This might be because when we move, when we tap our foot, when we dance, we're better able to predict when the next beat happens.


SPEAKER_01:
thanks the the groove uh again jargon so apologies it it reminds me of the zone of proximal development and kind of what does it mean if there was a build up and too much tension being built like a ramping but then there's for example um when there's quarter notes for two measures and then eighths and then sixteenths and then it's like when it goes even faster and then it it

it's like a meme with making it more exciting because it's reflecting a cultural and potentially related to biology like our priors on increasing rate of

the sound is like meaning something because it can't go on forever.

So then something is exciting or something's changing.

So then that's very interesting about how our, like what is quiet?

What is loud?

What do those represent?

And what are the priors of the musical experience that becoming cultured in different ways?

So yeah, maybe how does it help us think about different preferences amongst individuals in the kind of music that they want to play or engage in or listen to or how they want to engage with that music?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so much content in what you just said.

So one is this notion of anticipation when the rhythm keeps getting faster and faster.

And there's a whole book by Leonard Meyer about how music is correlated with emotions and how there's this idea that a composer is playing with these periods of tension and release.

So whether that tension is from buildup of rhythmic events, and we usually expect

the faster rhythm gets, maybe it's associated with a certain activity in the music, or we expect it to slow down after it's gotten faster for so long.

Or you're thinking about when the beat drops in a piece of electronic music, for instance.

We can play with the rhythm or we can play with the musical pitch and we might have a certain set of chords that usually lead up to a certain resolution and we can trick everyone in the audience if we play a different chord instead.

But you mentioned this kind of idea of different individuals liking different kinds of music.

and this zone of proximal development too.

So this is really getting into how the music that we're exposed to shapes the expectations that we're going to have.

So if you grew up hearing Western music, if you are trained in Western classical music, you have certain expectations of what rhythms are allowed

of what kind of melodic or harmonic progression is gonna happen.

But when you hear a different kind of music, it might not even register to you as music the first time you hear it until you learn about it, until you learn about the music of that culture.

Even if it's music within your own culture, say you listen to,

hard rock for the first time or like like heavy metal for the first time it might just sound like noise until you're exposed to it enough or if you study the patterns of of how that music um moves in time it's like the plastic learning phase which is always continuing but especially during early developmental phases uh it's


SPEAKER_01:
patching on to patterns and rhythms and whether the four beat measure or different pitches and rhythms are familiar or not.

That's very interesting area.

So how would one model that and or where do you see active inference in this discussion and what you've discussed here?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so there's been predictive coding approaches at modeling this.

Also the information dynamics of music is one model that comes to mind.

Or if you think of any of these AI music generators, Google has an AI that plays music like Bach.

Actually that might not be Google, but there is an AI that plays music like Bach.

Google has...

different music AIs that you can actually interact with.

And what you do here is you turn all of the music into symbols for the computer, and you're gonna encode what the pitch is, you're gonna encode what the rhythm is in a set of however many different numbers you want.

And then you can kind of take measures of maybe the Shannon entropy of how likely you are to expect this note knowing that that note has played.

And if you've only trained this AI on Bach chorales maybe, then you know the notes are mostly gonna be quarter notes, maybe half notes, maybe an eighth note here or there and some whole notes.

So you already are constrained with the type, the length of note that you're gonna hear.

And Bach chorales follow a similar pattern every single chorale.

So you know the probability of you hearing the tonic chord at this point in time and not hearing a major second or hearing a certain step at this point in time because you've mapped out all of those probabilities.

And lots of people do that.

I don't do that kind of AI or modeling work with musical scores myself.


SPEAKER_01:
So they're creating musical scores with what imperative or for what end?


SPEAKER_00:
That's a good question.

So...

I've actually worked with a co-author who submitted a manuscript, and that's kind of one of the questions we ask waiting on reviews back.

But we're looking at all of these different kind of music-making AIs.

And we're coming at the question from another angle.

We're kind of asking whether they can make music and whether it's good music and what's missing if they can't.

And that's because when we're talking about humans and why humans make music, a lot of it comes down to the social interaction that music allows.

So music seems to facilitate social bonding.

If I am drumming in time with you, even if I'm walking in time with you, but if I'm doing something in time with you, whether it's drumming or tapping or making music, I probably will like you more after that event.

And it's also a tool that we use parents to infants to soothe them if you think about lullabies.

And there's a lot about music that seems to be rooted in social bonding.

And music also activates reward systems in our brain.

So we get a dopamine rush when we get to that peak experience in music.

There's some recent work, and I can't remember who put it out, that if you listen to music, you're getting similar activation as if you had engaged in exercise.

We use music in therapy.

Music is connected to a lot of survival and social bonding functions for humans.

But why doesn't AI make music?

The AI doesn't need to bond with another AI.

Maybe they're getting reward in terms of like a value function that we've programmed into the AI to say like, oh good, that was a good musical line that you made.

Now do it again.

But like what motivation do they have?

There's also no connection to any sort of like interoceptive states or physiological states.

If we think about listening to music before we go to the gym, we listen to music to hype us up and get us pumped and it's raising our blood pressure.

It's...

getting us our body prepared to do the activity we want to do and at night we might listen to calming soothing music lower blood pressure lower breathing rate to prepare to go to sleep

What drive does a computer have to sort of maintain these different sort of homeostatic needs at different times of the day or different times of your life compared to a human?

It's a great question.

I don't know if the people who are making AI music are always asking that question.

But have you ever heard of Holly Herndon?

No.

So she is a...

electronic music creator who's created a music AI in this space.

And her notion was to take this idea of, of cultural learning.

And if you could think of the zone of proximal development, but she has, she's trained her, her AI baby with voices of a lot of different people and exposed to a lot of like basically a culture in order for it to generate some sort of music from what she makes.

And she has some really interesting art in that space.


SPEAKER_01:
It's a little bit like the tree falling in the forest.

Is it a noise or a sound?

Does someone have to listen to it?

If you have a bunch of auto-generated songs in a genre, but no human experienced writing them, no one experienced listening to them, it's like, did it ever happen?

That's quite an interesting idea.

And it's also, it's a cross media issue with generated text and image.

And yeah,

That also makes me think about a John Cage quote talking about music and duration and time.

So maybe, what do you think about music and time?


SPEAKER_00:
Music and time.

So stereotypically, whenever we think of John Cage, think of that four minutes and 33 seconds.

He sits in front of the piano, starts a timer, and is just silent.

There's Mariusz Kozak.

if I'm remembering right, actually writes about music and time and the idea that music is deeply linked to movement in time.

And it's sort of a way to express movement in time through not just the auditory lens, but also through dance.

So like thinking of dance, it's a form of music as well.

And seeing how...

Not only something like auditory music, but dance is prevalent in every culture in the globe.

And I think there's something important to the notion of time and maybe music as the choreographing of movement through time.

Because if we think about, you mentioned generated language or images, these are static pieces.

You can look around the scene or you can read the text, but music has to happen in the temporal domain.

You have to listen to it over a period of time.

Once a note is played, it's gone after that.

Or once you've enacted a particular dance, it's gone after that.

And I don't know, I don't have like a nice way to wrap that up about why time's important, but it's definitely an important feature of music and of dance that you're not gonna find in other art forms.

You might find, you could think of it in a narrative, has to happen over time because you're reading it over time.

And that's part of why, so in my neuroscience work, I study how we perceive musical rhythm.

So if we perturb the time that a musical rhythm is happening, how does our brain cope with that?

Or if we perturb part of the brain that is thought to be involved with timing perception, so this ability to hear beats that are happening in a certain phase or to hear certain rhythms, if we perturb that system,

Are we going to impair how people perceive the rhythm in that piece of music?

And these are questions I'm asking, questions a lot of people are asking.

It's a very bright landscape right now for that kind of question.


SPEAKER_01:
That's really interesting about bringing the action in and maybe even moving music outside or a little bit beyond just the auditory

because then that might open up auditory experiences that aren't music and musical experiences that have a large component um through time but they're not necessarily auditory now so one other thing thinking about the the development of auditory preferences and expectations or

probably a long time in human history the sounds and the music that one heard was local and like performed if not interactive and then there was a pretty short period of time of like top 40 records cds and then now there's the ability to listen to a huge number of music as well as listen to a small selection many times and uh

what is that doing to our auditory cognition or or even more broadly that i can listen to the same song with 50 different versions in a row versus that just not being plausible not even so long ago yeah that's an interesting question i haven't thought a lot about it but um


SPEAKER_00:
I'm basically just tracking from music in the home to everybody's hearing everything, the same thing on the radio, to now we have Spotify and the internet.

And it's probably a question that's not just about music.

It's also about media.

We went from only getting our media or our news from people that we locally interacted with to everybody sitting for the same fireside chat.

So now everybody's in their different bubble for whatever media they're consuming.

And it's interesting, I know there's been some work, for instance, Mike Hove has looked at how the bass sounds in music have gotten lower over time, lower and louder, which has some impact on how we feel musical groove since the bass is usually where the rhythm sits in pop music.

But yeah, so.

what is it doing to like our brains and like our perception of music?

That's interesting.

And you mentioned memes earlier, which made me think of TikTok.

And so this like new way of

proliferating sounds.

And if you've ever spent very much time on TikTok, there'll be like one sound that everybody's making a dance to, or one sound that people are just playing over the top of the video of their dogs running around, because that sounds popular.

And then when you hear it on the radio,

it's a little bit jarring because you only know this like 15 second snippet or however long a TikTok is from that TikTok video.

And then you realize this is a real song, like a real work of art that somebody made before it became a TikTok meme, which is just pure like personal anecdote, but it's interesting.

So if we're getting insulated by like the media we consume,

Are we also getting insulated by the type of music we consume?

Like, are we less able to appreciate other types of music because I'm listening to the same song in a lot of different renditions?

Or are we like broadening our musical consumption because I'm able to access music from all over the globe at the click of a button?

It's probably a little bit of both.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah it's like the space of the action opens up when when there's so many affordances in our niche to select from yet also quite curated and presented in a certain way that just on aggregate probably still does drive people to have shared action and so then like it's literally the platform playing that role of the metronome coupling interaction


SPEAKER_00:
That's interesting that you bring that up.

And also, so if we come to this, music is the strive for social bonding.

And we've just been in this global pandemic, or we still are.

But for many people, we were on various stages of lockdowns.

Live music was not happening.

Choir or musical ensemble rehearsals were not happening.

And you saw this drive to continue to do something like make music together online.

And one of these drives was SheShanties became really popular on TikTok.

And it's not something that people were doing together at the same time, because we have this delay that's happening over audio visual communication like this.

It works well when we're taking turns.

It's harder for trying to synchronize and sing together.

So TikTok allowed someone to record a sea shanty, and then the next person adds their voice to that recording.

and they record their song singing the sea shanty.

And then the next person does the same thing and you end up with these compilations, not compilations, but these like ensemble performances of a song that people would sing when they're off on ships at sea.

And they're feeling, they're like having this social bond with the people that they're out at sea with the whole time.

And now it's our song that we're singing through the internet as a way to,

feel like we're having some sort of social bonding and interacting and engaging with people.

And you saw that on TikTok, you also saw that with celebrities trying to sing when they all gathered together to sing Imagine, we can argue about whether that went well or not.

Or when we saw, basically there was kind of an explosion of different types of online music interaction to try to replace this local,

interaction of going to a concert and seeing someone on stage around a group of people that you're interacting with together or going to perform or rehearse or jam with your friends in your garage and trying to find digital avenues for the same social role that music traditionally plays.


SPEAKER_01:
Very interesting.

And how will it change going forward?

Some people may find very immersive sensory experiences to be powerful for them.

Maybe that's a scalable approach.

Maybe it's not.

Maybe that's a good thing.

Maybe it's not.

So one other part was like,

when you were contrasting the musical study that you presented first with the basketball, you mentioned that that environment was unscripted or in contrast to sheet music or like a spoken dialogue that was scripted.

And then in one sense it is unscripted, but then as per the paper on active inference and scripts,

it's more like the strong and the weak scripts.

Like the basketball is a scripted environment in the cultural norm, weak script sense.

So yes, it doesn't have the stage directions, but you know, are there not signs helping identify where people with a given ticket should sit and signals and lights and sounds that also provide a lot of cues that are gonna be totally specific, like the seventh inning stretch in baseball.

Why stretch then?

But then that's part of where the embodiment of even watching the game and participating in it gets to be why it's the phenomena of entertainment and why it's something that people spend their life supporting directly and indirectly and practicing for and why this isn't just like a neural entrainment, binaural beat hack or something like that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so if I got the same experience being at a basketball game, sitting in the student section that I got from sitting on my couch and watching the basketball game at home, then you would imagine nobody pays to go to basketball games.

And we all sit on our couch and watch them at home, right?

But we spend lots of money to go to basketball games or whatever sporting events.

We have student sections.

We wear the colors of our sports team.

So we're already signaling to people that, you know, I'm wearing this outfit, so I'm a BYU fan.

I'm wearing this other outfit, so I'm a, I don't know, basketball teams.

I was going to name another one.

I'm that kind of fan.

So that's already signifying a kind of script where I know, oh, yeah, you're a friend.

We're going to cheer at the same time.

And then the game has rules and the game has good things to happen.

If my team scores a point, my response is going to be to cheer.

If the other team scores a point, I'm going to be upset.

So there's already a relationship where the game is driving the behavior in the stands.

And then you have the interactions of the people next to you, the people you can see next to you and in front of you, the people who you can hear also behind you.

And

there are certain cheers that might be scripted just like that musical ensemble.

So if there's a certain idiosyncratic chant that I make that's associated with this team and this mascot, we all know this chant, we've learned it.

Maybe it was written down.

Maybe it's being broadcast on the big screen above the game.

Maybe there's cheerleaders or a band who's leading a certain cheer and you're engaging it.

So even though it's less scripted in a way than this musical ensemble in the sense that it's not written on a piece of paper that every person's looking at,

They're all aware of the social scripts that are involved in a basketball game experience and a basketball game experience with that team or with that student section that you're sitting in.

So you're absolutely right that there's scripts like this.

And I think any interaction you get to, there's gonna be some kind of script.

There's not gonna be something that's pure interaction.

Nobody's interacting just on vibes.

There's some social script based on where the people are, based on what context they're in, whether they know each other ahead of time, whether there's some external signal like clothing,

um or you look like me or you don't look like me and that's all going to change the dynamics it might make certain forms of interactions occur more easily it might make certain kinds of interactions dissipate more easily which interestingly is something that we're still studying with metronomes um so metronomes don't only move into synchrony if you have two interacting metronomes they might actually cancel each other out um or they might

exhibit other like coming in and out of synchronous dynamics.

And if we are still learning how to understand that in that physical system where there's physical properties that we can change and measure that are really simple, just moving back and forth in a certain period.

is that much more complicated when we're looking at humans who we seem to have some sort of free will and we can behave according to some social rules that we know about, or we could behave completely contrary to those rules.


SPEAKER_01:
awesome point that the model system like you brought up helps us confirm just our statistics like before the linear model gets brought out in one setting try it on the piece of graph paper and so this is like the graph paper for thinking about semantic or narrative coordination but one wouldn't want to be in a non-observable territory with kind of flying blind that way um

And also, I think the examples with the game and the context coordinating behavior to different ends, it made me think about where there's fans from different teams in the same setting versus sections that are separated, and then there's the parents at the game, and maybe the intention is just to support people in their play.

versus like a professional sports.

And then there's like people who are there for pragmatic value.

They have literal money.

Other people have like identity currency on the line and like feeling like one's city has a good baseball team and all these very complex things.

And so it's kind of just cool

to have a model that maybe can blanket off some of that complexity, but also just recognize the real data that you're getting from these systems, which is sometimes, as you pointed out, down to a single microphone, which has many advantages over visual observation or like sensor tracking or anything.

And that's what we're observing from the system.

And then there's our process of doing analysis on that signal, because that's actually what the system is,

provide these measurements so it kind of does tie in active inference and how we're modeling these complex settings without getting lost in how many possible ways they can be cool do you have any other like things you'd like to add or any other points you want to bring up um no i think this is really great i really appreciated the discussion you brought


SPEAKER_00:
We covered a lot more than just interacting groups of people running from brains to music AIs back again to people.

It was really fun.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Thank you very much for joining.

So see you anytime.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Sounds good.

See you.


SPEAKER_01:
Bye.

## _MH7E58zKxY

SPEAKER_03:
Hello everyone.

It's April 25th, 2022.

We're here with Adam Saffron and today we're going to be having a guest stream, the radically embodied conscious cybernetic Bayesian brain from free energy to free will and back again.

So Adam, thanks a ton for joining on this day.

Really looking forward to your presentations and thanks again, Adam, take it away.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you for inviting me and letting me come to talk with you.

I'll present some ideas from a recent manuscript in entropy called The Radically Embodied Conscious Cybernetic Bayesian Brain, From Free Energy to Free Will and Back Again.

After that, looking forward to discussing some of the ideas with all of you.

And hopefully this is the beginning of an ongoing conversation.

So what I tried to do with this manuscript was basically marry good old fashioned cognitive science with a more an activist perspective, trying to find a middle way between these ways of viewing of things.

And this is the view that I've come to over a number of years, where

The idea being that embodiment, at this point, it's not news that the mind is embodied, but the claim is that it is very, very embodied.

Some would say radically embodied.

I'm not sure if that made the most sense to use that term because the term radical with respect to embodiment is usually pointing to a perspective or radical inactivism

that avoids talking about representations or models and instead is saying you know what's really going on is these couplings with the world and maybe you could say there's like an implicit information processing or intelligence even that might be objected to but these talk of representations and symbols and models from cognitive science um that's those are not real things

And so this paper goes through a perspective in which basically we do have representations and models, and we also have these sort of inactive couplings with the world.

And I say it's radical in that nearly every mental process you would care to talk about, the way you have to understand it according to this view would be first and fundamentally and foremost in terms of its embodied character.

So before I move on, is everything coming across clearly?

Okay, sound.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I did disable my video because due to some incredible consequences of different situations, I'm using a hotspot, but it's all good.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, you're on the run.

Okay.

uh... so

To review a little background, I mean, a lot of this people who were watching this were familiar with, but I'll review some background on predictive processing and active inference.

Maybe some of what I'll present is a somewhat heterodox view.

That's also something to discuss.

So a basic account of predictive coding, you have these deep pyramidal neurons, and you have these superficial pyramidal neurons.

where they're deep with respect to cortex as having this layered structure, roughly six layers with some variations on the theme depending on where you look.

And the idea is that the cortex as a whole is engaging in what's sometimes called hierarchical or what's often called

hierarchical predictive coding or potentially predictive processing because there might be some assumptions with saying predictive coding that not everyone would sign up for, such as that you are only suppressing and explaining away information as opposed to sometimes enhancing it.

And there's other nuances that could make people object to saying predictive coding.

Instead of getting into those weeds, the idea would be that you have this hierarchy of beliefs, implicit and neuronal organization.

The nature of these beliefs, and this gets into these debates about representation and inactivism, but this idea that

You could say there's an implicit belief at each neuron and set of neurons about what they expect, what patterns they expect to encounter.

And according to this predictive processing view, through their activity, they're trying to predict this incoming activity and suppress it or explain it away to minimize overall activity, and that you only update these beliefs where you got it wrong via a prediction error.

And this is under certain assumptions.

If you have a good model and events in the world are relatively slow relative to your internal signaling units, you can have substantial energetic savings for an organ of about 2% of your body mass and 20% of your metabolism.

Seems like the kind of thing natural selection would do, and there's some decent evidence for this.

So the basics of neural architecture here for Cortex is viewing it as a predictive processing hierarchy or a heterarchy, and that each of your modalities would be a different belief hierarchy, and they would all come together and exchange their information for a joint belief.

across all your modalities in terms of what you think should be in your sensorium as it moves through the world, whether it's the world you're in right now or some sort of counterfactual world in the present or future.

So that's predictive processing in a nutshell.

And so in this account, the goal was to use

predictive processing to try to get into the micro mechanics of goal oriented behavior and agency.

And so what I suggested is that the work has been done within active inference on this sort of imaginative planning

pursuing of goals, the work to refer to would be sophisticated inference or sophisticated affective inference, which is thinking about basically planning into the future as this tree search of possibilities where you're going on different branches of these possibilities and then picking the ones either in imagination or in reality that would correspond to you, minimizing your prediction error the best or realizing value the best.

this exploration of a tree of possibilities and going down different branches.

And so this would be, I suppose, a particular flavor of this.

And the idea being that a lot of what would be pulling along this stream of consciousness of imaginings would be this iterative comparison between sensed and imagined states or between various goal states.

So here I have this comic book that a friend helped me make.

And I have multiple comics throughout.

I tend to view comics as being really highly expressive in a way that I think we should probably use them more in terms of being able to capture the joints and experience space with sufficient richness and detail.

And there could even be something like comic book-esque about the stream of experience, which could be part of the reason that they're so effective.

But to return to this comic or a modal frame sequence as I sometimes call it, you see in the bottom here this is the actual pose of the agent and up top what's going through the mind's eye whether we're talking about an imagination or a perception.

And so here it's just a simple contrasting of what you're perceiving in each given moment and then what you're imagining.

So you're sitting, you want tea,

You then look and you say, I am not drinking tea.

I am at my computer, and there is a laptop in front of me.

You look down, and you're imagining having tea in your cup.

But then you look, and no, there is indeed no tea.

And then you imagine a next step.

And so what's happening here is you're doing this contrast.

And what I propose is that in contrasting between these states,

they're arranging they're basically setting up prediction errors for each other where what doesn't match would potentially get you a natural prioritization of what features are unaligned and then from those you use that to retrieve some sort of relevant affordance to help you bridge this gap between your imagination and reality and

And there's a lot of devils in details of the ways this could work, but that some sort of iterative contrasting of goal states and a goal hierarchy where it's like you might have an ultimate goal, but to achieve that goal, you have to now go and think of what are all of the sub steps and the sub goals that would be needed to actually get the tea in my hand.

You're going to have to ambulate to the kitchen, make the tea, et cetera, et cetera.

And as you're going back and forth at some place, some point, you either have a plan that's compelling enough or the next action is close enough to your present pose that you just find yourself launching into action, sometimes accompanied by a feeling of having decided.

Sometimes you just find yourself moving.

But that's the basic account here, that the stream of consciousness is being pulled along in this goal-oriented fashion, this value-driven fashion, sometimes more freely wandering, but usually there's an interest.

And as an active inference in predictive processing, your preferences or your attracting states, the attractors that you'll find them as a system, which you're attracted to,

takes the form of predictions.

And so the things in your mind that you're imagining that they become the goal state, they become the state of the world that you prefer, in that instance, or in general, if it's a regular kind of imagining, and this now becomes the attracting state that your system self organizes, and you engage in action selection of different kinds to minimize that difference between what you're imagining, and what you are estimating for the world.

So I go into some discussion of neural architecture and different aspects that might be more or less relevant for different of this kind of action selection.

I probably should have just thrown this on top of a picture of a brain, but I didn't.

But in some ways, it might be a good thing.

And I wonder whether this account of having a dual tier system

Something like a system 1 and a system 2 is a broader story than just brains.

And so I have written out here, like, here would be neural substrates of what would enable you to do this.

But well, it could be across brains.

You might have similar processes happening within, let's say, like an insect nervous system by different means.

Like instead of the basal ganglia, you might be using the mushroom bodies.

If we're talking about an ant colony, for instance, it's possible you have a different attracting states of the colony where some are taking this role of a higher-level controller and a lower-level controller.

But the basic idea here is that you have an upper-level controller that's capable of aggregating information across different... So you have this lower-level process in this control hierarchy where the lower level is...

taking care of your immediate couplings with the world.

This would be the more inactive portion.

If we're talking about the brain, it would be something like loosely assembled constellation of cortical reactive dispositions, maybe orchestrated by the cerebellar system, of what would be called amortized inference.

And it would be largely unconscious and automatic.

Phenomenologists would talk about just things being

ready at hand, as opposed to being present to hand.

You're just effortless engagement and effortless mastery with the world.

But on top of this, you have a slower process.

In this case, I'm saying it's more involving conscious processing, something more system two-like, to use Kahneman's language, where it's involved in more deliberate, potentially effortful modes of cognition,

which would be a higher level of control over this faster, smooth coupling system.

So go into some details of neural architecture.

Potentially, this might be just what you need for a lot of active inferential agents, something like this across whether or not we're talking about neurons.

This might be a broader story for active inferential agents.

So to return to the example of making tea, go into it some.

We're saying that we're back to the mouse brains.

Here in the brain, areas associated with mental imagery, maybe even physical and computational substrates

mental imagery phenomenality itself, but like the Protonius, for instance, involved in imagination have heavily implicated multiple reasons to think why this would be the case.

But I have this little Cartesian theater here with the different imaginings.

And down below, the idea is you are iterating through different imaginings largely via large-scale orchestration by the hippocampal complex and its capacities to couple with the rest of the cortex to guide these high-level attracting states where some portions of which would be your experience.

And so the reason you would bring up the hippocampus in here is it seems to be a specialized subsystem for sequential predictive modeling.

You could say that for cortex as a whole.

Technically, hippocampus is a kind of cortex, arcade cortex, old vintage.

But that basically, so Damasio will talk about this in terms of a convergence-divergence zone, where many things will funnel in and then funnel back with high centrality.

I forget his name.

He's at Waterloo, the spawn architecture.

But he'll talk about semantic pointers.

But there's different ways of viewing the high centrality of hippocampus as it basically will predict this trajectory of the overall organism through space.

You can both encode memories, what was happening in my storium, whether in reality or imagination, at each point as I was moving through space and time.

And you could also use it for replay, including in counterfactual circumstances.

And so I have some diagrams here of the neural systems involved.

And right here, you'd have the, I think that's good for now.

So anyone wants to know more details about that later, we could.

So to return to trying to go more phenomenological, so these modal frame sequences are comics.

Ultimately, what I'm trying to build up to is a sufficiently detailed account of neural architecture and a sufficiently detailed account of phenomenology so that we can basically talk about something as highfalutin as free will and have some purchase.

So in this complex modal frame sequence, you have that up top and imagining row.

Below that you have what's actually in your perception.

Below that you have your pose and your proprioceptive inference.

And then below that you have your interoceptive inference.

So as you're stepping through, the stream of consciousness is evolving through space and time, encoded or orchestrated by the hippocampal system at this high, potentially most integrative high level of action selection.

you are having different wounds in your body corresponding to the interoceptive concomitants of, or the interoceptive aspects of what it means to be in different situations.

So for instance, like a hunger situation here, you're getting prediction error, interoceptive prediction error that would be roughly vaguely localized here as like a cool sensation around your gut and mouth or thirst or hunger, something like this.

And now as you're going into movement, you might have here like you're still having this interoceptive code of hot and cold states, pleasant and unpleasant, but it's kind of getting infused into other modalities where your proprioception, some of the phenomenology of like feeling like an urge in your body, it's one of the claims I make is that you have this kind of quasi-synesthetic cross-mapping between interoceptive signals

and the proprioceptive and exteroceptive associates.

Part of the reason I claim this and say that this is both part of the phenomenology of will and maybe part of the mechanism also is that interoceptive signals are poorly localizable in space and time.

They tend to have pretty low resolution for them.

And so they drift free from their sources.

And that's a kind of anomalous inference, but an adaptively anomalous inference

they may get infused into the relevant effector and sensor systems and objects in the worlds for which they would be relevant.

I make a lot of different claims in this work from a number of years of study.

A lot of it can be taken a la carte.

You can find some things to be more compelling, some things to be less compelling.

But I do think you get a whole that's greater than the sum of its parts.

But it can also be taken in a piecemeal fashion.

So you might not be particularly compelled by this account of interception as being synesthetic in nature.

Nothing really, not too much will ride on that, but not too much of what will follow will ride on that, but it could end up being important so I'm putting it in there.

Okay.

And so across all of this, this is happening within a perspective of computational neurophenomenology.

As Anil Seth calls it, or I call it Marian neurophenomenology.

And the reason I call it Marian is specifically his account of multiple levels of analysis, which I guess supervene on each other.

And you can do two things because things have these multiple levels that they can be engaged with.

You can either engage with them a la carte because of, let's say, for instance, you want to do cognitive science, but you have no idea how the brain works, and for many years we haven't, and there's a lot of mystery still.

You can kind of bracket, like, here's this big set of unknowns, but it's at a different level.

But working at this other level, we can obtain knowledge, even though we might be ignorant at these other levels.

And that would be functionalism and cognitive science.

But for me, what's more exciting about this actually, this Marian stack, is the capacity not for independence but interdependence and mutual constraints, using the implementation level or the mechanistic level as a constraint of what's a likely set of algorithms, using a likely set of algorithms to test hypotheses on the implementation level.

using what you think the in things like neuropsychiatric literature to constrain and the neuroimaging literature to constrain algorithm and thereby implementation.

So the idea of what excites me is like filling in this crossword puzzle, leveraging constraints, and then cross-referencing them with phenomena.

I'm using basically machine learning as a version principle and typically going to the races of this idea that a lot of cortex could be understood in terms of particle predictive problem, but also evoking some additional machine learning principles.

But that's the overall scope of it.

in terms of all the body parts and faces, this is part of the radical embodiment idea, is that instead of the cortex being this grab bag of associations with areas

What does that mean and why?

The idea is that once you really place it front and center as a cybernetic controller for an embodied embedded agent, once you place embodiment front and center, a lot of it becomes .

So for instance, if they like, OK, there's something like right around here.

So something like .

But then you're like, wait a second, that's not too many steps removed from where the ears first pipe in.

So the idea that something like

You know, going from phonemes or going from sound patterns undifferentiated to phonemes and steps, it ends up making cortex dysfunctions, in my opinion, a lot more applicable.

It becomes somewhat like location, location, location, and location relative to the modalities.

It ends up explaining a lot of things.

A similar story for Broca's area.

What a coincidence that it's a hop, skip, and a jump away from what might move your mouth bits.

There's doubles in details here.

I don't want to be glib and underestimate the complexity.

But the claim is that actually once you place embodiment in the center, an elegance kind of falls out and becomes a lot easier to keep track of things.

If you're thinking of cortex as this control, cybernetic control hierarchy over to basically help a body move through the world and model the world as it moves through it.

So we are ready, I think, to get to free will.

And so taking these modal frame sequences, and here is doing one for this experience of standing to make tea.

and then taking that model and then porting it to a Lebet experiment.

So what is a Lebet paradigm?

So some people say Lebet, some people say Lebet.

I think Lebet said Lebet, but I'll continue to say Lebet because it's more common, and I just will.

But the idea is that you're there and you want to see, do people or don't they have something like meaningful conscious control over their actions?

And so the idea is, okay, let's strip this down and take the most insignificant of all actions.

It's like, well, surely we need to have control there if we're going to say we have control anyway.

And so the decision to just move your hand based on feeling like you want to do so.

And this coming from basically it's endogenous.

It's not being decided from without, but you doing something based on something internal to you.

And what was found with the Labette studies, or Labet, is that you get this ramping activity preceding the decision to move your hand.

You have this clock, right?

And it's a big clock that you're looking at.

And it might be a dot or a big hand moving in a circle.

And the reason that you have this is basically so that you can estimate the time when it was that you said, I will move my hand.

When did you decide?

And you then say, OK, when you made that decision, what were you looking at?

Where was this dot as it moved around in a circle?

And this can get you very fine resolution, sub-second resolution, because if it's a big clock, then the dot will be moving slowly.

And you can say, OK, it was right there.

But what's observed is that you're getting this ramping activity with this predictive of the action called the readiness potential.

And it will peak a good 200 milliseconds before you reporting, it varies, but it'll peak substantially before you saying, I've decided.

And so if

And so the claim is, well, if this potential has predictive information of your action and is the cause of your action, and it's happening prior to your conscious decision, your decision cannot be the thing that caused the action.

There's a problem right away with this in that with ERP methods, you're actually averaging over many, many trials to get these waveforms because you're measuring from the outside of the brain.

It's like trying to detect events inside a stadium while measuring, like listening to the roar of the crowd on the outside.

And you're limited in what you can do.

So you have to average together a lot of different episodes.

And then you get these event-related potentials or ERPs.

so you get predictive information from this of when people moved but the idea that a readiness potential is causal or deterministic in some fashion there's some debate about that whether you can infer that um i'm going to say that the readiness potential is in fact reflecting a causal process um and it's reflecting a conscious causal process even

that is contributing to the action um upstream of um the decision itself where the decision could have some more you know depends on i don't know if there's one account but it could have some epiphenomenal aspects to it and that the decision is not necessarily um the thing it's it's not the only uh difference maker there but the idea is that this

is a function of mental imagery where you are imagining will and won't move.

And as you're rehearsing, moving your hand, you're having different things associated with it.

And that building up of that recurring, a building up of activity in these body maps

whether we're talking about getting ready to actually change your proprioceptive pose as you're imagining, starting to move closer to a threshold where you're going to get robust enough activity that is actually going to drive your muscles and your affector systems, or building up activity in your interoceptive modalities, like your insular and cingulate hierarchies and maybe their synesthetically cross-couplings with other modalities, that that building up of a feeling of urge is itself consciousness leading to the stream

the causal stream of action.

So that I would say, so yeah, the, and then on top of all the different imaginings would be orchestrated by the capital system would be the basic model.

So currently, and so, and, and,

So currently, I am working on expanding this to seeing what different states of consciousness, the ways in which they could impact these sorts of phenomena in terms of changing your awareness of this rehearsal process or changing one of the primary things of interest.

So and also whether differences in the mechanisms of agency could potentially contribute to the phenomenology of psychedelics.

I'll try to explain what I mean.

So here would be someone relatively unaltered, engaging in mental rehearsal.

Their mind's sort of wandering off to nature.

They're seeing a tree.

Here's imagination.

Here's perception.

Here, more vivid than imagination.

And they're just sort of imagining things, imagining, will I move?

Won't I move?

And then at a certain point,

imagination becomes vivid enough that they can really see it happening.

And at a certain point of vividness of imaginings as a function of this rehearsal of will I move, won't I move, you get enough buildup of whether we're on the implementation level or mechanistic level, we might talk about recurrent activity.

In terms of active inference on the functional level, we might talk about model evidence.

But at a certain point, you cross a certain threshold, leading to model selection of you altering your proprioceptive pose and this becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy through active inference.

You then minimize the prediction error between your imagination, I am moving, and the action through reflex arcs, the way that basically motor control is thought to work in active inference.

and predictive processing.

So the psychedelic angle would be, as someone is dosing with these compounds, their imagination becomes more vivid.

And they might show stronger ramping at first and maybe greater awareness of these patterns of mental stimulation leading up to the action.

It might get stronger still as you dose more and more.

Also greater coupling between interoceptive and proprioceptive modalities, increasing the gain on this positive feedback between mental imagery and feelings of urge.

And so in a way, this would be an enhancement of the willing aspect of agency as you move up this dose response curve.

But then you get to a certain level and you start to get into this psychedelic regime where your thought becomes highly creative.

And then your directed willing might start to go down.

Potentially, the idea is you might find other things competing for your awareness, different creative possibilities.

So you're now imagining nature very vividly, and this is competing with you rehearsing, will I move or won't I move?

And less predicting I'm about to move.

And as you come up with the dose, these inferences, you directing a certain move might become less and less.

Extremely high doses, you might get a compromise of these mechanisms of agency, of this conjoining of your interoceptive and your proprioceptive predictions of your basically

of your stream of consciousness being pulled along by value-driven policy selection via sophisticated affective inference.

So I think the reverse direction is this in terms of

this paradigm potentially informing psychedelics could be that one source of hallucinations or delusions or atypical altered consciousness and cognition would be that if you take the basic micro mechanics of agency,

And you compromise that.

So as you're beginning to somewhat imagine an action, but it's not well integrated into some causal unfolding, you could come to this anomalous inferences about what's causing these basically

The different endogenous activity in your brain, the different events that could lead to motor actions, if these aren't being integrated into a self-consistent, coherent causal unfolding, one of the ways that you could try to make sense of this would be a confabulation of something like a hallucination.

And so this could potentially

also explain some of psychedelic phenomenology and potentially clinical neuropsychiatric phenomenology with things like schizophrenia as potentially being a function of disrupted agency mechanisms.

So that's currently the area of focus.

And a preprint just came out on that called On the Degrees of Freedom Worth Having.


SPEAKER_03:
psychedelics as a window for understanding and expanding uh free will I believe that's what I called it and so that would be a little bit um also apologies if there's any strange stream hiccups but could you maybe unpack what the alien or extraterrestrial was doing and how does the confabulation relate to a narrative understanding of action


SPEAKER_01:
So in this one, so we're starting out just imagining your hand moving or imagining being in nature.

And then same here as the dose goes up.

And it goes up, and you might start to get some more intense interoceptive sensations.

The 5-HT2A receptors, which heavily mediate the effects of classic psychedelics, they're highly expressed in the interior insula, the top of the interoceptive hierarchy.

And so you keep going up.

The sensations become more intense.

Imagination becomes closer to reality.

And so here, what I'm calling the heroic dose and this extreme dose regimes,

you're starting to get for instance like your ownership of the actions are starting to get undermined so here i'm depicting like you find your hand moving but you're not accounting for your willing of the move being the thing you're not saying oh i was rehearsing it and it felt this way and that was part of the causal stream into action you just found yourself moving and

And so one way you could make sense of this or confabulate around this here is a hand, like it's a feeling of the hand pushing down on your hand from without, just an example of a potential confabulation or hallucination someone might have.

And this one here, it's expanded, and it's basically someone, it's not even your hand anymore pressing it, but an alien's pressing it.

It's just an example of, for instance, so psychedelics, the classic psychedelics will act on these 5-HT2A receptors.

They are heavily expressed on these deep pyramidal neurons of cortex's six layers.

The layer five, well, basically, they're big neurons that loop with the thalamus.

And they let you form these broad synchronous complexes, which in predictive processing are thought to encode your beliefs, some subset of which would be your experience.

And so if you increase the gain on these, the idea is that you might have enhanced perceptual vividness.

But because, though, you've done a radical alteration of multiple kinds to the normal regime of processing in your mind, the normal ways you would model,

even though you're experiencing things intensely, this would potentially be of an atypical variety of experience.

And so here is the intense perception, apperception of the alien.

It's a counterfactual alien.

It's not actually an alien.

That would be an example of an anomalous inference you might make.

And it has some relation to what's happening and the fact that maybe there was some motor rehearsal going on, but you're not able to keep track of it.

And here, you're actually having phenomenal consciousness in each of these moments, but you don't have conscious access unless in these iterative moments of experience

you can somehow get callbacks where things can be contextualized within some sort of causal unfolding.

The claim would be that basically this would be a way of separating out phenomenal consciousness from conscious access, that there's things that can happen as you're generating these quail states as estimates of what's happening of system world, system world, system world, specifically your sensorium as you think it is based on your current engagement or in counterfactual circumstances.

and that that's the stream of consciousness, but that not all of the frames of experience are accessible or rememberable.

And so in this case here, maybe there was some rehearsal, but you're not keeping track of it.

And then the best causal account you were able to come up with was that an alien made you do it.

And you might have even forgotten that this was you, or maybe you do remember it, but would need probably some more contextualization or not.

It's unclear.

So that would be the basic idea is that psychedelics would be increasing consciousness level or the vividness of your experience, but potentially undermining the coherence in terms of causal unfoldings or your usual priors by which you structure the world in the spirit of Robin Carr at Harris and Carl Friston's Rebus model, which I'm currently discussing in the context of a broader framework that I call Albus.

But yeah, I don't know, did that help at all or?


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

It also reminded me of what you said about the different levels and their interdependence and mutual constraints.

So it's like a sound is heard and potentially in one state of consciousness or mind or brain, it's 98% likely to be one thing and

option B and C are 1% likelihood.

And so it just goes forward with as if option A, like as if I'm in control, but then some things might happen where like that 1% chance that it is an alien gets accepted and sort of passed forward.

And then that might lead to the experience through the generative model of something that like,

was a distributional so it's like a change in quantitative distributions that leads to a qualitative change at increasingly higher and categorical and semantic experiential layers beautifully said


SPEAKER_01:
And it would depend on your cultural priors.

So whether you would call this a relaxed belief or a strengthened belief, I'm not sure.

But for instance, you might not be seeing it.

An indigenous people of South America, for instance, they might not see an alien.

It might be related to something having to do with their spirituality and whatever available myths you have.

would then go into basically this interpretation.

Your best guess, which is always wrong, sometimes useful, but your best guess of what's going on will be different depending on what they would call the set and the setting, but also where the setting is the broader cultural, the set and setting are also broader to the culture.

Not everyone will come to the inference of aliens, probably.

And actually, that's been shown, that hallucinations are culturally specific.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, with which kinds of extraterrestrial morphologies are seen in relationship to which are prevalent in the media and the stories of a given region.

I don't know all the details, but one can imagine.


SPEAKER_01:
like not everyone i mean like you could like say like um uh maybe there is something about like gray aliens which is like a little more archetypal i don't know if i'd say this but like uh

If you look at the eigendimensions, like morphological variation, what's relevant to us, you're just exaggerating many of the dimensions that would be relevant for us engaging in intersubjective modeling or modeling of ourselves, even for the sake of control.

So bigger hands might be important.

Where is attentional inference?

Where is this person attending to?

Where am I attending to?

So you want to know the heads and the eyes.

That's going to be really crucial.

That's a far out story, but there could be aspects that aren't just through the medium.


SPEAKER_03:
It's super interesting.

And yeah, not to go into alien stream mode, but thinking about a large headed archetype with very large dark eyes and the long fingers like you're kind of hinting at.

It's like, it's all pupil.

It's all cortex.

It doesn't have the strength, but it has a lot of nimbleness with its hands and with its body.

And so like, that's like one archetype of cognitive action.

I don't know.

And then what, maybe there's a blob and a shadow.

There's like these different archetypes, different little characters in this comic book of cognition.


SPEAKER_01:
that different from a child's um affordances too right like they're not they're not capable of like moving things around much but it's like their intentional actions are mostly like hand-eye coordination of like that's their purchase on the world that's their grip but you know for all this you know so this is the current like focus is how might psychedelics

inform our understanding of the micromechanics of agency and how might the micromechanics of agency inform our understanding of what psychedelics are doing.

That's currently one of the things I'm focusing on and about to do some experiments on at the Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Science I'm working at at Hopkins.

fundamentally and upstream of this, the idea is that these studies, which purportedly show that there's no free will, they show no such thing.

It's very ambiguous what they're showing, and I believe if you do an active inferential handling of them, you'll actually see that there are several ways in which consciousness is contributing to causal streams leading to action, which would be having some of the varieties of free will worth having.

Is it arbitrary?

uh degrees of free will no uh are there some varieties of free will worth having that we don't have like can you just like fly all of a sudden that'd be nice that'd be worthwhile we can't do that either but if you want your beliefs and desires to be able to meaningfully said to be be able to be said to be uh

meaningful, efficient core screenings, maybe even maximally efficient core screenings of what is happening, I think we do have that.

And I think you can find this even within these Libet paradigms.

If you didn't, I think you still could have many of the varieties of free will worth having because many people have criticized and saying, oh, just moving your hand without a reason, that's not really agency.

That's not what we want from free will.

We want meaningful decisions.

Sure, but I think even though for these studies, which people often will trot out and say, look, my brain made me do it, even then, I don't think it follows that

They show that our consciousness is epiphenomenal through and through.

And I think active inference basically shows some of the particular ways that consciousness is indeed causal, even in these circumstances.

And I think that's a very big deal.

I don't know how well it's surviving the replication crisis, but there's plenty of studies showing that

some undesirable consequences of people not believing in their own free will or their own agency.

Whether or not that works, I think there is a kind of this face valid account of this and that like, kind of like Dumbo's magic feather.

So like, you know, this elephant, I'm taking this from Dan Dennett from his book, Freedom of Olives, but this elephant

has a feather that the crows told him will help him fly.

And he had his big ears, and he used them to fly when he had the feather.

But it was because he believed.

Whether or not believing in free will gives you free will, not believing you're a meaningful cause, that becomes true just by believing it.

So I think it's quite dangerous to take basically something where we have something precious, something that basically would empower us to pursue our values, and to say, based on the several studies and using the authority of science, telling people that they are not meaningful causes.

I think that's extremely pernicious.

um and i think active inference can there's already great work being done like within like the neurophilosophy of free will pushing back against this and i think active inference can help uh showing people what are the meaningful degrees of freedom that they have um and how can they be preserved and expanded wow very interesting do you have any more slides to go through or may i ask some questions uh no more slides uh


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, so those who are watching live, please feel free to ask a question.

Otherwise, I want to pick up near the beginning when you spoke about finding oneself in a stream of action.

So what is happening when we find ourself in a stream of action?

And I want to hear what you have to say and then take this to some questions about memory and free will.

But when we are suddenly aware, like, whoa, I'm on a run.

I mean, I guess I did make prior decisions about deciding and so on, but like, whoa, now my leg is moving forward.


SPEAKER_01:
So the... I imagine this varies a good amount, like as a...

ter and intra individual difference variable.

So both between and within people, you're going to get a good amount of variance on this, I think.

But the way Heidegger described it in terms of this difference between describing like hammering.

And when you're a skilled craftsperson, the hammer is in your hand and it is ready at hand.

And your mind could be elsewhere.

Or people might have the phenomenology of this.

on a run or on a drive, you might just find yourself home, you can listen to an audio book, you'll barely know you're just you have this effortless mastery of the task set.

And it's only when something goes wrong that things are brought into awareness.

And so the

It's only, and so then you get this motion between, so here's the hammer just in your hand, ready at hand to present to hand.

And now it's in the foreground.

It was initially in this unconscious or semi-conscious background.

And so like if someone's running, like for instance, they could largely be in a similar state of effortless mastery, especially because, you know, just natural pendulum motion gets you like a lot of the control that combined with some spinal pattern generators, you know, it's, and

little other tweaks it's like you barely need to do anything once you once you've been trained up but let's say you're trail running and or let's say you run and then you step on something the idea would be that this violation of your expectations would cause basically prediction error

And that this prediction error, the thing that was different.

So, okay.

So within predictive processing, part of one of this marriage between category and phenomenology where things just become unconscious and you only become conscious when you're something's wrong, you might, while being careful not to conflate levels of analysis, you could get a good amount of this just from predictive processing with a dual tier architecture.

Like if,

Basically, you're really well trained up.

You can explain things.

You can basically handle things just with these efficient, unconscious couplings, unconscious inference, and a bunch of reflex arcs being skillfully deployed, doing most of the things you need to do.

And whether you want to call this modeling or not, it would be a matter of choice.

I would call it modeling.

But you wouldn't need to become aware of it

unless something was wrong.

And so then the idea is this lower down, it's not handled.

You don't predict it.

You don't explain away the prediction error.

It makes its way deeper into the brain, into the... It becomes more broadly... The deeper portion is, of course, it's... ...more explicit modeling and conscious modeling... ...processing challenges...

will be greater, more capable of accessing these richly connected sub networks, which could support basically this larger scale integrative simulation, some aspect of which would be your experience.

I don't know if that got it at all, but.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, awesome.

So we're driving back towards free will, because I really liked how you approached it in this conversation.

So I want to think about three concepts, memory, free will, and experience.

what are their Venn diagrams?

Like, can we, uh, of things that we remember, did we have free will for them or not more or less than expected for things that we experienced?

Do we remember them more or not?

Could there be something that you didn't experience, but you remember and had free will on and so on?

Like how our memory free will and experience bound together.


SPEAKER_01:
That's a fantastic question.

I don't,

So what's coming to mind, that's a whole other conversation.

But what was coming to mind for me at the moment is that

There's a partial definitional aspect of a connection between free will and experience.

So people want different things.

I wouldn't call free will one thing.

In fact, I actually think there's a certain wisdom in just the language of it.

People want both the willing, they want the agency, and they want the degrees of freedom in terms of they want to be able to pivot.

They want to be able to have what they do be a function of their past and being constrained by their memories and their meanings from the past.

But they also want to be able to break free, whether in the face of something new or just encountering something new or to explore.

And so having that freedom for exploration is also going to be a part of agency, both within a context and across time.

But the memory is going to be important because without the memory, that's the constraint based on values, based on you.

You know, there's many aspects of the self, for instance, some of the most essential ones and maybe some of the gold standards of free will.

It's like this interface of like, you both want things and you want that you want them, where the wanting that you want is based on this integrative and like narrative type self.

so that would be a way in which memory would very strongly like where free will would be a function both of experience that you want your experience your consciousness and your experience to be part of the causal stream leading to action part of your your valuing your affective inference you want that to be influencing both across time and in the moment um and so the experience would be essential like

It's not clear that many, like Dennett has argued that free will and consciousness must always be handled together.

But without memory, you also though, it's not you either.

I think there's an interesting thing though, in terms of like you're alluding to like basically connections between causation and memory.

And I believe we are better capable of remembering things when we can take them up into a causal unfolding.

This basically affords a representation with more of a sparse structure of salience, of this led to this led to this.

And then you hold that causal graph in your mind as basically the core of your generative model.

And it seems to be a highly efficient way of remembering things is to come up with a causal account of them.

And so if something is a product of your agency in a way that is automatically structuring things in this causal fashion, and so there should be a connection between having agency and free will in a circumstance and being better able to remember things.

I don't know if that's the case, but it seems like some things from education theory suggest, like with respect to active learning, but I can see that going a lot of different ways.

So that's a deep question.

And that's what came to mind.

But what do you think?


SPEAKER_03:
Wow.

Well, the last piece you brought up about the sparsity, kind of the sharpness on the sparsity of the causal story, and then things that have a sharp...

and a sparse causal architecture as experienced with our very limited working memory they're like pre-digested and therefore very apt to be able to leave certain kinds of traces and then maybe something could leave a trace that didn't have a perceived sparse causal architecture in the moment

But that might be an example of a memory that's hard to recall or that might be cleaned up in post-production and may be very susceptible to being influenced because subsequent updates could try to draw attention to part of that uncertainty.

And if there was just a loose memory of many things happening at a scene,

asking even a question about part of it could start to sharpen that aspect.

And, um, so it's, it's an interesting question and also kind of like the questions, like what if you had some sort of suffering, but you didn't remember it or in between moments or when you were sleeping, you were having some sort of negative experience.

So just, I mean, what is happening with the mind and the brain?

The brain seems to be continuous, but then we have these more flashes and discreteness and shifting of mental attention.

Go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
I just like the way you're describing this.

Yeah.

I feel like it's a really good case in point of the answer to do we or don't we have free will should always be what do you mean?

And the answer is always the way you're showing these different processes could either go together synergistically or come apart.

It's like

How many meaningful degrees of freedom do we have in what circumstances?

Or in what senses do we have how much of which of the varieties of free will that we want in different circumstances?

So it's like the answer is there or isn't there free will?

it seems like like much more interesting is getting into the details and useful.

It's like getting into the details you're talking about right now with like the different ways that memory and experience and choice can all go together or not both within and across time.

Like that's,


SPEAKER_03:
then that answer is like that i guess you could say that's like that's the real problem of free will and then that um interesting yeah like um that when the experiment of pushing the button is presented as being about the exertion of decision making in the moment rather than the um memory or the recalling of something

that might've been different in the moments, those are quite different settings and it could be a total different neurophysiology

And also what you said about how this sort of tension between having a connection to the past and the constraints that it provides, but also the ability to choose.

And I guess that's what's explored in these varieties papers.

So I wanted to not just ask, like, what are the varieties, but just specifically asking about the similarities and differences with bodily action.

What are the varieties of free will we might have with respect to bodily action, like the so-called voluntary and involuntary bodily processes, and then mental action, where in active inference, we can model regimes of attention and metacognition and thought as like action policies on mental states.

So what kinds of free will are out there for the body?

And what does that say about what might be a cognitive degree of freedom or not?

Like, you know, just choosing what we want.


SPEAKER_01:
So in terms of like body actions,

If we're dealing with something highly rehearsed, then it seems like that could be an example or something where it's like ..

you can model that, the predictive processing, like the hammer strike, and the loop is closed before it ever even enters the brain.

It's in the CNS and the reflex arc, but it doesn't perhaps even make it up top before your body moves.

That's just after the fact that you're aware of it.

But then if you're doing something like,

And so then at this other extreme of abstraction, you might have something like planning, reaching a distal goal where there's many steps involved, and you need to come to some sort of sequence of the steps.

And along the way, actually, I don't know if that would be the extreme, but that would be...

there's certain things that have to happen to some orders.

At the extreme of abstraction, it might be something like going to grad school, something like that.

Too real.

Getting a new job.

Ouch.

That itself, there's a lot of things that have to happen before other things, a lot of dependencies, and a lot of multiple realizability.

There's always multiple realizability.

I go to reach for this glass.

I could have reached for this.

I could have done a weird thing and gone like this.

I could have pinky out, pinky in.

I prefer pinky out.

But there's all sorts of things that could have done.

There is multiple realizable.

But the multiple realizability of something like going to college, going to grad school, that's even more so the number of ways you can go into it.

And then I guess I'm thinking in this middle regime of something that's still very clearly motoric, but would be novel in that fine-grained motor control.

I'm learning for the first time, and I'm doing a tea ceremony.

or I'm learning calligraphy, or I'm just learning to knit or something.

There, it's the fine-grained things are now being monitored as present at hand.

And you actually need to use your sophisticated inference machinery to help scaffold this basically

the acquisition of skilled motor abilities, the capacity for skilled motor performance.

But I would also, I think, suggest that the whole way through, it's always built experience once it's being co-opted or controlled.

And its controllability is always modal in a motoric fashion.

claims I make in this paper, turns out that it's called premotor theory.

But that basically, through partial expression of a motor command or a motor prediction, the inference copy from that, the associated sensations, can be used as a means of top-down attentional selection.

It could be used as a means of attending to memory in terms of working memory.

Basically, you can use these.

partially expressed motor predictions, not enough to actually cross threshold, but use them to basically as a source of control over dynamics of where your awareness is going and what's going in or out of your awareness.

And the claim I make is actually that this is exhaustive.

Like this is the only like lever you have is basically whatever is built off of a control hierarchy off of skeletal muscle.

It's a claim.

But the idea would be like, even though I'm talking about something as abstract as,

going to college or grad school, there's still going to be some, it has to cash out as static and modal.

You're seeing yourself in the different contexts, even for the abstracts, like justice.

You still, to experience it, it's still going to have some sort of thing.

Here's justice's scales.

Here's the courtroom.

Here's seeing this memory from your past where there is an injustice or justice was served.

Here's you feeling this uneasiness or this righteousness.

So the idea, I would claim, is that any kind of control on any level will always cash out motorically.

But there are meaningful differences in terms of whether you're engaging in something which is involving these immediate fast feedback loops.

It might be multiply realizable, but less so.

Or something which the affordance structure is more

being played out in terms of your capacity to control it and relate to it in terms of these even more multiply realizable high level plans of all the things, situations you might be in that would be related to achieving high level goals or abstract goals.

I don't know if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, one thought on that is it's like a jigsaw puzzle.

So there's only one way to assemble it.

And it's kind of like there's therefore this bundle of trajectories of different realizations of how one is going to assemble it.

Like there's sort of what happens on the table, all the combinatorics of the way to assemble it.

And then there's like all of the real life combinatorics about how many minutes am I going to spend playing this jigsaw?

And then I'm going to go get up and do other stuff.

and so the multiple realization of the jigsaw where it does all kind of come back to being completed is one thing and then yeah you brought up how when things are even the outcomes are unknown or there's multiple realizations those are where we start to maybe think about hierarchical nesting of models like we've been discussing in the slam paper and also

the vivid imagining of different future states what is the regime of attention that might for somebody who wants to be an athlete help them make practicing and being on that path like more natural so what what how specific and what modalities that's kind of what it made me think of but

I kind of want to keep on going on this mental action route.

Has there been anything like a mental or a cognitive Libe experiment?

Like where the instructions would be like, take a couple of breaths and just, you know, get up and walk around or whatever.

Just take a couple of breaths and then identify the moment on the clock when you chose to think about X. A pure mental on mental assessment.


SPEAKER_02:
So, before I forget,


SPEAKER_01:
Just before I forget, I actually think what you're just mentioning, the optimal intentional engagement for something like a sport or some performance, actually, I think that's a key example of through skilled mental action or not, through the skillfulness of your mental actions, having more or less freedom where, for instance, if you're choking, for instance, you do it wrong.

Jun Tani has a good paper on choking and active inference.

And so if you get that wrong, that would be like your free will being undermined by your mental action not being well calibrated in terms of where you're positioning your attentional selection for optimal grip or optimal engagement with what you're doing.

In terms of this more purely mental action libette, there's different versions of it that have been run, some of which I think would get a little bit more to that

And kind of what you described in terms of has one paper called Decisions that Matter.

And so basically, it would be choosing between charities.

And in this charity choice, you actually don't see the same type of ramping.

And I think this supports, to some degree,

the model I'm suggesting, and that if this ramping is a buildup of basically activity in your action-oriented body maps, cross-coupling with your interoceptive body maps, and this feeling of urge and mental stimulation, it makes sense that you would have that for something like pressing a button.

But if it's something like which charity I'm going to donate to, you might not get that same kind of tight coupling and feedback.

And so I think that's some evidence in support of that.

But I think the particular thing you brought up, there's these and this is a direction I'm beginning to look into.

There's these closely related waveforms to the readiness potential, the event related negativity and the SPN

stimulus preceding negativity.

And I believe some of them would be, for instance, preparing for information that's coming and then acting.

I think that would be the ERN or the SPN, the stimulus preceding negativity is,

You're preparing to receive information that's possibly salient, but there's no action required.

So I think that might be potentially, you could think of all these things though, and actively as having, they look,

very similar electrophysiologically.

And I would suggest that they are all fundamentally similar and that what they're using, whether we're talking about patterns of attentional selection or specifically orchestrating mental simulation to act or not in terms of an overt action, that in all these cases, it is grounded in the modalities.

And this is basically understood implementationally as recurrent activity in different places of the control hierarchy over body maps.

Or in terms of algorithmically and functionally, an accumulation of model evidence for shifting your proprioceptive pose.

That would be for an overt action, but for a documental action, similar story.

But if the model evidence, I guess, would be a slightly different model, but it's

if what you're imagining is your own, you're imagining your body being in a different state that would allow you to orient differently, to bias your sensors differently, to move your attention around differently, to do different precision weighting, but you don't imagine it vividly enough that it will actually drive your spinal reflex arcs.

But that this would be what you would use even for potential purely mental acts.

it would still be co-opting a control hierarchy off of skeletal muscle.

And the reason I focus on skeletal muscle is because it's designed to have basically large gross actions with low latency, and it's controllable.

And the conditions for fine-grained control are realized because you can actually direct your sensors using your effectors

with a large-scale meaningful outcome that can be causally modeled and tracked and controlled.

And so then the idea is that basically, Vygotsky first expressed an idea like this, I think, with respect to thought as inner speech, where first you learn how to speak, and then through partially expressing your speech, you learn how to co-opt this process for a stream of thought.

as inner speech.

Whether you want to say that that exhausts thinking is a whole other thing, but inner speech would be a significant part of thinking.

So the idea is this is all intentional mental operations, whether we're talking about shifting around basically the fine-grained adjustment of an overt skilled motor act or guiding your mental action with respect to attention and mental imagery and imaginings, that in each case

you have the initial affordance structure, the initial control levers established via these overtly expressed behaviors and couplings of the world, which then later, by partially expressing them, gives you something you can repurpose for things like imaginative planning or covert detention.

Or I would argue, any intentionally influenced mental process


SPEAKER_03:
maybe ultimately uh have its origins in this co-opting of motor control bold claim okay so what could be systems yes go ahead i just said could be wrong not financial advice not not extraterrestrial advice hardly even active advice

It's very interesting.

What systems rise to this capacity and does their embodiment matter more?

So there are insects with tremendously reduced central nervous systems.

One could imagine a computational system that can engage in counterfactuals, but its only affordance or embodiment is one Morse code receiver or something like that.

So what systems have this capacity and why?


SPEAKER_01:
Um, so I definitely don't know the boundaries, but if I were to shoot from the hip on this, the idea would be the handling would still be of this computational neuro phenomenology or Mario phenomenology, but instead of drawing brains,

we would draw a different nervous system or whatever the signaling information processing system is, we would still give it this kind of handling where there would be a mechanism, there would be a function, there would be some intermediate algorithmic mapping across these levels, and then you connect this to phenomenology.

And so if

In this phenomenology, you're having basically goal states being represented, and the representation of these goal states is part.

At that level, you're also able to get an account of the guidance of action selection to bring them about.

Then you could say that you have degrees of freedom in that way.

So if we're talking about something like

And insects, you actually sent me a really interesting paper recently about dual systems thinking broadly construed, including for insects.

And it seems like you would need at least a two-tier hierarchy where this upper level can

break free of immediate engagements with the sensorium and where this lower level would allow for your couplings with the world and the orchestration of overt action selection uh in terms of actually like sensory motor coupling to the world and then a process which can basically um

on top of that hierarchically higher that could infer these state transitions, but without them being expressed.

And if you have that, then you could do the types of counterfactual processing that you would need for planning and constructing causal models.

It seems possible that insects might be able to do this in terms of, for instance, like in that paper you sent recently.

So the central complex has a lot of these properties of the hippocampal system.

It's kind of like it has properties of the hippocampal system and the thalamus at the same time.

And it's giving you the salience map used for both orienting and moving.

But you also get these mushroom bodies, which are like the stratum, which would be basically helping with moment-to-moment action selection, biasing it in a value-driven direction.

And so in this paper, you're getting

dual systems for control, one which seems to be more immediate and reactive, and the other seems to be governed by slower processes.

And so it's possible that something like this could give you

ability to do sweeps of possibilities of counterfactual inference where you basically take the beginning of expressing the motor command and so the insects thinking i'm a locomote in that direction um i i don't know the evidence well enough to know if this is the case but um it could be and then

So for a rodent, you'll see these sweeps in the hippocampus.

There's a maze.

And you'll see predictive of whether the mouse goes left or right.

You'll see these place fields representing different points in space.

And in anticipation of this, you'll see these sweeps ahead of activity.

And then where the sweep is most robust, that will be the branch that the animal will go down.

It will go down that set of places.

in theory you could do a similar thing by other means uh maybe with some homology even in the insect nervous system maybe you can even do it in an ant colony if you're getting like an inner attractor capable of aggregating across all these different um finer grain couplings and engaging in control but so basically whatever has

or I can't say, I'm not gonna say sufficient, but the claim I'll make for necessity would be some sort of dual tier architecture where the lower level gives you the couplings with the world and the upper level gives you counterfactual affordance and integration across these lower level potentially segregated coupling processes.

Something like that could do it for you.

And so could insects do it?

No, potentially, I don't know.

Could the insect colony do it?

Maybe.

The thing where I would place a potential constraint is...

It seems like we might need an architecture to have properties where it could signal fast enough where these inferences of quickly enough that it can stay on top of its evolving action perception cycles.

So in terms of its surfing uncertainty, it's moving through the world as couplings, the architecture, whether we're talking about a brain or some set of signaling across multiple individuals in like a hive mind,

We want it, I think, to be fast enough to have the estimates correspond to this sparse causal graph, what Benji would call, I think, independently controllable factors of the world, and not have a causal world model where you are an agent within it.

But it seems like you would need to have the ability to model independently controllable factors.

And so you need a signaling system that's fast enough

to pull this off.

And so some sort of small world network architecture would be likely required, where you have a combination of local modularity, but then synergy through having some central hub.

And so if this could be pulled off by the hive mind, and if this can orchestrate the overall swarm to do things quickly enough to basically have purchase, have the right grips on the world, that it can both inform and be informed by its action perception cycles,

then you could have an agency architecture, which by some dimensions we might describe in terms of free will.

That dodged the question.


SPEAKER_03:
Before I respond, what about just the computational one?

What if it was a computational one and it was instantiating a digital twin, a limited or comprehensive digital twin of itself?


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, I personally think the... I feel like an integrated information theorist would say absolutely not.

Some people within active inference communities would say no, it has to be physically realized.

But I think something like a digital twin or some sort of emulation, the important thing for me is that the...

there is a set of dependencies of effective connectivity that could be involving virtual processes.

And that if you trace out the patterns of effective connectivity of kinds, not necessarily made of matter, that if that is entailing the modeling of a system and its relationships with the world, and where within that system world model, it has this kind of agentic affordance,

For me, that counts.

But a lot of people would disagree on that.

But for me, I think you're trying to find the maximally explanatory core screening.

And sometimes that might be found at the level of the virtual machine and not in terms of the physical realization.

And then that's actually the most meaningful cause.

And then if you trace it out there, that's where you would look for it.

And so that could be in a digital twin or emulation.

But a lot of people would disagree with that.


SPEAKER_03:
So when you were talking about applying this to the colony level, I thought about like the foraging behavior.

That's like reaching out of the ground and grabbing a seed.

And so that's like the enacted foraging trip.

And then is there a counterfactual, I could be foraging or we could be foraging at some different scale

underground uh on the other side of the markov blanket of the nest entrance and then what if somebody were going to be tracking the the elevation of a forager and they'd be like well they go up and down in the nest but on the times where they make that decision to forage they always go up 200 milliseconds before foraging

It's like, well, yeah, that's where the nest entrance is.

So without going into whether they have will or not, it's like, it's some kind of cognitive motor integration when the person hits the button.

So then the way that you frame this as being like not a trivial artifact, in fact, an interesting outcome of aggregation of ERPs across trials

It's like, how couldn't there be a coherent preamble?

Now, I guess if we're 30 seconds long, that would be a different setting.

But then when we connect it to the specific mechanisms that do have to come together in order for there to be a coherent motor action,

it's it's quite an interesting view and I wonder how those who have um interpreted it in a very different way feel have you spoken or asked to anyone who has a very clear and um different interpretation of what this potential means


SPEAKER_01:
I've been discussing it some with, or I forget, I've been discussing some with, or a good amount with Uri Mose and Aaron Scherger.

Aaron Scherger has, he has multiple views, but some of them do disagree.

And so one of them is you, in theory, because you're averaging across multiple trials, there is an interpretation of readiness potentials as artifactual.

And it's possible that sometimes you are dealing with an artifact of measurement, and this is an open question.

But he's also, for instance, he's testing out the mental simulation view also.

Another interesting hypothesis he has is actually some of the evidence accumulation is actually fast feedback loops with muscle spindles.

And actually, you're getting basically the urge, actually, a lot of it is actually in the body itself.

But one interesting thing before I forget is that these, like,

build up and then threshold crossing.

I believe this you'll see across all nervous systems where you get action selection.

And I would wonder whether this similarly to me saying like, you know, this isn't just like a brain story.

Might we see

basically something like this, if we're looking at them.

I think in your active input paper, you talk about stigmergic coherence.

But through some sort of like, forgive me if I'm butchering it, but some sort of measure of that kind, you might see something like generalized action potentials for large scale changes in switching modes of the hive mind of the colony.

And while I'm just speculating, I actually also, in terms of multistage hierarchies,

I actually wonder whether the brains, like for instance, the resting state networks of the brain, maybe not like, there's different granularities and parcellations.

It can be as much as 17 or more if you wanted.

But there are some solutions that are like maybe, so seven networks are most well-known, but there's also like five network solutions.

And I'm wondering if there are actually universality classes for active inferential agents, that you'll actually get something like homolog of different resting state networks in their patterns of effective connectivity.

So generalized resting state networks, generalized empirical phenomena to like things like readiness potentials.

Very speculative, but I think we might.


SPEAKER_03:
a few interesting things that makes me think of and uh are we making cognitive science a creation in our own image if we talk about the generalized hippocampus and the general and so to what extent are we or can we must we generalize from our own action perception loop is uh

putting another umbrella which the human mind is just a realization of and say well the cognitive domain is bigger than the human brain because it includes the brain body and the extended niche but also includes non-human systems like if we want a cognitive science that includes a thermometer or something like that like a thermostat is that a is that a cope

Because actually, that is still the water that that model swims in is still human and cognitive.

Like, I don't know.

But these are interesting pieces.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, it seems like, seems like surely what you're describing has to be the case.

And it's like, and that's like a both a good thing and a bad thing where it's like, we need

to be able to draw on an analogy with something we understand.

We're usually making sense of things in terms of other things, and so our own experience as this base domain, in order to give us some purchase, can we do it without it?

You could say first principles thinking, but which first principles?

But then there's all of the baggage that could come.

It seems like

we can't avoid doing that.

Maybe we could, but I don't know if we'd want to, but then like, we really need to be careful to track the disanalogies.

Like if we're saying generalized to the campus, like, okay, wait, wait, wait, what are the disanalogies here?

What are the proper unique properties that are present in the target domain and not the base domain of like the map, the analogical mapping you're doing or vice versa?

Yes.

Yeah.

That's fraught what you're describing.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Um,

well I think a kind of closing area just one point that I want to pick up on I thought it was really powerful what you said about really the social consequences and the personal consequences of interpretation of neurosciences and in some ways even science communication around empirical results like

the idea that we could opt out to free will and that in a world where there's limited degrees of freedom you might be coerced into thinking you had free will or not but if there's any glimmer of free will it can be used to deny and deceive itself so that puts research in this area

in a different reflexive position than research on other systems.

So I guess just how do we move forward here while drawing on the specifics and being respectful of basically the past and the present and the future?


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, for me, I definitely have a lot of...

uh, sold a soul in the game and that like, this is actually maybe the biggest thing that a couple of things, but this might've been one of the biggest things that got me into cognitive science was a very long extended, um, freak out about free will when I was younger, where it was just, I couldn't see how anything could be mean.

I couldn't see how anything could be meaningful without it.

Um, I don't know if I still believe that exactly, but, um,

For me, it was very difficult to not believe that there were this sort of all or nothing thinking about free will and then going with the nothing.

Dennett actually rescued me from that with Freedom Evolves, his book.

But there was a long time where it seriously bothered me and it had real negative consequences on my life.

the and i'm not alone in this i've talked to others and they also feel that way and um part of the way this is coming up in the present work with um psychedelics actually is um so there's this study with um i'm preparing for with creative professionals who are suffering from burnout and one thing i'm wondering in terms of like people can get burnt out from you know multiple reasons but to the extent that this is continuous with burnout is continuous with uh

depression or feeling like you don't have agency in context where you want to have agency or feeling like you don't have adequate control of something where it really matters that you do.

that seems like a good recipe for burnout.

And it seems also like a decent model for some forms of depression, where if you view yourself as not being able to be a cause in the world, if you're not able to meaningfully work towards your values, that could be very distressing.

I mean, it could also be a state of like a quasi-Buddhistic, like blissful surrender.

But there's a question, are we flirting with nihilism there?

There's a question.

And the other question is,

Is it even legitimate, though, to be an eliminativist on the self and on volition, and then just to say, it's okay, you're not real, your volition isn't real anyways, don't worry about it?

Was that even a legitimate intellectual move to begin with?

I would argue it wasn't.

So yeah, I think this is the stakes here for people's sense of themselves changing.

I believe they really matter.

And I believe they have both social and clinical and social consequences, existential consequences for people.

And I'm glad that there's this growing community of people in the neurophilosophy of free will who have been doing a really great job pushing against some of these, I believe, excessively inflationary views.

And I believe that active inference might be a really valuable contribution to these efforts in terms of providing formal models and models that can go across this Marian neurophenomenological stack

or computational neurophenomenological setup and actually address these phenomena in enough detail where not only can we feel meaningfully satisfied where we understand our own agency, but we could intervene, and hopefully for the better.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just some last thoughts on that.

That's very powerful.

And the mutual constraints and the interdependencies of the different levels,

it may come down to someone's genetic sequence of a receptor or some kind of binding affinity with a molecule, but then it could also be integrated in kind of a full stack way with talk or action or changes to the niche.

So it gives like a full stack yes and way that's not

I think a dead end.

It's more like a starting state.

Like if the computer weren't working and then there was like the hardware and there's a software, but then moving beyond just that type of analogy, just very,

powerful about burnout and about the different cognitive ways that we might get there and get into it and get out of it.

And so it's like stoicism or whatever, plus preferences, because it's not just the neutral stance.

It's not just a descriptive stance on burnout.

There's like a preference there.

So Adam, if you have any other thoughts, please feel free.


SPEAKER_01:
I guess a quick thought is

is if we're looking and this is like to follow up on the um comment or something like these somewhat buddhistic eliminativist framings of um agency and i said like are they even legitimate uh i'm gonna argue um no they're not uh and specifically um if we're thinking of something like modeling the self

through time as a high level controller, if you engage in some sort of practice, whether it's discipline meditation for a long period of times, or you've taken like a very high dose of psychedelics, and you've basically collapsed the depth of your, the temporal depth and counterfactual richness of your generative modeling, you will not find yourself there.

You will be gone.

There will be no like you to talk about it.

You might call this something like ego depth.

But then to say that there never was a you process to begin with, I believe that is actually illegitimate.

You've basically used a search strategy that a priori should not have been able to find the self.

And then using that search strategy, you then concluded it didn't exist.

And I think that just doesn't work.

So in this case,

you know, to quote Dennett again, uh, you know, individuals, their narratives, their persons, you know, they're real patterns.

And, um, but they're also, there's a reflexiveness to it where their own belief and their own reality is an important part of their causal significance.

And so.

I think it would be good to have some nice debates with different members of the active inference community who are more deflationary on things like selves, self-processes, and agency.

Because ultimately, I think this is a thing where it's going to be like, well, we should be respectful in disagreements.

I think it really matters we get it right to the extent we can.


SPEAKER_03:
Thank you, Adam, for the excellent presentation.

Apologies for any internet glitches that might have happened.

We are a strange loop and this has been a strange live stream.


SPEAKER_00:
Always good talking to you, Daniel.
