SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome everyone to actin flab today is may 6 2021 and we're really excited to have shauna dobson back for math stream 2.1 this is going to be a fun discussion diamond holographic principle and d square immersion time maybe you'll teach us how to pronounce it and what it is so thanks again for coming on this stream and really looking forward to it so please take it away


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you so much, Daniel.

I just want to say your community is so supportive and I'm so happy to be back for a second talk.

You are all working on some of the most, you know, profound ideas here.

And so I'm really excited and thank you for having me.

Yay.

All right.

So this talk, I'm going to go a little bit into the more like the diamond part.

Cause I got some feedback on what are these diamonds and what was she talking about?

And so I was really excited that D square is actually D diamond for emergent time.

So, um,

I'll try to do my best to lay all these out.

Please ask, like Daniel was saying, questions every, you know, 10 slides or something like that.

I'm happy to answer it.

I'm also trying to constellate and weave together this sort of kind of grand unified picture.

So there's some drawings in here, and I hope that it's fun.

Okay, so let's go.

I'll be talking about the diamond holographic principle in D-diamond emergent time.

Yay.

Okay.

So the goal, I sort of talked about this last time, but not too, too in detail.

Um, today I'm going to actually weave together this kind of new math with a active inference and let's try to put it together and all work together.

So the goal is like to take the holographic principle, which were, you know, um,

all aware of, which was like begotten by Maldacena's, you know, beautiful gauge gravity duality between anti-de Sitter space and conformal field theory.

I have an idea to sort of reinterpret it in terms of continuous K theory and something I'm going to call pro-emergence.

So a pro-object is

is um a specific object kind of in category theory that's being used everywhere and it's sort of this idea of sewing together a bunch of um kind of smaller things that are self-contained to get a grand object and it's sort of built into the very structure i thought oh this is a great idea so i talked about k theory a little bit last time which is this beautiful construction by grothendieck to actually look at um

classifying very difficult objects using isomorphism classes of the spaces.

So it's like, oh, we can tell if two spaces are equivalent based on their equivalence relations.

And I thought that's a very, very, very nice, higher way of looking at things.

And there's a new work by Efimov talking about continuous K-theory.

So, again, this idea of sort of sewing together maybe smaller K-theories to build a bigger object.

So, for this pro-emergence, right, I am fascinated by time, and I want us to kind of get into it, right?

how does active inference see these sort of time streams?

Like, are there little local times with little thicknesses around them?

What is this?

So in this idea of mine, this pro-emergence, you have a doubly emergent time that's emergent on two fronts.

So you have a local singular condensed time, which is sort of the time that we all experience.

It's very like, you know, I'm presenting to your lovely community, 9.06 a.m.

This is like Shanna's now, right?

But there's also like

you know, Alpha Centauri now and the unicorn constellation now, right?

So there's all these different nows and who's now is what.

So you have these like local singular time, and then you're going to have actually have this global, what I'm going to try to push for is a non-locality in the diamonds, right?

So to rephrase the holographic principle and kind of upgrading ADS, which is anti-de Sitter space, which is the bulk, which has gravity in it, I'm going to try to actually rebuild that from the six-factor formalism.

So that's what you see in this figure with these sort of six columns.

is the six operations from Peter Schulze's The Telecomology of Diamonds.

It's so beautiful.

So imagine building space from a functor formalism, which is very, very specific.

And then if you're going to get the conformal field theory, which has no gravity, I was thinking, OK, so the gravity list could be in the profinite condition of the diamond.

So you see I have a bunch of diamonds kind of glued together.

And so maybe this gluing

in the diamond condition can kind of replace the conformal field theory.

So in this, you can actually get a holography.

And it's really interesting to think what active inference thinks about holography, like what's the actual reflection?

What's the actual object?

So you can relate this to strong and weak coupling.

Whichever theory is strong has a strong coupling, which is like the tension in the interaction terms.

And so you can relate.

you know, whichever one, you know, has maybe a weaker coupling, you normally use like a perturbation theory, the stronger coupling, you have to use the non perturbation methods.

So it's very physics oriented.

And

you know, the beauty and the duality is that if one space is too hard, you go to the other space.

So this is really fun.

And this is in the, I sort of have this grand opus paper, the DOP 21.

You're like, she refers to it all the time.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

So the goal, right?

So I said, you're going to have this pro emergent thing, which is like has multiple emergent times going on.

It's not just emergent time, but I think they're all over the place.

So in that is what I'm going to call V stack time.

So a stack is going to be this particular object that takes, um,

values in categories, not just sets.

We're not looking at the set of continuous functions, but maybe you're looking at the category of continuous functions and every object in the category is a continuous function.

You're getting this grand unified view

of objects, which is really, really neat.

I say V because it's going to be a stack with a V topology on it.

I think I spoke last time that you can actually put a topology on categories, and that's what I'm really interested in.

So the V topology is Peter Schultz's topology that he's using for the diamonds, and it's

It's a nice, fine topology, and I'll go into it in a little bit.

So the big questions that are driving some kind of wild diagram that I have here in the middle, this con D diamond, is like, what is the mathematics of simultaneity?

So I'm really interested in what we mean by simultaneity.

When we say two events happen, quote, at the same time, what time is that?

And is there a difference?

And what is the difference between simultaneity and nonlocality?

Nonlocality, you know, you have spatial nonlocality, maybe the view from a pair of entangled photons.

And then what does temporal nonlocality mean?

That time is actually everywhere, that there is no difference in time between events, right?

You have events that are maybe spread out into space.

but maybe they happen at the same time.

So I'm really interested in what kind of mathematics would be able to hold something like that.

Maybe you have a bunch of multiplicities going on, but they're all at once.

So I'm asking, what is embodied cognition in nonlocality?

How could you actually reframe one of the fundamental tenets of active inference

based on, like reframe it, a non-locality, not a progression, but what would actually happen all at once.

So this is where I think the mathematics would actually help, like infinity categories and this double emergence that I'm talking about.

So I talked about infinity categories last time.

These are categories that have a lot of rich structure in them.

And you're able to create morphisms between morphisms and between morphisms all the way up to infinity morphisms, which is really, really beautiful.

So maybe the claim, maybe it's kind of a wild claim is that embodied cognition like is emergent time.

Right.

So, um, what am I gonna, you know, hopefully that's something that can, I can kind of show throughout these slides.

Embodied cognition like is, um, emergent time.

So again, the basis behind emergent time is, was it always here?

I don't, I don't know.

Was time always here?

Who knows?

And that's what I'm kind of after.

So in this diagram, you see, I have this SPA FQ, which is the addict spectrum.

I'm gonna go into on the other side, you have SPA QP.

which is the attic spectrum of the P-attics, the diamond interpretation with a little diamond on top.

You've got these two factorization maps, these XBs from Farg's work on his geometrization of the local Langlands.

So heavy math in this, which is really beautiful.

On the bottom, you've got this Y-diamond SE.

This is called the diamond interpretation of the Farg-Fontaine curve.

This is an attic curve.

that has an actual Frobenius action on it.

And so this curve is very important.

It's used in the Langlands program, which is the top grand unified theory of mathematics right now.

So then you have these ln maps that are mapping up, whatever up means.

into what I call condensed T-diamond.

So the condensed category is Peter Schultz's construction about category of condensed objects.

I'm going to go into those.

It's a beautiful idea about sheaves over points.

So anybody in the crowd who knows what a sheaf is, it's like an awesome topological way of keeping track of local data, local data, local data, local data, like a little bag.

And so normally you have sheaves over spaces, but here's an actual sheaf over a singular point.

And so he and Dustin Klassen have been putting together this really awesome lecture notes on this topic.

So it's great.

It's in its infancy, and I think it's great.

So that D diamond is a conjecture of mine that you take the diamond I talked about last time, and you can actually extend it to the infinity category of diamonds.

So I call that D diamond.

A lot of stuff in that diagram, but this is what I think is actually the aesthetic.

Because what if we could actually map this to a string theoretic interpretation or something?

Then you get the grand unified theory of math and physics.

Boom.

OK.

So let me open that just a little bit.

So if you take, let C be the category of diamonds.

Let condensed C be the category of condensed objects in C. Objects are condensed diamonds.

That's what's in there.

Let R be the reflective full subcategory of condensed C. This is a subcategory where all objects in R are actually reflections of objects in the bigger category.

So it's very neat.

You have diamonds and their reflections.

So objects in R are reflections.

So if you take D diamond to be the infinity one category of diamonds, you can extend this to con D diamond.

So condensed D diamond.

And you get this actual object.

So following precedent from Farg's amazing work, the fiber product of this diagram is claimed, a moduli space, and a diamond.

That's very hard, right?

That's hard.

So moduli of vstack time.

So let's take this condensed diamond and just up it just a little bit.

So I have this other conjecture, right?

Let's take, so the way that you get these diamonds

I don't have the figure.

I have the figure of a diamond very, very soon.

The way you get the diamond is by taking equivalence classes, certain pro hotel equivalence classes of,

these objects called perfectoid spaces, which are like Berkovich spaces, kind of like cancer objects.

And so you glue those together and you get a diamond.

Well, why don't we glue diamonds together and get something else?

So you can do that.

So if you can take diamond equivalence relations of this diamond curve, then you can get a stack and the V topology.

And then why don't we work in the moduli space of V stacks?

So moduli space is this awesome parameter space where each point represents an isomorphism class of objects.

So

You're looking at, so each point like in this little figure below is an isomorphism class.

And so the question is like, you know, how do you move in a diagram like that?

Is it a chess board?

Is it, can I only move this way and this way and this way?

So I'm really interested in like what it means phenomenologically to have something like this and to start in the upper left.

like, dot and jump to the, like, the bottom right dot.

So how do you actually move through this thing?

So I'm thinking that every point of that moduli space would actually be an incarnation of the condensed D-diamond diagram.

So that huge factorization with these maps would actually be each point.

And I think that's actually really beautiful.

So that's the type of, like, grand unified theory I'm kind of thinking of.

So these LN maps play a dual role of what's called topological localization.

Localization is a beautiful way of actually constructing equivalences between objects.

And so topological localization passes through this reflective subcategory.

So objects are being sort of stared at by their reflections.

And it's a way of getting more equivalences in maps.

So I'll just leave that at that.

So this pro terminology, this is a little mathy, but I thought, let's do it.

I'm not going to go super mathy, but I wanted to give you enough terms so you know what I'm talking about.

So for this pro, which I think is very cool, the idea is that emergence is built into the very space as a pro object and not as additional counterterms.

I think the active inference community does that as well.

You want everything sort of built into the structure as opposed to adding these counterterms.

There's a lot of beautiful Feynman path integral work that has all of these additional counterterms added to it.

And it's like, I wish it could just be built

into the actual space.

So you can actually do that with this pro terminology.

So a pro object, there's a great reference called ncatlab that has all these definitions.

So I'm pulling all these.

And lots of great lecture notes on any kind of pro object.

So what is a pro-object?

A pro-object of a category C is a formal co-filtered limit of objects of C. So basically, roughly, what we mean by this co-filtered limit is that for every two objects, C1, C2, and C, you have a third object, C3, and C, that they both get mapped to it.

So it's sort of self-contained.

You see it's built into the structure.

You don't have to go off and leave the category to find a limit.

So you have a hom functor.

also.

So what you do, you take S to be a closed symmetric monoidal category.

Closed, I have the definition for both of these.

Symmetric monoidal means it has a tensor product.

And you take C and S enriched category, which means that it takes values, the hom set of C takes values in S. So you have this enriched hom functor, which is written like this.

C takes in two pairs.

going from the product of C opposite with itself, where C opposite is the same category, the arrows are just reversed, to S that sends a pair of objects in C to this hom object, which is a collection of morphisms.

So look at that.

You're actually mapping each pair of objects to where it can go.

right, to all the possible paths.

And I think this is very nice.

So a closed category means for any pair cc prime of objects, the collection of morphisms is an actual object of c. So everything is inside of itself.

And it's sort of like a categorical closure property, right?

If anyone's familiar with just the closure property that you learn in abstract algebra.

So this is called the internal hom object.

All right, so five, the profunctor.

So with the pro terminology, you can actually have a profunctor which generalizes the word term functor.

So let's C and D both be enriched over C. The profunctor from C to D is an S functor, so it's enriched with DOP, tensor C over S. So again, taking the pairs and mapping them over.

So you can also make this into, like I told you, this moduli space right here with the points, where isomorphism classes are each point.

And they can vary geometrically.

And I'll go into what that means.

And you can get stacks from that.

So I think I'll finish the pro and then ask if there's any questions, Daniel, just to wrap up this pro.

Okay.

Before, yeah.

Let's get the super techie stuff out of the way.

All right.

So what's also beautiful and all over the Langlands program is the idea of a pro-finite group.

So you can take this pro language, this kind of multi-gluing and self-containedness and extend it to a pro-finite group, which is a topological group that's isomorphic to the inverse limit of an inverse system of discrete finite groups.

So you have this inverse limit over the discrete finite groups.

These are finite groups that they all have the discrete topology.

And you have a collection of homomorphisms that satisfy nice relations.

So my idea is like, OK, let's up the game even more.

There's a lot of work about spectra and prime spectra.

And this is also Grothendieck, where the spectrum of a ring, I think I talked about it last time,

the spectrum of a ring refers is a space where the actual points of the space refer to prime ideals.

So again, you have this like point referring to something higher than a point.

Okay.

So you can extend that to what are called a formal spectrum.

So Grothendieck had this great idea of like including infinitesimals and things.

So,

It's not like you have a singular now, but what if we had a singular now with a little bit of infinitesimal thickening on it, right?

Like every now or every like local time of ours had a little bit of thickening and we could call that an infinitesimal thickening.

And so he actually has the same idea and he calls it formal spectra.

So we say the formal spectrum, SPF R of a commutative ring R in an ideal that obeys certain properties, it's actually the inductive limit of the prime spectrum.

So inductive limit, meaning like this.

So the pro refers to a projective phenomenon and the end refers to an inductive.

So it's like a co-limit.

So SPF R is the co-limit of spec RIN, which is where R is complete with the iadic topology.

There's various ways of completing rings in the iadic.

Where the connectomorphisms are these closed nil-quotient immersions, spec RIN immersed with spec RIN plus one.

These are of affine schemes and the column is taken in the category of topologically ringed spaces.

What is a closed nilpotent immersion?

So a nilpotent phenomenon is some property that you take an element, raise it to a certain power, and eventually go to zero.

So it's a way of canceling out elements.

The affine scheme is a ringed space.

It's a topological space, and it has a structure sheath, which is, again, this kind of thickening thing.

So imagine a space with a little bit of skin on it.

And so I'm thinking that, okay, it's not just a pro-emergence of points.

It's a pro-emergence of these formal spectra, which are like times, intervals with little thickenings on them.

So nilpotent elements, did I say elephants?

Nilpotent elements are infinitesimal neighborhoods.

And so a beautiful way to complete, again, to complete the ring, having convergence issues like settled, is to actually take attic completion.

So attic completion is to actually have all the infinitesimal neighborhoods

once.

And I think that's a grand goal.

And anybody after addict completion to have all the thickenings, right, is probably what we should be after.

Any questions on that so far before I get to the fun part?


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for this interesting intro.

I think one thing that's really going to resonate with people, hopefully of all different backgrounds, is what you said about we want emergence built into the base structure of our model, not a counter term, which isn't a term that's familiar to me, but it's kind of like magic magic.

shouldn't be added at the higher level.

We should have a model where at the base level we have emergence.

And then you mentioned the pairs of objects and a few different kind of pair operations like inverses.

And so I was just wondering, how should we think about these pairs of objects?

For example, are they organisms in the niche or are they two organisms?

Because if so, then we can kind of think every time you say pair, we might be able to like map it onto something that we've talked about from the embodied cognitive perspective.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, I like that.

Yeah, go ahead.

Try that.

Try that.

You know, well, you could take, you know, the category C of organisms and then it can be any two organisms in the actual category.

If you wanted the category, you know, to be, you know, pairs of organisms like the organism Daniel, the organism Shanna or something different.

then you could actually construct the category to be that.

That's the beauty of category theory.

You construct it to be whatever you want because structurally, you know the goal.

The goal is to get everything built inside the actual space and to have these consistency issues that you're not like, oh, well,

you know so like uh we come online and then there's this counter term oops so you actually have it um where organism you know is relating to or interacting with like organism right or you could actually have a category be just the way that my organism is identifying and interpreting information like whatever you want those objects to be it's completely loose


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Thanks, and I'll relay any questions from live chat in another 10 slides.


SPEAKER_01:
Yay, all of them.

This is so great.

Yay.

So we're all on the same page.

Build it into the structure.

And if you want the structure centered around, you can actually have this C3 being the organism Daniel, the organism Shanna, that everything maps back to me, because that's what we're doing in Active.

Everything comes back to me.

I'm trying to process.

OK, cool.

All right.

So, okay, this is a, I don't know, these ideas may just all be wild, but I'm glad, you know, I'm here to help.

So I don't know, this is where my brain thinks.

Okay.

So we have the idea of an infomorphism, which is an actual pair of, an adjoint pair of functors that's on a chew space.

And my colleague, my great colleague, Chris Fields has done so much work with that.

You know, Chris Fields pairs with Levin all the time.

They come up with these great stuff.

So an infomorphism is one pair, one set of adjoint functors, which satisfies some information.

My idea is to make a two infomorphism from...

these six functor formulas.

So in these kind of wild equations down here, the two tails is a structural property, an internal hom and an actual tensor product, how you actually combine things.

But the four in the middle represent two pairs of adjoint functors.

So if one set of two pairs is an infomorphism, I just want to actually construct a two-infomorphism, which would actually be a morphism between morphisms.

So that's a categorical thing at this point.

We're working on the semantics of what that actually means right now.

And so bear with us, that should be out very, very soon.

So what is this?

The idea is the incarnation of global time emerges from diamond non-locality.

That's what I just tried to say.

Local time emerges from these singular condensed sets.

The two-infomorphism is going to connect the global time with the local time.

That's the whole point, right?

That's how your organism evolves, right?

That's how you deduce, is to connect your local time with what's actually happening globally, right?

These cannot be singularly, they have to intersect at some point.

So if this two-infomorphism can actually do that, then you can actually get this temporal simultaneity non-locality.

I'm still not convinced that there is a difference between simultaneity and non-locality.

I would love it for anyone in your, you know, if anyone's...

like interested in that, that's, that's really, that's tricky because maybe, maybe the instance of simultaneity is a slice of the non-locality, or maybe we were actually in tune enough with what's happening, like, like embodied cognition wise or whatever, that we were actually able to

access for just a second, maybe the true nonlocality of everything that is, the nonlocality of information, whatever you want to call it.

What is the difference?

I don't really know.

People normally refer to like special relativity and reference frames.

And I have a couple questions about what reference frames are.

So anytime I think I'm going to tackle a new subject, I invent a new dictionary.

I'm like, OK, let's start with a dictionary to actually translate what I'm talking about.

Okay, so the notion of a site in category theory is where I can put a topology.

So I'm thinking if I'm, you know, for instance, looking at the site over, you know, organism, you know, investigating its environment, something like this, the site of Shanna, that's a categorical way of actually referring to the localization phenomena in the collapse, right?

So quantum mechanics is saying you go from, you know,

The collapse of the wave function is great.

I go from a simultaneous superposition state to a localized now.

Of course, there's controversy about the collapse and things like that.

That's why I'm using the word localization.

You localize in the now.

So coupling perturbation.

So again, strong coupling, you have to use these non-perturbative methods.

Weak coupling, you can use perturbation.

I think there's a link between perturbation and this perfectoid stuff that I've been looking at.

So there's a way called tilting to go from characteristic 0, if people are familiar with that, to characteristic p.

You can also add these beautiful objects called p-divisible formal group laws, which are, you know, once again, I would say ways of connecting like groups.

The kernels of these actual maps are p to the n torsion.

So the torsion element actually annihilates any other element.

So an element is torsion if it actually is annihilated by another element.

So you can see that you have these p to the n sort of phenomena that are canceling terms.

So the whole idea is that you can get this cancellation and sort of sequence phenomena also in perfectoid spaces.

So there's also torsion in these objects called Chimura varieties, which we'll talk about later.

That's in the Langlands Conjecture.

Strong coupling, maybe it's strong.

Maybe in the diamond, we could say strong coupling is in the diamond side of the holography because there's many incarnations of these covers, spa, cd.

i'll go into this a little bit later just trying to put the ideas up front weak coupling right so maybe you can do perturbation phenomena um in the condensed setting uh in the interior um you know so maybe that's in the singular perfectoid time it's weak because it's uh you know condensed maybe it's easier to work with pro hotel covers than in the condensed setting so it would make you work on the conformal field theory which is the diamonds so the whole relation to the diamond holography is that if you have these six operations right in the bulk then you're gonna have to go from the bulk

to the conformal field.

So maybe the inside is the six operations, uh, you know, um, whichever one you want to call strong and we coupling.

So what do I, what do I need to finish?

Well, you need to like to, I need to actually take the six operations and put them in the condensed setting and then link the diamond pro finite conditions with non locality.

So you get what's called diamond descent.

Descent is another way, like Daniel was saying about keeping the system contained.

Descent is a way of actually making sure that the covering spaces can reconstruct the lower space.

So my local space is actually constructible from my global space and vice versa.

This is another way of keeping the structure built inside the actual space.

OK, and we'll talk about diamond localization, which is going to be a way to make relations between the various diamonds.

All right, so let's try to link this, right?

So recall in infomorphism, it's an adjoint pair of structure-preserving maps for a chew space.

The beauty about chew space is that it's got a very, very nice construction categorically.

The chew construction builds what's called a star-autonomous category.

This is a monoidal category.

It has a tensor product in there to help you move objects around, where all objects have duals, right?

So I thought this might be interesting from embodied cognition, because maybe you're looking around at your reflection and learning off of your reflection, right?

And where are these reflections?

Everywhere.

So if all objects have duals, that's a very strong property for a category, which is why there's a lot of type theory and stuff that works in the choose space.

So you also have a category of five, Frobenius algebra.

This is an associative algebra with a linear form on it.

I told you Frobenius was even in the Langlands, right?

So Frobenius is powerful.

In body cognition, everything is related, right?

So you want everything to be related.

So what if everything was a star autonomous category?

So I think the Chu construction is actually very pertinent here.

So if the hidden states, what if those are like a pro-finite condition or a pro-object that maybe just only become, you know, visible upon a certain pullback?

So in the diamond construction that I gave you, I said those geometric points were mathematical impurities, yeah, that they were not visible.

unless you pulled them back over these covers.

There's once again a lot of work about neurology acting topologically, meaning that your appropriate obsession is gotten by these topological covers.

where portions of the mind or the brain are actually working together and where portions sort of intersect and overlap.

That's a covering phenomenon, and that's how you actually deduce and things like this.

So shared action.

OK, so if we're after shared action, what if we start looking at relations between relations?

That's where the shared action is.

We want to think collectively in the face of uncertainty.

If we start thinking

in the framework of two morphism, then you're already in the global space.

And I think there's nothing more shared than working in the relation of the relation space instead of being so siloed.

You can be siloed in your own localization, but that's not going to help for shared action.

So if everyone can get a hold of everyone else's two morphisms,

What does that mean?

That means you're actually all intersecting and interacting.

You can take that and go to in-awareness, which is what my awesome colleague Robert Pretner and I have been working on as well.

I think I said that last time, but I do not believe that there's only one channel here.

I feel like through shared action, you could access more of these consciousness channels.

that an awareness is actually a categorical phenomenon that I can show here.

So I think I showed this last time, but I'll just show it again.

So on the left, you have a basic depiction of a category, this one right here.

My little mouse is not working.

All right, so the one on the left, top row left.

So you have...

Two objects here, A and B. F1 and G1 are morphisms, right?

You have two objects, C and D. F2 and G2, those are morphisms.

We'll call them one morphisms.

Let's go to the category in the middle.

So the category middle is a two category.

Oh, and I'm sorry, the category on the left is a one category.

So if you go to a two category in the middle, you have the same objects, A, B, C, D, and the same one morphisms, but look at these wild maps on the side.

So you're mapping, look what we're mapping on the left.

You're mapping the morphism F1 to G2 by that map phi.

And then you're also, by gamma, you're mapping G1 to F2.

So this is awesome.

So look what we're doing there.

Now you're mapping the morphisms between the morphisms, and this is where I think shared action lives.

You can go even wilder because, you know, it's me.

So the third, you can have a three category, which is the top right piece.

And look at that.

A three category consists of objects, one morphisms between the objects, two morphisms between the one morphisms.

And then look at the three morphism you have going on.

The big double bar, triple bar, horizontal bar that's connecting phi and gamma.

Is everybody see?

So you see, you can just keep going and why not?

That's where collection... Yeah, go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, just wanted to give one little thought on this.

It's almost like, let's say A, B, C, D are people.

And then the two mapping is kind of like best friends or marriage.

It's like two people who are married, there's some parallelism between couples of married people.

And then the three is like the mapping between marriage and being a best friend.

And so it's like saying the relationship between person A and B in the marriage is like the relationship between A and B in the best friend relationship.

So it's like we can put the relationship and almost objectify it, but not in a demeaning way, just in a containing formal way, and then use that to build higher order relationships.

So this is like very interesting.


SPEAKER_01:
Look at that.

Yeah, you say it.

I should just give you my slides and you present.

it's a co it's a co-presentation and we as in as a dyad are interacting with the material you've prepared as well as any questions that anyone else brings wow and so does everyone see so like collectively oh that makes me excited so collectively like even this interaction is like a three morphism right now and so that's actually really cool and you see um

like the yeah the with like marriage maybe you know maybe if you stayed in the one category you would have just been friends and you would have never actually tried the other relationship or the other relationship or you can go like you know twin flames and all this kind of stuff and so it's actually really exciting and so you can see just like daniel's saying

that's shared action.

And let's like, let's take shared action to infinity.

And then what a beautiful place this would be.

You know, you kind of have like, you know, the people like me that are, you know, related to animals too.

So it'd be like, oh, okay.

So then you have the morphism between like the theta wave of the animals talking to like the humans and then like oceans and things like that.

And then you might start relating on the higher, like higher connection level, right?

Not hierarchical, but like a higher connection level.

And so you can see that Robert and I were trying to think, okay,

Let's get weird and like take, you know, the one level of awareness, which is like, you know, Daniel and I co-presenting here because he says my slides better than me.

So the co-presentation, right, is maybe like a one awareness.

Okay.

And then two awareness, let's just bump this up a little bit, would be that, you know, he and I are presenting here.

And then simultaneously, like we're both Cambridge Apostles.

What?

Yes, that's the level that I'm willing to go, right?

Because if time is non-local, which I sort of think it is,

Why can't we map to it using these morphisms, right?

Of course, we'd have to do, I don't know, some kind of partition in the brain or whatever, but we'll get to that later.

But that's what we're saying about this nested hierarchy.

So use the same, everything that Daniel's saying about the categories, right?

One category, two category, three category, and bump it to like awareness, meaning actual interaction.

Like let's take embodied cognition and bump it.

Like what would a two embodied cognition be?

A three embodied, and let's keep going up.

because that would require higher, higher levels of this awareness, this stacky thing.

And again, the beauty about this is that, look, we didn't add some counter term, right?

We didn't just add, you know, the whole thing is magic, of course.

And, you know, I love magic, but we didn't just add it out of nowhere.

This was like built into the actual structure.

which I think is cool.

So again, most people may be intimidated by category theory or whatever at the first, but it's like, I think there's a payoff.

It's like, let's put a little bit of work into that structure, and then you can make this aesthetic.

And it actually, I think it helps, you know?

So just an overview real quick.

I'm going to try to talk about this emergent time a little better and a concomitant theory of condensed types, which are supposedly, they're supposed to be immediate from the recently introduced diamond holographic principle.

You've seen me already kind of introduce that.

So if you're connecting this beautiful mathematical grand unified theory of geometrized local language in the stack language with emergent time, that would be a new incarnation of a new reciprocity law.

You see, I'm using the word incarnation to refer to diamonds and reflections.

Also, choose spaces, infomorphism, star autonomous.

All of this, star autonomous, objects having duals,

reflections, reflective subcategories, profinite condition.

It's all about the mirror phenomena, which is in embodied cognition, I think.

Of course, there's problems everywhere, which is why I'm excited about this, right?

Problems everywhere.

You're going to talk about a theory of emergent time.

How do you measure that?

How do you actually measure time without constructing it?

And that, that is like, that's huge.

That'll stump me.

You know, I talk fast.

I'm like, wait, wait.

So how do you, how do you measure a double emergence?

Something as crazy as I'm talking about.

How do you measure a pro emergence?

How do you measure like, you know, if you want to do this categorical construction, like we're doing a two emergence, a three emergence, right?

I don't know.

And that's what I hope to sort of like, we can all work together to figure this out.

How do you actually measure emergence?

It's like, do you collapse emergence?

Are you too late?

If you measure it too early, is it a partial emergence and you've missed it?

If we sneeze, do we miss it?

Is it fast?

You know?

So our model gives levels of non-locality.

Levels of non-locality.

Not just saying like, you know, there exists a spatial non-locality.

No.

If you can put them together in that formal spectra, what if you had levels of non-locality everywhere?

And that's sort of what I'm into.

So I call it like a stacky non-locality and stackification.

I think...

Stackification is a word like spaghettification.

It does exist.

I may have misspelled it.

Sorry.

All right.

So you can do local this.

You know, I'm interested.

One of your awesome members of the community was asking me about like, what are you talking about this local global?

Meaning like the local singular now is like where I'm existing now.

And then, of course, you know, you have your unicorn constellation time on a Saros and all this other stuff.

So that's what, there's a play here between taking in information and then like existing and stuff.

So you can do this by this diamond descent, I told you this gluing, and that's gonna be an infinity one version of spatial V descent, which is at Peter Schloss's work, diamond localization.

So what's already neat is that once again, when I talked about the emergence is built into the structure, this localization, those L maps in the reflective subcategory, it's already a descent condition.

Whoa, so let's use these beautiful theorems, right?

And actually use them for phenomenology.

And so that's already a descent condition.

So we're on our way, you know?

So the goals to actually link strong and weak coupling, how do you actually construct this diamond non-locality for a temporal multiplicity?

I think that's really in tune with embodied cognition is to have a multiplicitous time, meaning there is not just one, but it's how could you actually model time acting

globally, non-locally, but also in a multiple way.

And that's super French continental philosophy at that point.

And I, you know, that's like my upbringing.

So I'm really interested in this phenomenal multiplicity because it lets the individual be, and it makes like what embodied cognition is like what I feel it is.

So I'll have to build this diamond descent.

And then again, these V stacks are going to have to satisfy this gluing condition.

That's fine.

Our model is a double emergence, but it's profinitely many copies of emergence.

That's what's strange.

I told you last time a profinite set was a totally disconnected compact Hausdorff space.

So that's what?

What is that?

Not Hausdorff.

A totally disconnected compact space.

Not Hausdorff.

So the profinite is very strange.

It's like, what is that?

If you have profinitely many copies of something, what is that actual space?

So if you have this double emergence and it's very kind of fractal-like, I'm really interested in that.

So again, maybe the strong coupling has to do with irreversibility and reconstructability.

I'm very, very interested in what we mean by something is irreversible.

I think we need to go into that just a little bit more.

And is there a play between irreversibility and reconstructability?

The descent condition says you can reconstruct this higher space from this level space.

What does it mean if you fail to reconstruct?

So we say, is a diamond x reconstructable up to irreversibility?

You've seen the up to condition in mathematics, which is like a is sort of equal to b up to some condition, meaning considering that condition.

So the hope is that yes.

So if I can get this play between reconstructability and irreversibility, maybe that'll make more sense mathematically for what it means to be irreversible.

So coupling, the strength of the coupling would be in the levels of the profiniteness and the nonlocality.

How many levels do you actually have there?

What's the strength?

So coupling by perturbation, I already said that's perfectoid and tilting.

So big questions.

What would actually non-locality be in active reference?

I want to leave these rhetorically because I want to get to this, that pretty image.

Daniel, before we wait, pause to the next question.

So, and I think it's like coming up.

Yeah, it's right there.

Okay.

So what is non-locality in active inference?

What is holography in active inference, right?

Which is this very awesome dimensional phenomena where there's a strong interaction,

and you know, say dimension n, and then maybe there's like a weaker interaction and n minus one, what does that mean?

And that if one space is too difficult, you go to the other space.

What does that actually mean?

And they're actually related, sort of like a hologram.

So a hologram is this 2D kind of scrambled image that maybe you bounce light on, and you get this 3D phenomenon.

So in one sense, the 3D is redundant, because you already had it in 2D.

So what is the notion of redundancy in active inference?

That's what I'm interested in.

So what is the diamond equivalent of profinite in active inference?

Where's the fractalness that's sort of happening, the fractal multiplicity?

What is object persistence in active inference?

That's tricky, right?

So, you know, when we, you know, we say, you know, the observer measures the electron and things like this.

You know, the pair of entangled photons, you know, acts non-locally or something like this.

What does that actually mean?

Why is it the same photon?

And so Chris Fields and I are trying to work on this awesome idea of object persistence and what that actually is, right?

I mean, you saw me a couple weeks ago, right?

But

is it the same shana how does that work how does objects persistence work when you're going through like a multiple time you know what is emergent time an active inference where is it more likely where in embodied uh um like cognition is emergence so what is pro emergence there so i want you to think about these as we're kind of going through what is the singularity right in active inference like a singular event

What is coupling, right?

What is the actual coupling?

What does the strength of an interaction mean?

So if you want to play out for shared action amid global uncertainty, maybe we should work in discrete time, operating grain unified theories, master this local global localization by these higher order awarenesses.

Machine learning, right?

Operating grain unified theories.

Let's go higher, right?

Let's not work in networks anymore.

Let's work in three morphisms.

Medical, OK, let's model the brain as a hologram.

Maybe these thoughts or these certain chromatic towers, I talked about the chromatic homotopy theory last time.

It has this beautiful notion of equating spectra.

You have this notion of this theorem called chromatic convergence theorem that says that you can reconstruct a certain object from its towers of spectra.

So you have a boost field localization, which is sort of like the idea of the topological localization I referred to.

which is a way of sort of connecting spaces.

And again, if, you know, you know, if in certain neurological maybe degeneration, maybe the actual morphisms are cut, you know, you can think about things like that.

You're no longer able to recall because maybe all the maps are gone, right?

So maybe that you could more aptly model things like interograde amnesia and neurodegeneration.

So medical, Levin and Fields have this awesome kind of new workout about entanglement across daughter cells.

What is holography in daughter cells?

At least we can measure entanglement in something besides photons, you know?

So you need this particularity.

Is temporal non-locality, is it like instantiation without reciprocities advent, right?

This is me going like wild here.

So advent means that you've arrived, that embodied cognition of the environment has arrived, I've arrived.

This is double play, right?

So is it an instantaneousness?

without a sort of two-way interaction, what does that actually mean?

What does temporal non-locality mean?

I don't really know.

Can we actually construct, for instance, a profinite version of that, which is, again, this kind of super disconnected fractal space?

Is temporal non-locality dialetheism time?

Everyone knows I'm a super fan of dialetheism.

This is a construction of logic where you can have both A and not A at the same time.

Normally, you cannot, right?

You have, you know, a

You know, A or B, not A, therefore B. Why can't A and not A obtain at the same time?

So you get this beautiful construction called dialetheism.

We may start messing around in that.

So it is, does a diamond construction of temporal nonlocality fail time as it fails all pro-incarnations of duration?

So you can get a lot of interesting heavy questions with this.

If so, what are the actual conditions for object persistence in a non-locality that is profinite?

How do you actually do that, right?

How does something persist in those conditions?

How does persistence work in a singular case, such as anterograde amnesia?

You know, I spoke of Clive Waring last time.

You know, was a beautiful pianist.

He's still living, which is great.

But he got an anterograde amnesia and has no more personal memory, but has a motor memory.

And so there's...

you know, some difficulties there.

But it's very interesting how the memory levels work.

So the question is multiply profound.

So at least try to hold on to it, you know, with a small assessment.

Maybe this has to do with like with thoughts and memory recollection.

We can go into that.

But first a dream.

Oh, go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
Can I just make a few active inference points there?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, do it.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so I'm recalling my thoughts here by looking at the paper, which I took notes on.

First, you mentioned the dynamic persistence and a multi-scale persistence, and that reminded me of the ship of Theseus, which is like if you replace all the planks of the ship, is it the same ship?

So it's a philosophy styled question, and then we're approaching it in a formal way.

And then it comes very close to active inference when you have the slide, a needed particularity.

That reminded me of Carl Friston's recent paper, which was called a free energy principle for a particular physics.

And particular is a pun because it means specific, but also it means particle.

And so when we say a particle or a point, it's like that is the unit of analysis that we can pick up.

We can make edges between points and we can engage in a higher level of network mapping.

So when we're thinking about particles here and this way that particles can be related in nested models or nested categories, not sure what technical would be, we're kind of talking about a particular approach.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, I love this.

Yes, yes.


SPEAKER_00:
Just trying to give a little active inference, you know, throw out some red meat.

No, please.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, every 10 slides.

Every five, stop me.

Yes, I think, wow, how neat.

You see, and that's like an incarnation.

It's like, this is exciting.

Yeah, what a play.

That's perfect.

I'm curious to see what you think about the next couple slides.

Okay.

I say, but first, right, so you have all this mathy stuff.

We're going to do this.

We're going to do this.

You know, like Daniel said, we're probably doing Friston stuff, pulling at everybody's stuff.

Ship of Theseus.

But first a dream because I want to get like a little pretty.

So we are interested in the relation between diamond descent, the stop mechanism.

So I know Fields and Levin and everyone has been like baffled by that.

the stop mechanism that doesn't work in something like cancer cells.

When do things stop?

I'm actually very curious about that.

And the storage and reflection and recollection of profoundly many copies of information in the form of mathematically impure geometric points.

If you're modeling, you know, neurons as diamonds, what is, whoa, okay, you have covers of diamonds, like I said, you know, if the proprioception is topological and in the covers, then maybe you could actually model neurons as these diamond phenomena.

So someone like Clive Waring has all the diamonds, but the covers are cut, so it's almost like you cannot access that, right?

Very interesting when the actual, you know, balloons are cut, you cannot get the balloon anymore.

if they're attached to you.

So we posited a model of the brain that's actually allowing for various mathematical partitions in the brain in the form of profiling many copies of the diamond, right?

So the neurons are geometric points, which are morphisms of schemes, like I said, then maybe anterograde amnesia would resemble some kind of sustained truncation of diamond descent.

Why are those maps continuously cut?

Which is why I'm very interested in this object persistence.

So considering temporal noncality, can we model thoughts as pro-finite reflections of pro-etel topological covers?

Oriented and non-locality, right?

Someone from your community also was asking me about thoughts, and I was like, that's such a great question.

Clearly, there's an EM field going on, but it's something more than that.

And then the brain seems to operate like a hologram as well.

So what is that, right?

Are these actual the pro-finite reflections, you know, like if you cannot organize your thoughts or things bouncing all over the place, you know, there's a lot of people that are internal or the, you know, is the diamond super internally reflected at that point?

So this may help, I said, you know, to model the state of being fully conscious, right, during dreamless sleep.

No one has that.

Fully conscious during the dreamless sleep.

What would that actually be?

Which perhaps takes the form of sleeping in a diamond hourglass.

So I write kind of fantastical mathematical fiction books.

And this is my second one that I'm working on about sleeping in a diamond hourglass.

What does that actually mean?

So you're working in diamond time at that point.

What does that mean?

Profinitely many reflections of time.

which probably takes some kind of image like this, right?

So I always have unicorns over because I'm like, oh, it's magic, right?

And what does it actually mean to sleep inside of anything hourglass?

I'm very, very curious because, you know, when we go to sleep, nothing is really asleep.

Your system is still functioning, right?

But quote, where do you go?

And I'm not sure what

You know, I'm going to put that out there to your community.

What is that, right?

Why can you not be fully conscious during dreamless sleep?

Not the little brief periodics, right, of dream sleep that you get.

But where is that?

So it'd be something like sleeping in an hourglass, which is actually very strange.

And you think, oh, God, what if somebody takes the hourglass and turns it upside down and shakes it?

But this would almost be an hourglass without cardinality.

So there is no up or down here, you know?

and so um stay tuned that book is coming out soon okay which is cool but it's all it's nested in

in the pro-finite condition.

If you're gonna say object persistence, that happens when you sleep as well.

So to get to some of the mathy stuff, there's some main conjectures.

I'll talk about the FMLK theory of diamonds.

Let's actually look up that diamond shape again, and let's get into the diamond holographic principle, the Farad-Fontaine curve, why we're using a telco homology, and let's go to emergent time, you know, or as far as many of these as we can.

So I may start skipping around, Damian, in the interest of time, you know, so that we can get to the good stuff.

So I introduced this kind of wild conjecture about, you know, this Efimov K theory of diamonds in this localization sequence, which is a cofiber sequence.

And a modification of something called continuous K theory.

So again, I told you earlier that maybe continuous K theory is the way to go if we're going to be modeling emergent time, because you want to kind of stick together

um, small pockets of, of, of local emergence.

So this, uh, this number two, uh, localization sequence is a cofiber sequence.

And, um, you've got the, the K theory acting on D little sub diamond and then K FM off of the diamond Farn-Fontaine curve, uh, mapping to the FM off, uh, K theory of the non diamond, uh, Farn-Fontaine curve with a modification of this F continuous, um, working in the category of sheaves.

And this is actually, um, this third, um,

The left-hand side is actually going to be corresponded to the actual, that omega to the n is an actual continuous k-theory spectrum of d-diamonds.

So again, it's a way of actually gluing together and looking at the isomorphism classes of what's happening in these diamonds.

So again, my idea is this.

You have these profoundly many copies of the actual geometric impurities.

So you already have those.

And we actually want to figure out what's happening

between those.

So like what's a two morphism between the profinite copies?

That's what my interpretation of the K theory is going to be.

So you have this level, let's go up a higher level.

K theory is actually looking at what makes things like unified at that higher level.

So it's cool.

So this D upper diamond is a stable dualizable presentable infinity one category of diamonds.

D sub diamond is actually the complex of V stacks of locally spatial diamonds where complex is a sort of like a collection.

And then you have the actual relative Farc-Fontaine curve and the diamond.

So I don't want to talk about that too, too much.

Let's get to the actual diamond holography principle, but the diamond holography principle should fall out and be immediate from this localization sequence.

So once again, our diamond holographic principle is going to use these two adjoint pairs where these, you have a direct image and inverse image functor, and then an exceptional and

and inverse exceptional functor, which is this F lower shriek and F upper shriek.

That's the kind of cool way of saying exclamation point.

What's the main point?

Is that, again, we want to take these double adjoint pairs and make a two-infomorphism out of them.

So these are from Schulz's Six Operations, A Telecomology of Diamonds.

We actually want to condensify this.

So how do you rephrase all this in terms of a sheaf of sets, like, on a certain site?

I'm going to go into what that means.

And then sort of, you know, how do we think about holography in terms of a mathematically...

mathematical impurity geometric point, the SPA CD, that's the attic spectrum of this closed algebraic curve mapping to the actual diamond.

So again, try to think of

you know, when we think about reflections, we're trying to mathematically interpret that.

So then let's actually discuss emergent time from that condensed setting and investigate a condensed version of the actual continuous k-theory for pro-emergence, right?

That's wild.

So the continuous k-theory, right?

So let's use FMOP continuous k-theory and then actually try to put the pro-object together as a pro-emergence.

OK, so here's this image.

I think I showed it last time.

So one of the main goals is to actually have an infinity one categorification of geometric Langlands.

The Langlands program is so beautiful.

What is it trying to do?

It's a mathematical interpretation of shared action.

You are working across very difficult disparate fields with lots of uncertainty.

And so you have these beautiful phenomena called Langlands reciprocity, Langlands functoriality, where you actually

you're creating a certain situation in which, you know, certain representations of objects are actually automorphic forms.

And so different incarnations are being shown to be the same thing, which is like a version of the same thing, which is cool.

So in this model that I have here, so the diamonds in the middle, and again, you have the FMFK theory of the actual diamond curve.

And at the bottom, you know, I said, oh, this structure is, you know, possibly an infinity one topoi, which goes back to Daniel's point about bringing all the structure in.

So an infinity one topoi is an infinity one category.

It satisfies a descent condition.

It's locally Cartesian closed, so everything maps to each other.

It's got a kappa filter on it.

So everything is nice and contained, which is really nice.

All right.

And so you can also, these LNs can also be interpreted in terms of, I have a little note there about a Lubin-Tate formal sheaf module.

This is a law to link, once again, one of these higher grain unified theories.

You can actually maybe link the geometrization of local Langlands with FOMOFK theory.

So I'm just putting some super mathy things because some people wanted some mathy things.

All right.

So that's Weinstein's work, which is really pretty.

So let me actually formally define diamond.

I don't think I did last time.

Yeah.

Yeah.

And then we get to the actual holography part.

Okay, so let perf D be the category of perfectoid spaces.

So again, these are attic spaces.

They look like Huber spaces and they are fractal and strange, kind of like Berkovich spaces.

So let perf D be that category, and perf be the subcategory of perfectoid spaces of characteristic p. So no longer 0, p. So a diamond is a Proatel sheaf.

That's a sheaf in the Proatel topology, which I told you is a very fine topology, which can be written as a quotient, x mod r. So you take the perfectoid space, and you mod out, and you glue.

by these ProHotel equivalence relations, boom, you get a diamond.

What a beautiful way of doing that.

So we say, let C be an algebraically closed affinoid field.

It's a certain construction and the Huber sense.

And then we say geometric points.

This is the thing that I think would be beautiful to actually the thing.

This is the actual object that could actually model neurons very nicely.

Geometric point, which is the attic spectrum of that C mapping to the diamond is made visible by pulling it back through a ProHotel cover

resulting in profiling many copies of spot C. So this is again, huge relation with like proprioception by topology, right?

How do you actually visualize?

How do you interpret things like this?

So diamond is an actual algebraic space for that V topology.

And the V topology, if anyone wants to know, is this actual cover FIXIX that consists of any maps, Xi to X, such that for any quasi-compact open subset U and X, you have final amenities I.

so that these open subsets jointly cover U. So X there is an actual VStack.

Okay, so here's the diamond again, right?

we can think, what are these actual geometric points in terms of embodied cognition, in terms of shared action, whatever you want to think.

If I'm a diamond, Daniel's a diamond, how do you actually relate those two diamonds by these big maps?

And so you can see that right here,

You have this diamond, so the actual footnote is calling it what it is.

So you take the P-addicts, right, which is the field of P-addicts, QP.

If we want to find the diamond spectrum of that, which is that spod D, so the diamond spectrum that's akin to the actual prime spectrum, the addict spectrum I showed you,

So you can actually only ever get the attic spectrum of QP cyclotomic, which is the cyclotomic field of the P-attics.

You don't actually get all the P-attics.

So this, modded out by this ZP cross, which is a Galois action, it's underlined because it's profinite.

So how interesting that you never actually get, you want the left-hand side spot of QP, but you only get profinitely many copies of the cyclotomic.

so you never actually get what you're after and this is actually has a lot of phenomenology behind it because like again robert and i really and chris and i are really fascinated by the phenomenology of what is so if we actually have you know um if you want to think interface or if you want to think whatever it is in our organism are we actually ever truly interacting with the thing or just our representation of the thing um you know you've got me at the level going well

You know, if interaction is just me interacting with a reflection of my environment, if it's actually me interacting with hidden states that were probably my reflections the whole time, what is it?

Are we just sitting around with a profanity of many copies of the thing and we never actually get the thing?

Any questions for, I feel like that's a lot of math.

A lot of math and pretty pictures.


SPEAKER_00:
There's a question in the chat.

wonderful yep uh cb writes according to this fascinating framework and from an awareness perspective is the dark room problem still considered as a problem

grateful for any elaboration on that and thanks to the speaker so the dark room problem being um the philosophical thought experiment where what does an agent in a dark room do and in the free energy world some people initially several years ago brought that up as something like a critique they'd say well aren't you very precisely sure that you're in a dark room so if active inference is about reducing uncertainty then isn't that the perfect state

But of course, the pragmatic answer is that while you're in that dark room, your uncertainty about the world is increasing.

So I'm wondering if that maps on to a multi-level uncertainty concept because it's almost like you're getting precise at the visual level that you're in a dark room

but you're getting increasingly imprecise at not just a different lateral level, like you're getting imprecise on smell while you're getting precise on vision, but actually at a higher level, you're getting imprecise on visually what's outside.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, wow.

Well, yeah, keep going.

What do you think?

What a beautiful question.

Thank you so much.

Oh, yes.

More questions and less me talking.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm thinking of it as there's three roads meeting in some ways here.

There's philosophy.

We've brought up the dark room, the ship of Theseus.

Then there's a lot of the formal mathematics, which certainly I'm scribbling down, but are just beginning to learn.

And then there's the active inference community who might be familiar with this idea of multilevel uncertainty.

but not have connected it to, for example, philosophy or math.

So we got people coming and going on all those roads.


SPEAKER_01:
No, this is beautiful.

So it's like, yeah, yeah.

Okay.

So let's not take one single dark room.

Let's expand it.

If every organism had their own dark room.

Yeah.

Let's take that question and accelerate it a little bit.

Would a dark room survive in a two-infomorphism?

Let's say on an information perspective, is it dark?

Probably not.

It's just on the organism perspective.

Actually, the dark room is a very beautiful, I think, instantiation of what I'm actually saying here with the diamond.

So in the dark room, you may just have profiling many copies of the dark, but as Daniel's saying, all your other senses are being very perfectoided.

I'm just playing.

Other senses are being more fine-tuned at the expense of something else.

So my question is this, it's like, why can't we increase the sort of bandwidth to be able to be precise everywhere?

Like, why is it dark to the extent of something else, right?

And how do we actually do that?

That's very interesting.

I think darkroom is still a problem.

Has anybody solved that?

It's still a problem, right?


SPEAKER_00:
I guess a problem for a philosopher, but not a problem for the human in the dark room.

And let me ask one question on the operations on diamonds.

People might be familiar with the operations on numbers, like addition, subtraction, multiplying, dividing.

So is it fair to say that the operations that you're going to be describing, they're like ways to work with diamonds, just like plus and minus are ways to work with numbers?


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, yeah, OK, it's a very good question.

So we can answer that very abstractly, that there really is no intrinsic definition of a number.

You can say, the number 5, well, what is it?

5 times 1, 6 minus 1.

You have so many ways of going at it that a number is actually just an equivalence class, right?

So if a number is just an equivalence class, then you can think of the same thing as a diamond.

Diamond is still equivalence class, right?

A certain equivalence class between, but you're in a different structure.

So sheaves don't really add like one plus one.

So there's a little more, and you can, is there an algebra of sheaves?

Oh, absolutely.

And the beauty is that sort of sheaves are this like way of keeping track of local data, like a little bag that's associated to every space.

There are ways of gluing those together.

You don't really add them, but you can glue them and start gluing them and start gluing them and start gluing them.

So in a sense, they are number theoretic.

if you're defining a number as an equivalence relation.

So you can think, yeah, one plus one like equals two, whatever that means.

Or you can say gluing and then gluing and then gluing and then gluing.

So you can actually get an infinity category of these sheaves.

So I recommend anyone looking at like,

um you want to learn like some of the the best global mathematics and like learning it conceptually first is to look at the sheath interpretation you're like wait was addition a sheath the whole time yeah talk about dark room and mathematics i'm just funny yeah so operation so and so um you know bless peter for being so amazing in coming up with this idea it's like oh

Not only can you put a sheaf on a topological space, you can put a sheaf on a category.

That's the sort of interesting thing that I'm into.

So take your idea of operating of like adding numbers and just go to the category of numbers.

And then if you start working categorically, that's already shared action.

You're in this higher space.

um yeah so operations with diamonds on diamonds showing something is a diamond okay it's all just a little rigorous but at the end it gives you such an aestheticism because um i think that you know all of this work should be pulling in everyone you need the philosophers make sure we're asking the right question you need the you know crazy math people like me to come up with like well i don't know let's try like an infinity category and then you need

you know, you need active, like we need people actually, you know, working on how do you relate all this?

So you need active inference, you need the philosophy and you need to put everyone together.

Yeah, so in the dark room, my question is, it's like,

You know, at what point was dark like light?

You know, so I think also the darkness is like maybe a profinite condition.

The question is, if we sat in the dark room forever, would it eventually become light?

You know, and then you bring in time.

So dark room is really interesting and try to think of dark room in a temporal non-locality.

That's how I would take that problem and kind of accelerate it just a little bit.

darkroom in terms of a diamond, darkroom in terms of change the time interpretation.

In all these models, time is always modeled as a total order.

That's another thing I would like to hear from your community.

Total order has this connexity property that every two objects in the total order are comparable.

Why?

Why do we model time as continuous?

Why do you model time as a total order?

I think that should be changed just a little bit and move it like non-Archimedean.

Quantum mechanics is going to work non-Archimedean with a very specific cutoff, right?

The Planck length.

And I think you should also be working with non-Archimedean time.

So the awesome person who asked the question about the dark room, please try to think about dark room like in some kind of temporal non-locality if time was everywhere.

I'm really interested in that.


SPEAKER_00:
I'll make one more comment here.

Quite early, you mentioned how a stack, you said, it takes in categories, not, for example, sets.

And connecting that to what you said about operations, this might be quite familiar to a computer scientist.

for whom the function can take in different things.

So we know there's functions that take in numbers like two plus two, but then there might be a function that takes in a large data set that has a diamond description.

And so computer science and engineering kind of the application

It's really easy sometimes to apply these recursive definitions, recursion central to computer science.

But you're right, when you go to the infinite level, that's kind of where the theory builds beyond any real implementation of a computer program.

So we're on the bottom looking up with the computer science implementations of nested networks.

And then...

Here's the hand coming from the top down saying there's a way to, you know, infinitely structure that and throw a sheath on it or I don't know.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, see, that's what I'm saying.

Yeah, it's like to upgrade a machine.

That's another project I'm working on.

It's like categorify it.

You know what I mean?

Like when, you know, the specific definition of stack is a two sheath, right?

So it's a sheath that takes values and categories.

That's actually, and so it's like, yeah, if you move from,

like an output is a weighted function or something.

If you move from that to the category of all possible weighted functions, then your complexity has just grown probably like threefold.

You see?

The output no longer needs to be something singular.

I outputted a weighted function particular to this distribution.

Why?

Why don't you output an actual category?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Here's another great question from the chat from Steven.

He wrote, if these category theory and geometry approaches enable another multi-scale formalism that treats time differently, can this approach play nicely with current multi-scale active inference formalisms?

Sounds like he summarized our conversation.


SPEAKER_01:
stephen should present yeah can he tell me a little bit more about the multi-scale active end see he you're right on it if you stackify things right think of it like this think that um you know like uh daniel was saying if every you know if every like

Think of every network being like a point in the moduli space.

Do you see?

Then that whole thing is just a point.

And then how do you actually get from point to point?

So is that the sort of like multi-scale, multi-class?

I'm super into like multi-class classification, you know?

I really like this question.

Yes, switch it up to like pro-finite.

If you categorify the thing, you're going to get more connections, right?

Then you're working in like categories of multi-class active inference, not just one.

Why don't we split it up?

Why don't you color it, call them incarnations, and relate them?

If it's a powerful enough category, you can put a sheaf on it.

Put a sheaf on it and then start gluing them all together.

And then I think you really have a multi-class shared inference.

Does that make sense, Stephen?

Wow, what a great question.

Do you have any thoughts on that, on the multi-class?

I mean, I think that's what we're saying.


SPEAKER_00:
one thought and the way that we've been talking about multi-scale active inference is like let's say the brain is the internal state and the body is external to it so then you have the blood brain barrier and then at the next level out you have the brain and the body interacting with the social niche and then you can go up and you can have societies or groups that are interacting with each other and it's a debate in active efforts does the group really have a blanket or what kind of blanket does it have

And here we're not going to speak directly to that, but we can think of, quote, American society as a point.

It's a point and then it has internal structure.

But by using that basically linguistic token, by saying it is a point, it's literally one term that you can pass.

then it abstracts over lower levels.

And I'm not exactly sure on what is strong enough to have a sheath or not or what that enables, but it sounds like it's making these nested structures and laterally interacting structures, making them composable and kind of compilable so that we can tractably zoom in and zoom out or work with guarantees or proofs on these types of structures.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, I love that.

Yeah.

And so I encourage everyone to maybe as a challenge, and Stephen would like this too, when we say like, okay, so thank you for explaining that for the multi-class.

Yeah, I agree.

Super, like all these levels.

Yeah.

To reinterpret that, because it's always a boundary condition, right?

Blood-brain barrier, barrier between me and group, barrier between like

collectivity and non collectivity, things like this, right?

What is a group group action and things like this.

So reinterpret that with a notion of a pro finite boundary.

I'm very curious as to what these boundaries are, right?

They're not solid,

They seem to be sort of like, are they hidden?

So the very concept of a boundary is a hidden state is something that I was playing with.

And I was like, you know what?

At what point is the boundary there?

Does that make sense?

It's almost like, you know, boundary and hidden state is like this darkroom phenomena that all of a sudden somebody turns on the light, boom, boundary is there.

So when you have Levin and Fields talking about entanglement across boundaries and things like this, or maybe the only way to decohere is on the boundary, where is the information?

And that's actually a really important question.

But if you can reframe all of that, try to reframe the multi-scale active inference in terms of a boundary that's like a fractal.

that's very strange you see what i mean daniel right then it's like then there's no clear defined boundary um i'm sure there's if there's a lot of people listening like anyone kind of super empath or if you have empath friends i mean i swear like some i can just be walking and like you know the tree goes into me or something like that so i don't have very good boundaries like that right my mind thinks about everything

And it swaps, you know, like I wish there was like a Jedi school, you know what I mean?

I would totally be there like, how do I do this?

And I think the active inference people like are the Jedi school.

It's like, okay, let's figure this out.

So if you do multi-scale any of this,

Play with that notion of a boundary.

You know, just like you saw, I'm very, you know, math people can almost get kind of, you know, too much with it, but you want to be precise about every word.

And we're real careful when we define things like moduli space, like what a family of bundles means, what a family of isomorphism classes mean.

So really think about what you're defining as boundary.

And if that boundary was not solid, because they never are, if you have a pro-finite boundary, it just changes a little thing.

It changes the way in which that scale is sort of hierarchized, I think.

Yeah.

Do you have multiple levels of inference going on?

Oh my God.

Yeah.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
if i can give a physical metaphor to what you said about these so let's just say that you were looking at a textbook for anatomy and it would say what is the boundary of the lungs what is the blanket around the lungs well at that level the gross anatomy level it's the periplura it's the the membrane that just encloses it like one bag and you can even have a point just the lungs but then if you really zoom in

it's actually truly a fractal with the alveoli and the way that actually the boundary of the lung, it probably looks like a piece of broccoli because are you looking at it from the outside with just a single sac or will you go into finer scale and see that the interface has a fractal dimension?


SPEAKER_01:
Ooh, see, and that's what I'm saying, right?

Like, you know, at what point was the room dark?

Was it always dark and we just didn't notice it?

That's what I'm talking about.

And will the room always be dark?

I don't think so, right?

I think at some point if you were in the dark room, it would change.

And so just like what Daniel was saying, you zoom in on this stuff and you know there's more space between the like atoms if you actually wanna use that approach, right?

What is that?

And that's what I'm really interested in.

So you have all these different smears.

It could be happening that like, if all of these events actually happen and they are just temporally extended,

What does that actually mean?

It's almost like a time sheaf.

You know what I mean?

If interaction is like this, what, time spread?

No idea.

No idea.

These are, I think these interrogatories should direct all of the work.

And that's why all my math is like super philosophical, like philosophy.

I don't know.

I did say elephants earlier.

Now I just said philosophically.

So it's like, okay, I'm just getting excited.

This is awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
If I could just say one more on the philosophy point.

Please.

The dark room problem.

So you just rephrase the dark room problem as being like, was the room always dark?

It's almost like, well, if there's no person in the room, what's the problem?

Or it's thinking about the person's

the time that they're in that room because you're not appealing to an alternate universe where somebody has always been and always will be in a dark room you're appealing to our everyday experience of being in a dark room but that is only part of our regular behavioral sequences so

not exactly sure where that would take the dark room investigation, but it helps us see that it's part of a bigger set of experiences or of scenarios that the agent is experiencing.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and my question is, like, if this boundary is, like, profinite and fractal, what's to prevent us going from dark room and then maybe a white room, right?

Dark room, white room.

Dark room, white room.

Dark room, white room, right?

Or let me ask, if anyone knows, what would be the actual antipodal reference of a dark room?

Is there an actual opposite of a dark room?

Would that be, like, what would that be?


SPEAKER_00:
If it were a stochastic signal coming into your eyes, so just like a white noise, then it would almost be like a dark room of a different kind because sure, there'd be light coming on your retina, but informationally, you're still not getting anything.

So at the higher level, it's a similar problem, but it uncouples it from the photons hitting your retina, which actually doesn't matter.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

Yeah, and I think there was something I was reading recently

I forgot what it was about like synesthetes and how synesthetes store information because I have sort of half of that.

But I was like, maybe I should find out a little about myself.

Anyway, there was some wild study that was like, if you put pure white light on the retina, I would love for your community to investigate this.

Like you actually can't see.

It actually negates object vision.

Pure white light, so unspectraed, on the retina will actually negate object vision.

Now, again, I saw this.

It was in a philosophy work, which I trust.

Again, I'm not like a super scientist about that.

But that's really interesting, right?

So just like Daniel said, in a pure white room, you'd also be in the dark.

So that's interesting.

And so you see you need this messy.

So pure white light.

you know, would hurt us.

You cannot see object vision.

So it makes me think is object vision itself profinite, right?

If it seems to be emergent, if it seems to be falling out, if you cannot see the actual

When pure white light, if it's a non-spectra, is interacting with our system, we cannot take it.

What are the actual implications of that?

And can you actually scale that, right?

So that's why I was saying with the dark and with emergence, at what point it is emergent?

At what point of photonic light hitting your eyes must it be non-white, like pure, you know?

So that's actually interesting, that the actual purest conditions of something may negate the organism's object functionality.

And then we're actually hurting.

So at that point, you may have to rely on the higher two morphisms, and then you go join the Shanna Daniel Jedi School.

I'm just like, all right.

So maybe I should talk just a little bit more about the time stuff and then leave with another fun drawing.

This is an awesome conversation.

OK, so again, we all know that time is a problem.

Why is it emergent?

Why am I talking about emergent time?

When we can go so far with these ideas, it's good to bring in an example like Daniel was saying about alveoli and things like that.

I take care of a lot of elderly family members, and so my earliest memories are hospitals.

And that might be why I grew up so quick, just with all these heavy questions.

And I remember we were having a lot of problems with the actual oxygen CO2 exchange.

That's actually really tricky.

So it's not like if someone is suffering in the pulmonary sense, you can't just put an oxygen mask on and it's fine.

So the actual body's way of absorbing that I think is very, very, very tricky.

The CO2, exchanging with the O2 in this fractal web of broccoli.

So what is that?

And that's happening 24 seven as I like giggle and give this talk, it's like my alveoli are excited,

I think I just said alveoli, like ravioli.

Am I ravioli or excited?

All right, anyway, I don't know what I'm saying.

All right, so, but it's nice to, when you have all this high math, to try to reign it in with something biological.

So people are like, Shanna, why are you talking about biology?

I'm like, because I want to try to find something here that we can use to sort of justify temporal nonlocality besides entangled photon pairs.

Everybody uses entangled photon pairs.

Why don't we use, like Daniel was saying, like the actual system?

Why don't we use the organism to test on?

So again, if there's actual entanglement going on in the daughter cells, I am excited about that and wanna ask the community what we think about entanglement, which is again gonna mess with this idea of time, right?

Time and boundaries.

So we know that there's a problem of time.

Your heavyweights in quantum mechanics have the Wheeler-DeWitt equation.

It says the universe is static to an external observer.

I'm going to have some questions with the external versus the internal observer.

I don't really know what that is because, again, I think all boundaries are profinite.

So it's a little tricky.

um quantum mechanics is you know gonna say that time is universal and absolute general relativity is gonna say that it's actually malleable and relative right and then you know people like me the category theory people maybe time is like a morphism you know so i always you know i asked back to the darkroom question things like this even your local time was it like what is time was it always here where is not our comedian time so if we're thinking about like hidden states right and any kind of embodied cognition it's very interesting how your memory

It's not very solid.

Maybe people's earliest memories, like when they're six.

My one friend, he's like, I don't know, like 12.

I'm like, you don't remember anything until you're 12?

Like, what is that?

So when does your little system actually come online?

Is this once again a play between irreversibility and reconstructability?

Is it also a play between your multi-scale own active inference?

Have you stopped?

Is it possible that you were only in your own reflections until age 20?

seven.

And then you were able to actually reach your reflections, right?

Is this like people's earliest memory?

So if you're thinking about like I am, that interaction and perception and all these things that are feedback loops with your own system, right?

Anything that's feeding back into the actual kind of non-local organism for cognition, it's reflection based.

So, but if you were only in reflection land, maybe your memory would never come online.

So where is it?

Like, where is time?

Was it always here?

Where's yesterday?

Like, I just don't know.

So we say these, like, you know, we have these existential qualifiers, like there exists, right?

But what are the conditions for all of this?

It's, you know, we're here for such a short time.

And there's all these big questions, right?

I want to know what an emergent time asymmetry is.

It's very interesting when I ask

you know, why do we seem to go forward or something?

You're almost, you're dealt with another answer that's super fuzzy and only defined in the negative, right?

There seems to be like a time asymmetry.

I'm like, did you just use time to define time?

Like, isn't that, we can't do that, right?

I mean, I guess we can, but what would actually be an emergent time asymmetry?

At what point, if you think about that pro-construction I was talking about, how do you actually get a time asymmetry in that crazy environment, right?

Or just like, you know, the beautiful darkroom example, or even Stephen's example, the question, right?

How do you actually get...

asymmetries on this emergent scale?

Go even weirder with what I said.

How do you get asymmetries in this doubly emergent scale?

Can you actually get an asymmetry in just one of the morphisms?

I don't know.

These questions are once again huge.

How would you actually have the notion of an entropy in an embodied cognition where you're exchanging with the environment if time was discrete

This is what I want to think about.

So just like Daniel gave us the great example, on the outside, we're all so beautiful.

We wear these awesome clothes, and we have these beautiful features.

And if you actually zoom in to the actual lung sacs, very tricky fractal stuff going on there.

Why don't we look at time the same way?

Out here, you have this supposed continuum, which I don't really believe in.

What if you zoomed in?

How would you actually figure if time was actually discrete, like a set of points, like that moduli space,

Is there a dark room in between each time?

And that's why I'm really interested in this dark room.

Who's to say that you're not blinking in and out of it like every plank second, you know?

That's what I'm really interested in is that, you know, your eye seems to be doing an interpolation anyway, right?

They've done those studies about like eye tracking.

And when you're actually looking at someone, it's just like eyes and mouth or something like this.

You don't really look at the ear.

So it's actually, you're putting together an image of me based on your tracking.

Yeah.

And so you're actually doing an interpolation like 24 seven, even go down to like the cesium atom, like time.

So are you not doing the same thing for time itself?

That's what I'm interested in.

Take the time to zoom in.

If time is also this boundary, this fractal curve, my awesome mentor, beautiful, amazing wizard mentor, Dr. Lapidus, Michelle Lapidus, came up with fractal curves and fractal cohomology and all this stuff.

That's really interesting, right?

Fractal zeta functions.

What if time is something like that?

So what is structural causality?

You've got Bertrand Russell and these great wizards, right?

Wittgenstein, language is a game.

know uh you know bertrand russell saying you know there's no there's no structural relation between uh now and actually assuming that the world was created you know five minutes ago so there's last thursdayism and then you get these fun things all right once again what is object persistence how do you actually do that who's to say that the dark room is not flickering in and out like every you know second and once again the stop mechanism really interested in what your community thinks about that right so again

in something like, you know, horribly sad, like the proliferation of cancer cells or something.

Why, how does that act so locally, right?

You could just have that in a particular area and it starts like spreading through like, you know, metastasis and stuff like that, but it originates locally.

It doesn't originate as a systemic thing.

And that's what I'm very interested in, seems to be these pockets, right?

pockets of the stop mechanism failing can destroy the whole organism, which is back to that torsion thing I was talking about.

You can have these few elements that annihilate, these torsion elements that are annihilated at the expense of the actual organism.

So if we actually say, how does causality actually change per your Turing degree?

Remember, I sort of think that we can

you know, in your multi-scale active inference, it would be nice to classify organisms, maybe based on their problem solving capability.

So I really think there are no ontic boundaries.

It seems to be these pro-finite boundaries.

Then you're going to ask ontic boundaries of what?

Ontic boundaries of the organism, which you zoom in and find that it's like lung sac, like fractal broccoli, you know?

And then just to keep going, why is spacetime only a manifold?

I showed you these other structures.

What if we reinterpreted any of that GR stuff as spacetime being a diamond?

You'd be allowing the multiplicity, which is the power of the organism.

It is not top down.

You are learning from everything.

So what would actually a number theoretic time look like?

So let's go just a little bit deeper into emergence.

Assuming it's emergent, what is an emergent from?

What is the actual eschatology of time?

That's what I'm really interested in.

Is it going to be here?

What if it just left?

What if time just walked off and left?

I'm really interested in planariums.

So Chris Fields has taught me a lot about the planarium.

So these are the little worms that if you actually cut off a piece of them, again, I'm not into animal cruelty, but if somehow a piece of them gets removed,

that little piece can regenerate the whole organism.

And so Daniel was going to ask, like, do y'all have any thoughts about that?

Because it seems to be that the nervous system is acting non-locally.

And it seems like, or the planarium, like, can they, is that like unemergence?

Like, what is that?

You know, so how can you actually have a piece regenerate?

reproduce the whole organism when we can't do that.

So is there any thoughts about that?

Like we lose a finger and it's very sad.

We have a stop mechanism that actually prevents that.

So I was going to just ask you all, since you're also complexity theorists, right?

Do you also think that because our organism is

more complex, we have a stronger mark of irreversibility, stronger cutoff of reconstructability.

Like if we all lost an arm, our arm is not reconstructable given our system, but it is for a planaria.

So is there a play between complexity theory, hidden, do we have more hidden states than the actual planaria?

Just wanted y'all's thoughts on that.


SPEAKER_00:
awesome question i'm going to address it with uh an empirical observation rather than an appeal to theory and just as you said if we lose part of our body we can't grow back but maybe you know future technology could change that but if you go to an ant colony and you scoop up the ants from a certain location a few minutes later other nest mates will have functionally

replaced the nest mates that you had taken because they're all diffusing around in the space.

And so it's almost like the ant colony is more resilient to perturbation, including extreme perturbations.

However, it has less morphological complexity in the interactions than, for example, a synapse.

So it's like if you want to have, you know, the library with a lot of books, it's going to take a lot of space.

If you want to have a really precisely specified topology of interactions like neurons do, you're going to have limited, not zero, but limited flexibility relative to a sort of distributed, totally fluidly mixing system like an ant colony.

So there's definitely something there with a trade off on the complexity frontier.

Of how much resilience do you have and ability to regenerate or maybe even to perpetuate indefinitely like a sponge or a coral or something like that versus irreversibly move towards order, which comes with the cost of building tall buildings that can fall down.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

Right.

And would we rather have like our sugar cubes as an ant colony or the tall building?

I don't know.

Right.

And my weird theorem would be able to do both.

In awareness, we could be ants.

You know, I'm just like, wow, that's...

That's very remarkable.

So that example is just as profound as these questions that I'm asking, right?

There seems to be so many things happening at once.

And thinking about it in terms of perturbation, which again, I linked perturbation to the diamonds as well, right?

You can still do that.

And again, so that's an excellent question.

um and um with like a more excellent answer right like how do you actually talk about emergence and also emergence and perturbation right those go hand in hand but also emergence and irreversibility and just like you said uh complexity so thinking about complexity in terms of um you know emergence and also uh i like how you said resistance

But, you know, with the advent of stuff like, you know, epigenetics and things like that, I'm wondering, I don't know if you put planaria in a very horrible environment, if they still continue.

Seems like ants kind of continue, right?

They're like little fighters.

Yeah, and again, who's to say, I don't want to be speciist, who's to say that, you know, we are more complex than the ants?

Because they have a collective phenomena, which is like super profound, right?

Yeah.

And so it's like, are we building tall buildings to the extent of, like, not really connecting with each other, right?

We need to think about stuff like that.

Okay, so- Can I ask a question?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, please.

Okay, just CB has returned with some funny and interesting questions.

So there's two questions.

There's a tiny one and then a big one.

The tiny one- All right, go for it.

No pun intended, is can you elaborate on the idea of the infinitesimal thickening?

So what does that mean?

What is the infinitesimal thickening?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, sure.

Say you had a space, right?

I have a space or I have a pen.

This is my pen.

So we would actually say that the pen is carved out and it has a specific boundary, right?

Outside of the pen, we would say is like a measure zero.

There's nothing else outside of the pen.

The pen stops and then you have like space, no pen.

Do we all agree?

There's a very strict boundary line between pen and no pen.

So in infinitesimals, they're like collections of infinitely small pieces.

They're not identically zero.

They exist, but they're almost zero.

But they're not quite zero.

So surrounding the pin, we could say, is an infinitesimal thickness, which is not all the way to zero, but there is a little bit of wiggle.

Does that make sense?

So that's what we're saying, that there is a wiggle, a space around spaces.

So just like I was saying, it gets rid of notions like singular points.

So we know there was a lot of problems.

And the standard model is great.

But in particle physics, there was problems with having points interact in these Feynman diagrams.

Remember, everyone?

And so you actually made the point a one-dimensional object called a string to avoid the complications of just having a point.

So in math, you can do the same way.

Instead of having a singular condition like this is my now, there's problems with that.

What if you actually had a now that had a little infinitesimal?

So surrounded by not almost zero.

So think about the smallest numbers possible, but they go infinitely, right?

So this is almost like if we know the Archimedean property that you can always make a bigger number, you can always make a smaller number, always.

So imagine that negative Archimedean all the way down.

And so you surround a space with those.

And then you don't have a singular space anymore.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you for the answer.

And the second question from Cambridge Breaths was also, is it accurate to say that every experienced now can reflect innumerable other nows?

If so, is time travel possible?


SPEAKER_01:
see oh I love your community you know well you know I'm gonna say yes because I'm like the magic person here yeah so again what is a now it's very interesting you can have all the elaborate physics on the planet and then you ask what is an observer and the room goes quiet right so when we say what is a now that's what I'm saying like a now according to whom we're all connected right now I shouldn't say now

But at the same time, you're peripherally aware of everything going outside like my animals, your next appointment, your digestive system, your autonomic nervous system.

So when we say now, it's like now according to whom are you neglecting your own hidden states?

And that's why very curious as to what we mean by now.

Also, I'm very, you know, I'm very adamant about saying, you know, there is no synchronous reference.

Anyone who thinks this now is actually happening now, you've neglected the neuronal processes that are actually happening.

There's neurotransmitter signals, you know, everything happening on neurological time to actually get you to have this now.

So you're always in the past.

Does that make sense?

Right?

You're always in the past, but you're also not in the past.

So you can get very like Alan Watts and Eckhart Tolle here and say,

You really only have now.

It is a hallucination to think that there is like a tomorrow because even when you actually remember the past, you're doing it now.

We all agree you're always in this slice, right?

But if you, there's a little bit more, do you see that if you do a formal spectra with the now, if you put a little bit of thickness on it, it allows for you to actually have a little bit of more room in the now, which is just like what, you know, the question is asking.

Can you, you know, the now actually contains other nows.

Yeah, because if the whole if time is this pro construction, which is what I'm trying to say, then you are linking together all kinds of things, right?

Your thoughts happening now, where are they coming from?

I don't know.

And so is time travel possible?

Oh yeah, you bet.

That's what I said.

That's why I was, look at me, I'm all excited.

You know, if you can actually partition the brain, okay, so let's get weird.

I mean, not too weird.

Don't do this to yourself, like, right?

Hold on.

If you were actually to make the brain so that it was almost like a split screen, this is a very rough analogy.

If you remember those, like, I don't know, older films that had like one panel going and the other one, I loved those just because, you know, I think like synesthete, hyperactive, I need to be like doing a lot, like multitask.

So imagine you had that kind of split screen, but in your own awareness, in the awareness, not the now, but if we were actually able to split the system, then you would actually be able to quote, time travel.

If time is non-local and if it was always there, all you really have to do is try to get to your like, your own V stack.

And I think people are gonna be like, what is this girl talking about?

But it's like, if you could actually get to where you had those higher morphisms,

Then that would be very, very exciting.

And then time travel should be possible.

When people time travel, it's like they normally, they normally like the object themselves doesn't travel and they seem to think that, you know, perturbation doesn't exist.

So it's like, if you're going to time travel, you're going to be perturbing time.

Be ready for time to perturb you back.

I'm not saying it will be like a very gentle experience, but I am completely all for it.

There seems to be something in the system that keeps us on one channel.

And I, you know, just to ask the community, those are great questions.

And even to ask the question, you know, if the questioner wants to ask again, what is their own thoughts about why do you seem to be on this one channel?

Everyone will say, well, because there's a time, there's a time asymmetry and the past is irreversible.

Well, we've seen how shady irreversibility is, right?

It's a boundary phenomenon.

And so you almost have to be like, somebody called me Miss Frizzle once, like the magic school bus lady.

I was like, okay, this is great.

She's got like red hair and she's driving a school bus going into these things.

I would totally take a school bus and go into the Alveoli.

Like, what is this place?

If you were to actually drive the school bus into the actual boundary, you're going to see it's not there.

I mean, it is because you can hear me like hitting the table.

It is on this channel, but if we were actually like able to access the multi-channels, you know, I'm not sure.

Is time travel possible?

Yeah, you're going to have to partition awareness.

Not partition the brain because you would be very sick and I don't want to lose you.

You cannot, you know, but try to think of why this whole interface and why embodied cognition is here for one channel.

Like, can we actually have a multi, and that's what I was saying, can we actually have like a three embodied cognition, you know?

What do you think about time travel, Danny, or any of that?

Sorry if that was too wild, everyone, but I'm getting excited.

Good questions.


SPEAKER_00:
I have, I've heard a few different ways it could happen.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
And I would love to see evidence it could.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, evidence it could.

And that's why you can look to, so as free as I am in the math space and I'm open and I want to travel because I want humans to succeed and I want organic life to continue.

I'm very worried about that.

So whatever we can do, let's try to keep it going.

And then something to help the questioner also is this great work, it'll be coming out soon by Levin and Fields, about decoherence is actually localized to intercompartmental boundaries.

where is it not okay so if the internal bulk states of daughter cells may remain entangled for macroscopic times following the cell division so you have little pockets of time travel right if you have entanglement and so there is like hope if there is entanglement in the biological setting um again most people may think their work is like you know to future thinking or whatever but i'm super future thinking like let's try to figure this out you know um

lots of ramifications, you know, this theory of extended mind, this philosophy theory, I thought was actually like a really great Andy Clark, right?

You know, if you're operating through time as these series of dots, you're gonna have something called a singular support.

You've got, I'm really curious how you remember a memory.

So again, if the whole point of shared action is to get these morphisms between morphisms, when the questioner asked, is it possible that your now is a collection of other nows?

Well, absolutely.

You're probably operating in a nested space of a perturbative, profinite,

memory of a memory, right?

So you start having these meta memories, memory of memory.

And it's very interesting.

You're like, oh, I know what a cat looks like.

And then I see it again, that is my cat.

It's very interesting how you link that.

So something as simple as object persistence, right, is actually everywhere.

Time is not a total order, right?

And how do you actually relate all this stuff?

Great.

I should probably go on about like,

five minutes because I have a class, but I wanted to actually show, oh, I have unicorns everywhere, right?

So there's magic.

I'm like, how would you, so another main takeaway for the math, take away the diamonds and the sheaves and all this stuff, is also the notion of a reciprocity law.

These are really beautiful.

Reciprocity laws connect seemingly different branches of mathematics.

So like in the Langlands program,

connecting these certain Galois representations, which is one branch of math, with automorphic forms, which is like, you know, harmonic analysis.

Like, that is beauty, right?

That's actually kind of synesthetic at a certain point.

And I think since I am kind of like synesthetic, that I align with these sort of grand unified theories.

I'm like, oh, that feels like home.

Like, that feels right.

To be siloed, like, doesn't feel right.

Still be individual, but also be able to connect in these like reciprocity laws.

So how would you actually have a reciprocity law of emergent time?

that actually means they're able to link emergent time with newtonian time string theory time alveoli time the time of c of co2 and o2 um exchange right how do you actually how do you actually relate all of those times quantum time everybody's time no time dark room time uh the time before existence that kind of like long like christ consciousness time all the times right

That's huge.

And that's why I said, well, I don't know.

I put a big unicorn on there because it's gonna be some magic.

So it'll take some magic to actually get a law of time.

But you've got great heavyweights trying to work on that.

You know, like emergent theories of time are like tricky and they're hard, you know.

So if you have this like new reciprocity law, if you actually could connect the diamonds and like, you know, I'm really everyone knows and I'm really interested in like the mirror framework.

If mirror phenomena are actually how you're interacting.

So when people say, well, what is the now?

Is it just your mirror system imitation?

And then Daniel, I wanted to ask your community and you, what is your interpretation of like, if you believe in mirror neurons or the actual mirror system that learns by imitation?

Because that's very, very powerful, right?

We were talking about stuff like that.

So just wanted your thoughts on the mirror framework and the mirror framework in terms of like these hidden states as well.


SPEAKER_00:
It's a great question.

I'd be curious to know what different hypotheses the mirror neuron helps us get at, what different observations in the world we could actually test.

For example, does somebody who's not looking but they're feeling someone else move, maybe does that... I'm just...

curious about it, don't have the answers.

Although in general, I'd say adding an adjective like, oh, it's the Jennifer Aniston neuron.

It's the mirror neuron.

It's like, okay, but that's a reductionist take because it's labeling the neuron.

So if it turns out that we have a dynamic distributed function in our brain that does have action models of ourself as well as action models of others, and maybe there are some firing patterns that are overlapping, but there's probably some action patterns only if you're watching someone else and only if you're moving or,

every other combination.

So I just think it's one of the facets of the brain diamond, and it's not the whole picture.


SPEAKER_01:
I like that.

Yeah.

See, and once again, right, even like even having this very strange, like little piece, that's this mirror thing.

I just know I was watching someone, you know, like another heavyweight get this talk about this, and the sort of the phantom limb syndrome and stuff like that, right?

If your limb is lost, and

Someone else is maybe like, you know, touching the same limb that you lost.

You sort of feel that.

And there's like, and these people aren't even kind of empath, like, like me, you know, they're not like me coming up with stuff like this.

They're like, you know, less hyperbolic, I would say.

They, so it was interesting than the neurologist.

I was actually happy to hear him kind of go do a shared action kind of thing said, you know, it seems that the only thing that separates us is the skin.

Because if I can feel what you can feel, you can feel what I can feel, everything is imitation, then it seems to be like this skin boundary.

And then again, boundaries are profinite, not ontic, right?

So you know that had me perplexed.

So I appreciate your answer there.

Yeah.

Okay, I think...

I've already talked about most of this, the topological localization.

So when I said you can put a topology, I said you could put a sheaf on a category.

Well, everyone should also think how you actually could put a topology on an infinite one category.

So I'm working on something like that.

That's actually really tricky.

You have to figure out what the open sets are.

in an infinite, a category with infinite morphisms, you know.

So this sort of condensed framework that I was talking about, I'll wrap up with this.

So you have this notion, I'd said the condensed framework was a sheaf over a point.

So if we talk about a site, so remember I told you the site is a place where you can actually put a topology.

So we called, Peter and Dustin called this the ProHotel site of a point.

is the category of profinite sets S, with finite jointly surjected families of maps as covers.

A condensed set, it's a sheaf of sets on this site.

So on this site, so it's a sheaf of sets over a point, but on the point is the category of profinite sets.

So you already have that kind of multi-scale,

in this sort of point.

So you do have sheaves over a point, but the point has the side of profinite sets.

So you can do this to condensed ring.

This is all about trying to do the same algebra and mathematics you've always done.

But when your objects actually carry a topology, that's what's interesting.

All of the objects.

So reframe everything, like the sixth tuple and active inference.

Put a topology on it.

have all of your algebraic things, modules, groups, rings, carried apology, how do you do stuff with that?

Okay, so that's fine.

That's fine.

The way that you can associate this, you take T to be any topological space.

To T, there is an associated condensed set T underline.

You saw the underline in the spot of QP, the spot QP, slick atomic mod Galois action with the underline that I showed you earlier.

This is defined by sending any profinite S to the set of continuous maps

from S to T. So that's what you're trying, that's how you can associate to any topological space, a condensed set.

So how beautiful is that?

So you can reframe, if you have stuff in terms of topology, we can bulldoze it.

I shouldn't say bulldoze, that's a little extreme.

Reframe it in terms of these condensed, if you want to get this very interesting sort of sheaf over a point.

And then you can do like the weird thing that I was saying, put a formal, formal spectra around it to make it a little like, a little thicker.

Okay, so to actually consider this emergent time, what I said, let's consider the simplest case, an event, you know, which is like a truncated perturbation, something like that, a topological localization of any particular reference frame.

So that means I'm in the now, I am staring at my reflections, whatever that is.

Let's take an event to be a point in the diamond topological space T. We're going to actually convert this to a condensed set.

On that point is the pro-etel site, the category profinite set.

So here we go.

This global time maybe emerges as the set of continuous maps from all profinite sets S to T, because I said the individual time is diamond, which is profinite.

So if global time is constructed as the sheaf of sets on this site,

as a condensed set right then emergent time is going to result in passing to the larger category of sheaves right so we just keep talking about sheaves on categories let's talk about like the larger let's just frame it all in the category of sheaves and you can consider a condensed version of this continuous k theory this is so hard um and it'll take me a bit to finish it but as soon as i make a little progress i get excited a second way to get emergent time is to take those like if

If condensed time is local time, let's take equivalence relations of those to get your multi-scale active inference again, and you can actually take diamond equivalence relations to get the b-stacks, and I already went over that.

So I came up with this dictionary between ordinary quantum mechanics and perfectoid quantum mechanics.

Upgrade the Hilbert space, which is a sort of complete inner product space.

Let's make it a perfectoid space, this sort of strange fractal space.

Replace state vectors with the geometric points, the tensor product with the diamond product, the non-locality phenomena.

Maybe it's the profoundly many copies of spa c. If you have that many reflections, you don't know which one is the reference point.

The weight function collapses this tilting, the coupling behavior, right?

Holographic principle, quantum topology, replace it with the pisatel cohomology of diamonds.

Take your operator algebra and replace it with a non-Etherean complete evaluation ring.

unitarity pro hotel descent datum or that diamond descent that's great okay so i will end there and say thank you so you know i mentioned everyone working together and you see there's draft elephant baby unicorn unicorns everyone is working together here and there's some like zero sharp on the board and a spot of qp diamond i should stop there yeah and take other questions yeah


SPEAKER_00:
We'll let you head off to your class in just a minute, but this was very thought-provoking and interesting.

So I hope that people will ask you questions in the meanwhile, and then I'm sure there'll be more math streams in our future.


SPEAKER_01:
That's wonderful.

And then does everyone have my email?

I guess they do on the...

I mean, I'm findable.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Anyone can always get in touch with Act In Flab to contact a guest or if you send us a link that you want us to put in the video description, then we'll add that there.

But I think we're all going to go home, go back, hit the books.

And I really enjoyed doing it live.


SPEAKER_01:
I do too.

This was so fun.

And I think, like, maybe the next talk would be, like, it'd be fun to do these thought experiments, right?

Like, what if?

Let's actually pose the question of darkroom and how we use active inference and this math to get out of it.


SPEAKER_00:
I'd suggest an event format where we have multiple different backgrounds and perspectives, and then we give people the prompts and the thought questions, and then we do have a spontaneous conversation about how different perspectives lead to different views on the thought questions.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, that sounds so great.

Okay.

Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
So whoever wants to join, whoever wants to join, you're always welcome.

So thank you again.

And we'll see you later.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you so much.