## sjdjRJMRVfw

SPEAKER_04:
Hello and welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

It's Active Lab live stream number 28.0 on September 6, 2021.

We're going to be talking about the paper Towards a Computational Phenomenology of Mental Action, Modeling Meta-Awareness and Attentional Control with Deep Parametric Active Inference.

welcome to the active inference lab we are a participatory online lab that is communicating learning and practicing applied active inference you can find us at the links on this page this is a recorded and archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams thanks a ton blue and steven and dean nice fun to have a dot zero crew together

here you'll see a slightly updated version of the upcoming streams calendar which you can get at from this short link here uh september 7th and 14th we're going to be discussing this paper we're going to be discussing in this one and then we don't have a paper for 29 and then we have some papers set with authors for all of october

Also, check out the tabs to see other series other than the Tuesday paper-centric walkthroughs.

And of course, anyone's welcome to co-organize an event or to be the guest for one of these types of streams.

All right, so today in 28.0, we're going to be just learning and discussing this paper that was already mentioned by Sanvid Smith, Hesp, Mattout, Fristin, Lutz, and Ramstedt.

out only a few weeks ago, which is kind of cool to see.

And there's going to be a ton to talk about.

It's a super interesting paper.

And if you want to participate in 28.1 or 2, you should get in touch.

Otherwise, if it's after that time, then check out those videos and maybe find another one to participate in.

But I'm just looking forward to hearing what you all were excited about.

By way of introduction, just...

Want to hear from everybody and what was exciting to them about this paper or made them want to join for the .Zero.


SPEAKER_00:
If I go first, Daniel.

Yeah, thanks.

I'm really excited or interested to see them moving beyond a computational approach to neurophenomenology, which I've seen before, and into this broader idea of what they're calling computational phenomenology, which

Well, it's a bolder claim and has more relevance potentially to other applications, which I'm interested in and applied active inference context.

So, you know, we'll see how that bold claim can be applied.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

So for me, I thought it was like ultra meta.

The paper really got into the hierarchical levels of organization, which I'm always excited to see and talk about.


SPEAKER_02:
For me, it was the fact that I am doing some writing right now and I am interested in the idea that there is a way of putting this into some sort of a geometric relationship as well as the computational relationship.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Okay.

The paper is, let me just reframe it, is Towards Computational Phenomenology of Mental Action, Modeling Meta-Awareness and Attentional Control with Deep Parametric Active Inference in Neuroscience of Consciousness, published about two weeks ago, 27th of August.

Does someone want to read the three aims of the paper?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure, go ahead.

The three aims are to explicitly model meta-awareness, to account for the computational consequences of meta-awareness on cognitive control, and lastly, to provide a computational account of mental covert action.


SPEAKER_04:
Okay.

And then maybe the second part?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

Formally speaking, the crucial thing to note about these cognitive processes is that they are about other such processes.

The deployment and control of attentional states and processes, for instance, are quintessentially a higher level ability.

Such states and processes monitor and modulate other, typically lower level perceptual states.

Third order, higher level processes in turn oversee these attentional processes.

we can be aware of our attention being grabbed and make a deliberate decision to focus our attention elsewhere.

It would seem then that effective self-regulation of attention depends on the ability to access, evaluate, and control the quality of these attentional processes themselves, in the same way that attentional processes are necessary to consciously access, assess, and control lower-level perceptual states.


SPEAKER_04:
interesting areas.

It's just interesting to see that the kind of framework that helps a robot navigate, now it's being used in a little bit of a different way, like nesting within ourself and coming closer to our experience and other things which often are said to be unable to be directly observed.

So it's quite a cool topic.

Dean or Steven, any thoughts or do either of you want to read the first abstract?


SPEAKER_02:
I got a quick thought before we get to the abstract.

In the introduction of the paper, I want to just read this really quickly.

It's in the paper, but computational terms, the central place of confidence and reliability and effective self-regulation speaks to the key role of precision.

or inverse variance of implicit beliefs.

And then they talk about probabilistic and posterior Bayesian beliefs that describe a probability distribution over some latent quality.

But this was the thing that I found really interesting.

Bayesian beliefs about Bayesian beliefs can, in certain situations, become propositional

and the way that they are estimated, optimized, and controlled.

Precisions, in a nutshell, quantify our confidence in our beliefs, say how confident we are about what we know about states of the world, about their relationship to our observations, or about how these states change over time.

Being able to place numbers around that, as soon as I read that and saw it in relationship to a proposition, I found that really interesting and was really curious to see now, so how is that thread going to play out?

Now, it wasn't part of the three things that were in the previous slide, but I think it was really important and something that was, it has to be a name or a claim of the paper because it's pretty fascinating.


SPEAKER_04:
good call it's almost like a background assumption whether uh post hoc justified by empirical appeal or not that precision is what matters which is kind of the other side of the coin from uncertainty like high precision means low uncertainty and vice versa and sometimes they're framed as so I think totally agree that is a claim of the paper okay Stephen want to go for abstract one yeah


SPEAKER_00:
OK.

Meta-awareness refers to the capacity to explicitly notice the current content of consciousness and has been identified as a key component for the successful control of cognitive states, such as the deliberative direction of attention.

This paper proposes a formal model of meta-awareness and attentional control using hierarchical active inference.

To do so, we cast mental action as policy selection over higher level cognitive states and add a further hierarchical level to model meta-awareness states that modulate the expected confidence or precision in the mapping between observations and hidden cognitive states.


SPEAKER_04:
nice yeah there's a lot of uh terms some of which we're going to go into in the keyword section but pretty distilled down description of their contribution and we're going to unpack it more okay

Abstract 2, we simulate the example of mind wandering and its regulation during a task involving sustained selective attention on a perceptual object.

This provides a computational case study for an inferential architecture that is apt to enable the emergence of these central components of human phenomenology, namely the ability to access and control cognitive states.

We propose that this approach can be generalized to other cognitive states, and hence, this paper provides the first steps towards the development of a computational phenomenology of mental action, and more broadly of our ability to monitor and control our own cognitive states.

Future steps of this work will focus on fitting the model with qualitative behavioral and neural data.

Okay, cool topics.

Any thoughts, or we can move on?


SPEAKER_02:
First steps, that's the emphasis here, just first steps.


SPEAKER_04:
Yep, I'm pretty excited to get to this, the generalized model of mental action because it's like...

almost like the new tool enables asking about phenomena that we already know.

And then it reveals a whole new state space of kind of then the model feeding back to the kinds of regimes of attention that we designed for ourself or niche modifications or information inputs.

okay roadmap so this paper has an interesting layout it is just an introduction that brings up the non-active inference sections related to the scientific study of mental action and about how it's been computationally modeled outside of active inference then there's a methodology paper that first has more of a model building

narrative and then the empirical results from a simulation that has a few different layers of

detail layered on it.

It's not just one single model.

There's a few little variants that help get at which parts of the model are contributing which behavior and why.

Then they have a more general discussion and give some directions for future research.

And that's where some of these big claims about computational phenomenology go.

And then there's a conclusion.

So any thoughts on the roadmap?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think that this gives a good sense of the way that they're trying to enter into this space, looking at the opacity and transparency of phenomenology and trying to sort of bring back that neuro-phenomenology into this wider phenomenology.

So by sort of looking at the experience.

Now, the question that sort of comes up with this is,

Because obviously a lot of the work here with Rampstead and others has been around embodied cognition and stuff like that.

So they're sort of going into this idea of trying to set it up so that they can target phenomenology while still keeping it around mental states and cognition.

So there's an interesting, I don't know, ontological dance they're trying to find a way through here, which I think is kind of interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
Any other comments on the roadmap?

Okay.

So the keywords were free energy principle, active inference, neuro phenomenology, metacognition, opacity, transparency, focused attention, mind wandering, and mindfulness.

So perhaps blue with FEP.


SPEAKER_01:
sure this slide i pulled out of the live stream 15.0 so the free energy principle is based on three aspects the observation of self-organization which brings us to the second aspect which is that living organisms can be described as stochastic dynamical systems possessing attractors

And then lastly, the states in which the self-organizing system is at a point in time can be identified by the interactive role they play within the multi-level self-organization scheme.

And then this is related to, in the slide from 14.0, multi-scale systems, ensembles, info thermodynamics, and variational Bayesian inference.

which I thought was applicable here as we're going through this hierarchical awareness, meta-awareness.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Yeah, Stephen, and then I'll go up there.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Well, yeah, I think this is good to characterize this.

And also, I know that Maxwell mentioned how that multilevel graph, he's kind of gone back on it a bit, but it does show that whole question.

It's a really good diagram to show both that there is this multilevel nested

sort of multi-scale thing going on and also it's kind of a contested it's a contested or kind of evolving part of the whole field because it's uh people are sort of putting out things and then they're maybe backtracking a little bit and so i think um yeah i think it's quite a good thing to bring up


SPEAKER_04:
Definitely not a settled area.

That's why it's so fun to just have these discussions on the topic because even the paper is not the end result.

It was first steps.

And we're gonna see in this discussion, the multi-scale system is almost like psychologically nested or mentally nested

within one agent whereas previously we've been talking a lot about multi-scale systems in the context of you know a bunch of ants making the colony a bunch of communicating individuals making the community so it's like that's like multi-scale systems out and getting spatially bigger and this is kind of getting more ephemeral but also having this very interesting influence on the lower level models

So for active inference, the keyword, we can look at what the authors wrote because

always cool to see just how did they define this how did they frame what active inference is for this paper and they wrote that at the root of these advances is a biologically plausible neurocognitive and behavioral modeling framework called active inference active inference provides us with a bayesian mechanics that is the mechanics of knowledge driven action and active perception which explains from first principles how autonomous agents can thrive within their ever-changing environments

Active inference descends from and is closely related to Bayesian brain theory and predictive coding.

And then this green one I thought was very interesting in how they said it was active inference casts perception, learning, and action as essentially being in the same game, that of gathering evidence for the model that underwrites the existence of the agent.

So just on the diagram that we've seen with the four different kinds of nodes, with the blanket states of in and outgoing, and the internal and external states, to say that the three that constitute the organism, let's say, are all in the same game, just brings sort of a unity of action and inference to

we think about the very least other systems that already have this structure like input output systems which some people speculate describe all classes of systems or computational systems so it's just like the way that they made that clear of active inference without tying it to a specific model implementation i thought was very well set steven and also this does give a flexibility as knowledge evolves um


SPEAKER_00:
Because as Mark Soames has been talking about, the way attention may be moved around more at the base of the brain, using more kind of

attentional biological you know inactive questions that wouldn't necessarily be a problem for this because this this modeling isn't completely tied to some sort of frontal cortex model of thought it's kind of it's broader so i think that's that's quite interesting and to say how they're using the term behavioral modeling the framework and they've sort of

Yeah, the way they positioned it, because they haven't gone the whole way and talked about biological and gone down the full multi-scale biology route.

They've kept it kind of in the brain, but they've brought in that behavioral element, which I think neurophenomenology maybe doesn't do as much.


SPEAKER_04:
Good segue.

Blue, want to describe this one?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

So neurophenomenology, in the words of the authors...

Neurophenomenology has been described as the search for generative passages between the neurobiological, phenomenological, and mathematical levels of description, going beyond the description of mere isomorphisms between these levels toward mutual epistemological and methodological accountability and cross-fertilization.

Neurophenomenology aims to bridge the gap between these kinds of data via the formal metaphysically neutral levels of the description provided by mathematics and computational work.

And I pulled this cartoon out of this paper because I thought it was kind of a neat perspective and visual on neurophenomenology.

So it talks about the biological structures as predetermining the world of the organism and then neurophenomenology as a praxis between the first person account that the organism has

and the neural descriptions of these structures.

So that was kind of the point of this.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice find.

Very interesting figure.

Looks kind of like a sci-fi human novel, but it's kind of cool.

Okay.

To talk about one specific kind of neurophenomenology, like a first-person experience that is desired to be modeled, potentially even in a computational direction,

Here, they're focusing on this metacognition aspect.

So just the yellow parts, they wrote, we define meta-awareness in this context as the ability to explicitly notice the current content of a conscious episode.

For our purposes, as discussed in the text, we define states of meta-awareness as those third order, which we'll get to, states of the system that are about and enable the opacity of second order attentional states.

Metacognitive states thus function analogously to attentional states, which enable the opacity of first order perceptual states.

So it's going to be a three layer nesting doll.

The role that the second model plays over the first is going to be analogous to the role that the third model plays over the second.

But that doesn't mean its dynamics are going to play out in the exact same way.

And then this last part was very interesting.

Like mental action refers to goal-directed internal behavior without necessarily having a direct consequence on the external environment, e.g.

as though muscular action.

A paradigmatic example of mental action is covert attention.

So what an interesting topic, you know, the whole think of X or don't think of X. I won't play any language games on the live stream, but many of those exist and they have to do with inducing mental action.

So that's just so interesting that that's what this framework is going to be exploring.

Okay.

Stephen, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And without, you know, putting too much pressure on the paper to go further, but is it that question of, um,

skill performance and the phenomenology of being in the flow or being in a state of sense making, it'd be interesting how that neurobiological phenomenology, phenomenological passages can extend out into some of that kind of work, which is obviously highly complex, but then, you know, these might give us clues.

So that's good.


SPEAKER_04:
Yep, cool.

And then this is just, I found this link.

Trailblazing ants show hints of metacognition when seeking food.

And recent research has shown that bees, when faced with a difficult task, simply opt out of doing it, a behavior that may be interpreted as a form of metacognition, at least computationally.

Now it seems that ants might be capable of a similar mental feat despite their tiny, simple brain.

So it's like, what computational attributes are we going to assign to, oh, but that's just how bark is, or that's just how ants are versus this variable is the one that we're experiencing because of this.


SPEAKER_02:
that's just kind of a topic that's going to come up probably multiple times okay how about transparency and opacity what does it mean in someone's words or reading here can i can i bring out a little different angle to this i mean i understand that how the contrast of transparency and opacity works but when i was bringing when i was trying to figure this out to help somebody who was walking into a situation

oriented to a lot of the data around them that they would otherwise be overwhelmed with.

One of the things we talked about was the difference between liminality and just getting a generalized sense of the orientation space and then limitality, sort of filling in the details and getting an understanding where the edges are so that you don't bump into them and hurt yourself.

And so I get the transparency and opacity piece and how it's explained in the paper.

But for a person who's trying to move from the generalized to the more specific, I think

I think it's the opacity piece speaks clearly to the difference between that and something that's clear.

But I also think that the details get filled in when you can have an understanding what the limits are and not just limitlessly understand that it's now in your field of awareness, which is how they're describing this, which is your, where's your focus?

Where's your attention?


SPEAKER_04:
angstine i put this goldfish meme it's the story about the goldfish and what is water and the elder one is aware of water and then the younger ones are unaware of the water that they swim in cough cough and then it's kind of like the two mental extremes like water is opaque you can think of the water being like cloudy to this fish

Maybe it has a different vision.

So then it can see that there's a drop off in vision.

It infers that it's in opaque water.

So water is something that it can ask about the conditions of.

Whereas the small fish in this example, it's clear.

It's like transparent.

So they're seeing through it.

Ergo, it's transparent to them.

So they're imperceptible.

So the green ones are accessible to the system.

You're aware of it.

It's like water that has an opaque tint.

And then the transparent means like you just can't differentiate it experientially.

And that's a philosophical framework by, I think, Metzinger, which has probably been influential.

Right.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, highly influential, I think, and increasingly so.

I think this could be pushed a bit further because I think it's okay to state this as almost a philosophical piece, but...

bringing in stuff like mental space psychology which hasn't really been incorporated in this area but you know these subconscious um sort of opaque or transparent um awarenesses um are um part of our could be part of a deeper way of knowing if we assume that

thinking is through our senses if sense if actually the process of the brain is not all in the box but it's recapitulating stuff through the sensory world around us even in the subconscious that would tie in quite well with this but also give a bit more of a computational grounding


SPEAKER_02:
The other thing too, Daniel, if you'd have written the words opaque and transparent in a white-colored font with that white background, they'd still be opaque, but we wouldn't see them on the white background.

And so that's, again, where...


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

Good call.


SPEAKER_02:
In order to be able to bring the idea forward, it isn't just a comparison of transparency to something that actually has a sense of tangibility.

There's this other part of it that we'll pick it up because there is a contrast.

There is some differentiation.

It doesn't always just have to be that something's clear and something has depth.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's a really good point.

And actually that can extend as well to the size of the space you're in.

So if you start to imagine the relationships or these kind of subconscious senses of how close or far certain ideas are, that changes depending on the size of the actual room you're in.

And I imagine the different colours of the room, the lighting in the room as well might affect, I haven't really thought about this before, it might affect the transparent states as well because there may be some sort of

calibration going on you know so it might be quite profound to be in a blue room in terms of what your transparent states end up recapitulating so that's interesting we'll come back to i think a niche modification and design of regime of attention who made this slide or what did it mean to anyone


SPEAKER_01:
So this was mine.

The focused action I thought was like an interesting keyword.

The authors didn't use it once if you search the paper.

And then as a Google search, you search for focused action and you get all kinds of life coaching, which is like, whoa, okay.

I don't think that that's maybe the intention here.

So this is just...

the typical active inference loop where you have internal states, perception, external states, and action that are all connected and partitioned by a Markov blanket.

So I'm extrapolating based on what I think that the authors mean.

Here, low precision is unfocused.

And it's low precision also in terms of perception.

Because perception is also when you register, you just saw something.

They talked about the oddball.

And you're seeing an image, seeing an image, seeing an image.

And then all of a sudden, the image is different.

And it's like, oh, I wasn't even paying attention to what I was seeing at all.

So it's that perception can also have this kind of unfocused quality.

So I related this to like a low precision kind of perception or action as unfocused and where it's high precision, where you're focused on what you should be focused on, that's focused.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

Just one note on that is under the reward paradigm, plus minus valence, avoid approach, a sort of forward and backward linear mindset, we can say, oh, well, not just do we diagnose happiness or sadness or on a linear scale, but it's a goal.

And so just what are the aspects of our experience or of just the outcomes of systems that can be said to be related to focus and attention and action?

So how about just mind wandering since it's a related topic?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure, this is, so here, these are different papers.

And so mind wandering has been explored in several different contexts, but specifically like the figure on the left is by Wanda Huck,

Hasselkamp and she studies she's at the mind-life Institute so studies directly meditation and the effects on the brain and here it just kind of shows the different brain regions that are activated during meditation or

Also, it's like where you have awareness and then your mind is wandering.

You become aware that your mind is wandering and then you shift your mindset back to like, oh, I better be paying attention to my meditation, for example, focusing on my breath or whatever.

And then you have a state of focus again.

And this kind of contrasting neural model of mind wandering, this is a 2016 paper.

And here, they discuss this in a very different way.

So when I think about mind wandering, it's easy to think about in the context of meditation.

But here, they describe like, okay, if you're focused on a task, that's on task.

and then mind wandering is actually pursuit of internal goals which i thought was interesting like you're still focused but you're focused on your shopping list or whatever like internal thing that you're you want to focus on even though you're like this is like mind wandering and then they call this off focus

is epistemic exploration, or this is like the exploratory, like where your mind, what I think of as mind wandering, they call this off focus.

And so I thought that that was kind of a different paradigm and not something that I'm used to hearing, like where you're just, where you catch yourself, like, why was I thinking about red balloons and frogs with three legs?

Like where you just find yourself in this intellectual state, like, what am I thinking about?

Or why was I even thinking that?

Whereas mind wandering is like, you really are thinking about like,

something else that's like you should be thinking about, but it's not exploratory, which I thought was kind of interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

The things I'd say about that on the bottom right, first, it doesn't look like there's a transition from the bottom left to the bottom right.

So it could just be that the dynamics, the attractor dynamics of this dynamical system are such that when you just down project these massive data sets of neuroimaging, you get certain transition dynamics, which is totally the case.

Like you're sleepy before you fall asleep and then different people

accelerate or have different dynamics but there is kind of a trajectory um so that was one point was these could be very nuanced states and then the space and the transitions that exist or don't can be important and the second thing is that the y-axis has to do with some neuroactivity some neuro marker where it's low in the bottom two and high in the middle one but then the x-axis is behavioral results so the idea would be that there might be some correlation

between like, wow, it was like they did 30 seconds of really good task.

And then there was 15 seconds where they totally didn't do the task or it was variable.

And then if you found a neural change that was like immediately preceding that or after it or during it, that's the kind of cross data set connections that this research is getting towards.

But instead of just putting this into the broad framework of dynamical systems and statistics,

Now we have a process theory like active inference to explore some of the dynamics that give rise to those patterns.

So blue and then D.


SPEAKER_01:
So interestingly, there is a correspondence.

So it does map what was found.

And I had to read into the paper to kind of find this out.

But the mind wandering in the left image does map actually to the mind wandering in the image on the right.

Or the brain regions are super similar.

So I read to just make sure that there was some cohesion there.

And there is.

So it's interesting to me to think about this off task.

What is off task versus mind wandering?

And what...

For me, if you're meditating and you're not focused on the thing, you're off task.

But it's, I don't know, super interesting.

I just wanted to clarify that one point, though, that there is a cohesion there.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks, Blue.


SPEAKER_01:
Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I used to have to work with people who were at a real... I got to be polite because I'm being recorded.

They had a real joy out of...

looking at time on task.

This was something that they found really, really important.

And so if you were task designing, you were supposed to be able to create something in your design scheme that would keep people focused all the time.

And in the meantime, there's a whole bunch of

interesting papers that have come out in terms of creativity and tangential thinking and mind wandering as an actual gift for taking what's in the task and making it your own.

Like if you're mind wandering, you're not, it's not a disconnected thought that you're having unless you're really being distracted by something.

the video game or the music or whatever, it's usually something tangential to the task at hand.

And it's essentially an embodying exercise.

So I think this is good stuff just because I think lots of times mind wandering, if you're focused on how many minutes was a person focused or concentrated is seen as a negative when from creative stance, it's a really important thing to do.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you, Dean.

And then Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think it's useful to see a transition, some sort of transition state between the regime of attention where you're on task and a regime of attention where you're mind-wandering.

So I think that opens up

um questions of how things you know liminal spaces between states and um the need to like if you're always coming back on task yeah it would and you're not getting beyond that

state of losing focus um and that that could be a problem I mean it could be a problem with the mind wandering doesn't get back on task as well I suppose but uh so I think that's um that that would that would make a lot of sense I think nice how about um mindfulness so just the yellow part and then blue or anyone can give a thought on what they added um or um


SPEAKER_04:
Mindfulness, for the purpose of this work, they're going to focus on regulatory cognitive control strategies in which an agent seeks to control their mental states by becoming aware of the state as a cognitive process, as opposed to regulation strategies where one remains engrossed in the contents of the state.

This style of regulation is central in mindfulness related intervention where patients learn to change their relation to thoughts and emotions rather than change the thoughts and emotions themselves.

So this is pretty interesting.

So becoming aware of the state as a cognitive process is like,

this is a thought, I'm having a thought.

There's many, many praxis, many knowledge traditions built around this, which you can mention or have people with experience talk about.

And the alternative is like, when you feel X, feel the X and be the X. That's sort of the opposite cue.

So we're thinking like mental action, cues for action, like cues for a sport, Dean's favorite topic.

And then there's cues for mental action that are verbal or have other modes of being delivered.

And what are the cues for mental action that leads to different regimes of attention, like Stephen said?

And then how are the measurements that we're going to make from different modalities going to inform that study and the kind of modeling that integrates across them, which we'll get to as well.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is a useful piece here.

It's good to distinguish between, I mean, often children, for instance, there's now more emphasis on mindfulness.

There's that big push to just get them busy, you know, make them do sports, make them do this, make them do the other.

So they're so busy with something they can't think about anything else, but actually saying to them, okay, you're going to be in a space where you could think of other things and you're going to work on

how to not focus on other things has some benefits.

I think there's some slight downsides of that if someone's got trauma, because then it opens up the space for those things to be coming into play.

So I suppose, I think this is really helpful to see where they're going.

And it'll be interesting to know

um how this plays out because there's always a danger if someone tries to scale this type of work because it's it's also easier to use the insights from this type of work to try and capture someone's attention at scale or capture many people's attention by using some of the levers here as much as it is for the person on the inside to be able to resist all the distractions and the the flashes of light that they keep getting exposed to in their daily life thanks steven blue


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, kind of.

I want to just follow what Stephen said.

So I don't know that the children or even like us adults being constantly exposed to flashing blue light, like the smartphone, like instant dopamine addiction, you know, fulfillment thing is necessarily the opposite of...

Mindfulness, I think that that filling is maybe the elimination of boredom, which you can have mindfulness with boredom or mindfulness while doing nothing and mindfulness while not doing nothing.

So you can have actually not sitting in mindfulness meditation, but retain through, this is called like meditation practice, the meditation off the mat, right?

So like there's the conscious placement of the mind during the meditation session, but then when it's over, you carry that into your daily life.

by constantly asking yourself, where is your mind?

That's the image I put in about the old Pixie song, where is my mind?

So there is the ability to carry mindfulness.

Even if you're very busy, you can still practice mindfulness in your daily life without taking time to sit on the cushion.

So I think we are starving our children of boredom, which maybe is, I'm more focused on or more worried about a lack of creativity

Because I think that that boredom process where your mind is really wandering to red balloons and frogs with three legs, that is where the creative nature tends to bubble up.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

And I won't mention the person's name, but I hope that they've emailed us.

They have emailed us, so I hope they talk more about it.

But they've related these aspects of active inference to the yoga of action, karma yoga, and basically the way that action exists in the world.

So I hope...

not what my knowledge area is.

So I look forward to learning about that though.

So before we jump into the paper, this has been a nice long background because there's a lot to say and it's pretty interesting.

Look at this fun April 1st, April Fool's Day with Steven and Blue and I.

But they write in this paper that the key technical innovation presented in the paper is an extension of the active inference framework derived from the work of Hesp et al.

2021, which was the paper that we discussed in live stream number 19.

So if you want kind of the kernel of what this discussion is about, then check out number 19.0 and 0.1 and 0.2.

And we were talking then about affect.

and about the way that that made deep agents so listen there to learn more and now we're going to be doing a few of the similar things seeing some similar figures so it's a good background listen okay figure one does anyone want to give a first description it says in the caption a probabilistic graphical model showing a basic generative model for moment-to-moment perception

Okay, so the observation O is going to be used across different layers, but here is the model of perception.

So we can debate whether it's realism or not later, but this is kind of like the retina or the sensor of the camera O. It's like, did a photon hit it or not?

This is an observable that you measure with a sensor.

s at each level is going to be a hidden state so-called because it's not directly observed but it's inferred from observations through a which is a mapping so like this could be day and night and this could be photon hitting versus no photon hitting and then you can imagine the mapping there

But we'll see how they nest and get more complex than that.

And then D is the initiator.

It's a prior over hidden states, which turns out to be important because as you compute the likelihood of different hidden states being the case, moment to moment or through time, you need to start with an idea of essentially how likely certain states are and how closely they map to observations.

That's the kernel of the Bayesian modeling that we're going to elaborate a lot

like multiple successive times.

But this is the underlying system that can be thought of like photons hitting the receptor and a mapping to underlying states as influenced at least initially by a prior.

Okay, any comments on one?

Or we can go to the next generalization in two.

okay so two is a base graph showing a basic generative model of perception with precision so it has the same terms and you know dsao as above dsao but now there's a new node and each shape just at a first pass represents some value that can be taken by a variable

And then an edge that connects two states is like a relationship between them.

And there's different kinds of nodes and there's different kinds of edges slightly in how they influence each other, but they just mean that they influence each other.

And that's important because the edges actually in the grand scheme are very sparse.

It's not an all by all model.

So this model is extremely more tractable to compute than like an all by all matrix of just estimating the coefficients of how related terms are.

So it's a very constrained model space, but it still describes a lot of system.

And the second figure adds in this gamma sub A, which is the precision, which is one over the uncertainty.

So just as we had talked about those being two sides of the coin earlier,

This is like uncertainty slash precision, depending on which way you want to think about it.

High uncertainty, you're really unsure, that's low precision and vice versa, but it still maps onto the sensory outcome.

In both these cases, after the sensory outcome occurs,

then there's uh an update the prior becomes the posterior after getting a precision weighted updating and that's just how bayesian updating works so this is a bayesian scheme for updating that initially doesn't include a precision on the a and now it does include a precision on the a any thoughts on two before three


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think it's interesting.

It's good to know that the expected precision is tied to the likelihood mapping.

It doesn't try and tie itself directly to the state.

It's in the way that the state is being... So that helps to really notice that and make that clear because that...

gives the logic a little bit more of clarity.

I think that's often a bit that's not teased out as often as it has been here.

That's quite useful.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

And what else is interesting?

So good observation that the uncertainty is connected only to the mapping.

So it's not uncertainty about the state.

It's about the mapping in this formulation.

Now we're going to see a similar move and two things happen in figure three to bring that previous model into this kind of twice generalized space of generative models of action and perception.

The first thing is that now there's observations through time versus at a moment with just one observation.

So subscript one, two, three, through time, three time steps.

Then here's that DSAO stack.

And then B is the transition matrix between states through time.

So we've talked about that on other streams before.

And then again, a similar move, just like you pointed out, Steven, how the uncertainty or like the intervention in this case, the policy pie, it's actually modulating the transition mappings rather than the states themselves.

So,

I'm sure that has very interesting computational properties that I don't know the details of.

But I think that's some components that make it amenable perhaps to message passing or to the variational inference methods.

But that's definitely an interesting observation that you made.

It's true.

It happens again here in a totally different way.

And then pi, the policy selection.

is influenced by preferences which play into the calculation as expected free energy as well as this baseline prior e so we've seen this one before and this is how policies are selected over um for the next time step based upon the um expectations of

hidden states and observations through time in relationship to priors, e, how they're apt to perform before starting this sequence of events, and then the way that they calculate their preferences over observation states, which also relates to how you said the body-centric inference.


SPEAKER_00:
This might be a question, Daniel, for them, but it says preferences over outcomes, and it goes into the expected free energy.

Is that almost like different ways you could weight the way the expected free energy terms are presented, you know, over maybe Hamilton's least action versus...

resolving, you know, would they be doing something like that?

I'm not sure we can answer that, but does that make sense?


SPEAKER_04:
It's a preference for sensory states.

And then we saw in the model stream one with Ryan Smith, like if you wanted to have a very weak preference in the matrix, it would be like one versus 1.1.

I'm just making those numbers up, but the point is like they're relatively close.

It's like a 60-40 election so that the preference is very weak.

And then you could also set it up to 100 versus one.

then if you think about that like when you're just totally thirsty and you're willing to engage in all kinds of actions that's how you could computationally put in direction as well as magnitude of preferences over outcome some people that describes you know maybe some individuals have a broad sensory tolerance others have a narrow sensory tolerance or preference so that's so you got you so it's almost like you can you can narrow you can either open up or narrow down


SPEAKER_00:
the amounts of options that are going to be available by saying the gap here.


SPEAKER_04:
And then in the absence of preference, if you don't have a preference for pheromone, it's just going to be a diffusion walk.

So that's how preference plays into the decision-making, but also other pieces do too.

Okay.

So then here, here's where we introduce this second nested layer with the deep generative model of mental action.

So here the same DSAO is recapitulated from the orange, but then the O is split into two nodes.

One is an estimate of the state, but also it's passing or connecting to the precision, the uncertainty.

So the features that were being discussed like up until figure three,

as being just part of how the inference was performed are now still doing the same exact role.

They're just being emitted by the state through the A, S sub one of two, like the second level in parentheses, through the A matrix at the second level.

And then that's resulting in these two outputs.

So this could be like a nested layer of thinking or a nested layer of concurrent programming or a nested layer of formality, Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm going to get the author to make sure that I'm getting this right.

But before, something I remember from what Casper talked about with his effective piece.

And then there's a figure five, which we'll get to.

But to me...

The figures one, two, and three aspect of this are the unplannable parts of it.

The figure four does ask the question, why am I, or yes, why am I trying to pay attention to?

It's kind of the transition space.

And then the figure five is where we could actually do some planning because we're saying to ourselves, now pay attention.

because we're putting that second order, we're paying ideas to ideas piece.

So I think up until this point, up until figure four, it was unplannable what we're modeling.

At figure four, we start to transition, and then in figure five, we can actually incorporate a plan if we so choose, if that's part of our policy.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice point, these are really helpful labels, like pie at the first level, what am I trying to do?

So in the case of the light hitting the receptor and then is it day or night?

When we introduce policy, that would be like, should I swivel the cart, move my sunflower head left or right, move my camera left or right under the preference for light.

Now, if you didn't have preference, it wouldn't matter, right?

If you don't know where you're going, it doesn't matter where you go.

But if you have a preference vector that gets increasingly stringent, you're gonna pursue

those policies that will lead to getting the observations that are in line with your preference now here the second level so this is again what am i perceiving what am i trying to do that's the motor cart with a visual receptor and then here the hidden state

And again, it's just the same exact placement analogously the first layer is what am I paying attention to?

And the policy is a policy over attentions.

So that's what makes this model nesting outside of the smaller perceptual level model.

So Blue, did you wanna say something or no?

Okay, then Steven, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
So it's treating the precision

And it's somehow merging that with the states and pushing that through another matrix and probably doing that.

I know Ryan Smith talks about a cycle of six in terms of when they model.

They go through six.

It will iterate through six.

And then the next level will just sample the sixth, the sixth, the sixth, the sixth data point, so to speak, in the faster data going below.

But I'm not sure how does that work with the two being combined?

The two are combined basically to give you the higher O2, is that right?


SPEAKER_04:
So I don't know about the six specifically, but here you can see like at the first time point of the slower model, this is like the hour hand, there's like the estimation or inference over states one, two, and three.

everything about them like what's the hidden state and the mapping and the observation which you can then conditionalize the inference on a subset of those variables but that's what the whole model is and then then it's like you're estimating at time one about time one two and three and then at time two you're also estimating over that trajectory but the slower hand is like the hour hand

Okay, continue.

Because I think this is where five is where you're getting at, Dean.

It's totally the contribution of the paper.

So they summarize as saying that they make three, and this is, the 19 has sped all for a lot of this structure.

They summarize that they make three novel contributions to parametrically deep active inference models of cognitive control.

The first contribution is to stipulatively

define attentional and meta-awareness states as the mechanism of opacity control at different hierarchical levels.

The second is to provide a formal definition of attentional and meta-awareness control via an account of higher level policy selection.

The third is to formally demonstrate the relationship between meta-awareness states and the capacity for deliberate attentional control.

we're gonna look at the model in figure five, and that's still gonna be like sort of the abstract skeleton of the model.

And then there's gonna be a simulation results.

So that was kind of all the background actually to their primary contribution.

Now in figure five, we see this explicitly three layer model.

and this is the primary contribution is this model topology and architecture and then the interpretation of the higher order states in terms of the opacity transparency and then eventually a more generalized perspective on mental action

and bring this all together with a model that does basically the same trick around the second layer as happened around the first layer so these layer one and layer two are the exact same from figure four and now there's this third green layer where the states are asking the unobservable question how aware of my how aware am i of where my attention is

then the policy question is am i trying to maintain awareness of my attentional state or something like that we can get at what exact wording these parameters map onto but totally interesting tape and structure of the model in question so any thoughts or what was exciting to people about figure five stephen and then anyone else


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's exciting to see.

It's got some similarities to the valence, the deeply felt effect.

Valence has been a higher level sort of calibration.

I suppose in a way they might try and find a way to put those two together.

When you say I'm aware of where my attention is,

Well, what kind of awareness is that awareness?

Is it a feeling?

It feels good or is it something else?

So, yeah, nice.


SPEAKER_04:
Dean or Blue, otherwise we can.


SPEAKER_02:
I just want to say a couple of quick things.

So the way that they laid the paper out, this made a really good case for why they were focusing on the transparency and the opacity piece.

And they don't make any claims around whether or not

person who's looking at a white page with white text written on it can actually see that white text or whether or not the size of the font is so large that you're only seeing one pixel in the letter A on that page so you can't even see the A but I think both of those things matter when we're talking about attention as well how can you pay attention to something where you can't see the contrast or how can you pay attention to something where the proportions are so out of whack that they just don't make any sense to you

Now I know they're not talking about that here, but it would seem to me that that would also be a part of where this computational piece would be really, really helpful because to a learner, sometimes it's easy to see the tunnel within the mountain.

Sometimes it's really, really hard to be able to pick something up off the page when it's either way out of proportion or there isn't any contrast.

So I just wanted to kind of, I want to, I want to give the authors credit and I think, I hope, I think I know where they're going next.


SPEAKER_04:
Thanks.

Yeah.

Cool.

Let's go into the little one cul-de-sac of the formalities that is kind of interesting.

And then we can also ask the authors to explain a little bit more to us, but just to get at how does this S state sub T so through time across time points at the second level.

So that's going to be what we're focused on is how this

is kind of at the intersection of perhaps you could even say the bottom up and the top down signaling or at the very least it's at sort of a um you know mid-level street in the scale of streets of variables from local neighborhoods like down here in the bottom cluster to sort of regional hubs to this broader

connection that is happening at an even slower or deeper time scalar way we're kind of looking at this middle piece as a as perhaps an example of again how factors from bottom up and top down interact and then it's kind of like legos maybe it can be generalized from there and you can say okay let's nest this within that or see what happens if you connect over here but they write mathematically the attentional and meta awareness state inference is calculated based upon three sources of evidence

read prior beliefs so this is the B and the S at layer two so those are um like what is previously influencing that layer specifically so that's what happened before at that layer direct perceptual evidence e.g the metacognitive observation of one's attentional state blue

And then orange, ascending evidence based on the precision beliefs of the level below.

So maybe that's where

If you just opened your eyes in the morning and it was too bright and you don't have the resolution, now you can't make the good mapping between fine-grained details because your resolution from a sensory perspective, like the precision is adapted for a different regime of environmental regularities.

So there's perhaps many ways to model this.

So then they say something that was kind of interesting.

For the ascending messages from the continuous expected precision to the discrete states,

we use Bayesian model reduction,

for the derivation C frist in 2018 to evaluate the marginal likelihood under the priors associated with each higher level state.

This gives in the case of the attentional evidence, for example, and then the equation that has these components that were here.

So it sounds probably extremely technical, but it's a pretty interesting topic that we'll look at just in another slide, because it is really important to understand how this bottom-up continuous info becomes translated to discreetly different states.

And then this is just to note that this is like the general structure of the model, which you could imagine is also computer variables, but then they preset two mental states associated with just specific parameters that they chose.

So especially the simulation is just like a parameter combination.

It's not all the possible dimensions one could explore.

So that was just to note.

So here's, oh yeah, Steven, go for it before we go to model reduction.


SPEAKER_00:
I think this is helpful to think about

how that top level has that impact.

So you can imagine, you know, you wake up sometimes, say you're at home and you wake up and it's just, and slowly you just, you see the room you expect to see, okay?

And there's the other times when you wake up and you've gone away and there's that jolt because the prior expectations were still locked into like, you're dreaming about waking up at home or you're sort of, but you're not at home, right?

And there's that.

So it's almost like you're fulfilling your expectations.

These higher level could just start to,

percolate out as you enter into certain states or into certain rooms.

So I think that's quite a nice way of thinking top-up, top-down, bottom-up, and that being about perception as well.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool, nice point.

Deep priors, narrative priors, how did I get here with sensory priors at the moment-to-moment?

So here's the paper with Friston, Parr, and Zeidman from 2018-19, Bayesian Model Reduction.

So

The yellow parts are highlighted, but just one green part and then kind of a takeaway here is we consider structured learning and hierarchical or empirical base

that can be regarded as a metaphor for neurobiological processes like abductive reasoning.

So I know that that's what we're kind of excited about and the paper that we brought up of Majeed Beni, but that's super interesting.

Like just to kind of skip to the last sentence, how are they going to be using model comparison of Bayesian models to explore abductive reasoning?

One takeaway, but really would be great to have people who know more about this topic have a little bit more insight would be like we can compare Bayesian models that only vary in their priors.

It's really easy to compare the similar structures of models

that just vary in like whether they think it's gonna be a Gaussian centered at five or centered at seven.

There's a lot of tools that help you very rapidly compare that.

But if you have two totally disparate model, two programming languages, they're predicting different things, it's really hard to compare them.

So the frequentist comparisons can be very intractable as well as sampling and simulation based ones that are just like brute force, or they can have stringent requirements like the hierarchical likelihood ratio test

is only applicable to certain subsets of frequentist modeling.

So structure learning is hard.

What is the structure of causation?

What's the structure of the data, the shape of the data, Dean, like you brought up?

So how can we frame this question and challenge about learning about structure of data in terms of model comparison or updating of priors amongst models that have similar structures but just different quantitative variables?

And so Bayesian model reduction is a way that you can do this kind of structured learning.

And one loose analogy is the lasso regression, which tries to restrict to a very small set of few strong factors in a data set that might have like many weakly interacting factors.

It kind of truncates the distribution and just says like, give me the most relevant ones.

And if it's just massively interacting, then, you know, so be it.

And that kind of a regression is going to have a similar use, which is to converge upon a smaller number of things that are really informative while keeping the model also similar, which should be reminiscent of like the Bayesian information criteria, AIC as well.

And then here's in that paper,

And it relates to what we read earlier.

How do you go from quantitative continuous estimates, in this case coming from perceptual updating of that retina sensor, how do we plug in from the continuous and map to categorical a discrete selection of models?

So mapping from continuous to continuous, you can just do like a dilation or some other function mapping, but it gets a little bit different when you want to map between these worlds of continuous and discrete.

And it turns out that the way it works is that inference is performed within and among a family of models, Bayesian models, that are using parameters like quantitative difference in parameters to describe structural connections between variables.

so here's like let's just say that black is zero and white is one then here's like all the combinations of linear models that were used to generate the different models so this is the exhaustive frequentist approach and then

Here, what's happening is the Bayesian model is estimating the relevance of each of up to 20 parameters, and then estimating a credible interval, which is 90% in this case.

90% of the time it's within this interval, we think, or that's where it's likely to be under some value of stringency.

That's the red blur.

And then you prune the ones that are like not significantly different from zero.

So it doesn't mean that they're not zero or they're not playing a role or the proteins don't touch, but it means that you can actually structurally simplify the relationship between variables.

So that's moving from continuous evidence about models of a discrete family to a reduced model that could potentially be extremely parsimonious.

so that's just the bayesian model reduction but that's like i guess a sub component of this paper so wanting to know more about how it comes into play or if there's an analogous process on the generative way down okay any thoughts on that or just that was one little section well i was just thinking i mean i'm not sure if i've


SPEAKER_00:
got this potentially right but i can see this brings in the idea of how action can be used to think like in creative abductive work you you know you can start to actually create entropy or create confusion to create some possible outcomes and that the art of

the creative process isn't necessarily the creation of random novel ideas.

It's being able to prune back.

I think it comes a bit back to that idea of that task-related off-focus mind-wandering, you know, the ability to then go backwards and forwards.

And that might tie in with this ability here to do this.

I'm not sure, but it sounds like this would tie into that somehow.

Cool.

We'll ask the authors.


SPEAKER_04:
OK, nice.

Onto the simulations.

Also, people can just leave when they need to.

This section is going to provide the simulation results that show how the model described in the previous section engenders opacity transparency phenomenology.

So outputs of the model that recapitulate some of the dynamics that have been described in other experiments.

And then they're going to use that agent with a three-layer generative model.

Okay, so first was just the... Any thoughts on what the simulation is or just to contextualize it before we talk more about it?

Okay.

The code is available.

It's a Colab book.

It's pretty cool.

It makes a lot of the graphs.

So nice work for the authors.

Maybe we can walk through it or ask about certain parts.

But cool that it's an interactive notebook.

Okay.

Anyone want to describe seven?


SPEAKER_01:
Sure, I will.

So here it says, just the yellow part, it says, in the first half of the trial, the agent is in the focused state, which confers a higher precision, i.e.

the agent is generally more confident about how their observations map onto states.

In the second half of the trial, the precision drops as the agent moves into the distracted state.

As a result, their beliefs about latent states are updated more slowly.

So this is kind of like, I wasn't really paying attention.

Did I just see a car flash in front of me?

I don't really know because I wasn't really paying attention.

Whereas if you're focused on the screen and watching the car, you see every flash and you know exactly when it flashed.


SPEAKER_04:
nice way to put it blue so the blue is what um happened it's like a tone like a lower piece even like a lower tone versus a higher tone that happens some frequency of the time and then um it is just this is a agent that's artificially held with a total focus state for the lighter half and then it just switches instantly and we're exploring how this s at the first level so to go back to figure five

that's the perception is s at the first level and then that is an estimate that's changing through time and so um when it's focused it's like higher highs and sharper and lower lows and then distracted states just more like wait what stuff's more just spread out and it maybe has a different recovery or similar speed but lower to rise so that's how they say that um

That's how they make their claims about the way that the attentional state influences A1.

By making the likelihood mapping more or less informative.

Because if it's uninformative, the likelihood mapping, then why does the sensory input matter?

Go with your gut.

But if it's very precise, you want to go with what your lying eyes are telling you.

And that is reflecting in figure eight, this phenomenological cycle.

So these can be discrete just via that mechanism of like the continuous to discrete estimation.

And they write that this is the diagram of the phenomenological cycle that occurs during sustained attention tasks.

The process cycles through being focused, becoming distracted, becoming aware of this distraction, and then refocusing.

So it's cool because it looks like internal-external states in a way.

And action-intense states, like it's a OODA loop, or there's so many other four-fold models.

But what are we actually looking at here?

We're looking at the dynamics of that attractor state as it wanders.

So I feel like since both of you have thought about attention or awareness, maybe what did this look like or what does this mean to you?


SPEAKER_02:
Do you think that we attend through steps all the time?

I know that for the simulation, they want to be able to see that in order to be able to do the calculations.

But do you think people do that?


SPEAKER_01:
So I think that the shift from focused to distracted is maybe not discrete.

That might be more of a continuous shift.

transition but definitely like as soon as i'm aware that i'm distracted like the attention gets redirected like that is a the awareness of distraction is a discrete like bam oh and then the redirection of attention is is also like i can replace it and then i'm focused again but then the transition so it's just this top left corner where it's a little fuzzy for me


SPEAKER_04:
I really agree with that, Blue.

Like, awareness of distraction to redirection of attention, that's like, you know, the eye of Mordor.

It just goes somewhere else, okay?

But then the distracted to the awareness of distraction is actually that same, but it's the eye, the cognitive, metacognitive eye of Mordor turning its eye on a lower level estimate.

So I agree that actually this, from noon to six, it looks, it's pretty interesting how it maps, but then...

do we think about focus and distraction as part of a continuum of a single variable or is this like in a yeah is there can you wobble or is there like more dimensions to just being super strongly obsessively doing something how far do you pull back what if you have to you know put down the first pen to pick up a different pen you're pulling back from the goal but you're moving towards it so that's the kind of deep policy questions that are so cool that we're raising blue


SPEAKER_01:
Well, so it's cool because here it's this gamma function, right?

Like, so the gamma is the precision.

And so just by changing the gamma and like you can change the gamma incrementally, however you want to change the gamma, like 0.01, 0.1, 0.0001.

And then by changing that gamma, you can really get that shift like computationally from focus to distracted by just by changing that precision metric.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Yep.

And I mean, that's kind of imagine the little headband when people are paying attention and what do you do?

So here I copied the left side of I think five and then just laid it next to here.

So these are the questions that again, each layer is asking.

The blue layer is like the perception layer.

and related to the policy that's going to get those perceptions in line with preferences.

So moving the cart back and forth to be in the right amount of light.

Then hidden mental states are about paying attention.

And then what influences the precision and emits a precision variable and an observable at a higher level, just like A sub one at the second level.

Here's like A three.

And here's now the slow one, but it's happening actually at every time point.

So again, you could probably elaborate this in various ways and ask like how many time steps of action are calculated per attentional state?

How many attentional states are calculated per metacognitive state?

Are they all in the flow?

It's so interesting.

So here, then they also put down the specific matrices.

I assume the ones that we'll see in this video

Colab notebook.

These are just like the parameters that are going to illustrate some of the dynamics that are going to be interesting for the fields.

But again, these are parameters that could be learned or updated or could reflect not just a two by two option.

All right.

So maybe even copying this guy out again.

Here, figure 10.

Yes.

Okay.

so here are the three layers of the model and so the bottom layer is playing the oddball Paradigm so it's like listening to like regular tones and then once in every x percent there's a differential tone but also that could be like which one of these security events is anomalous or which one of these trades would be effective amidst the prior that 90 are probably not so

It starts off focused and all systems are normal on the sensory side.

And it gets distracted, it returns to being focused.

This is the true state at each level is the dot.

So the bottom layer is like the percept of the sound.

This is the attention, this is the meta awareness.

And then this you see at the change point from being distracted to focus, there's a switch point in the third level.

So then everything's normal, the sensory level, and then it's distracted.

And then the oddball happens at 21 or something.

And then that like flips it.

It says, flips it back into attention.

And then that continues and it stays in that state.

until an event happens.

And so this is just simulating out the dynamics, but the idea with this kind of a graph is that we can scan along and look at how changes in one level either are influencing each other statistically, causally within our model, not necessarily about the real world, but just literally causally because we specified it in our model and then do parameter fitting and be like, whoa, we can explain 95% of the variance in this behavioral data set, even though we didn't observe

the red or the orange we observed this or their task variability but then we have enough data points from enough individuals and from time series of this individual and then start to add in some other measurements and there's a lot of data to do inference on these higher order states about any comments on 10.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm just thinking, so sorry.

I'm just thinking about how this is going to be used, like...

by companies to keep you working.

Like, I just can't help but, like, think about thinking about that.

Like, are you paying attention?

Are you not paying attention?

Can we give you an oddball to make you pay attention?

Like, you're sitting at work and all of a sudden, like, oh, shit, I wasn't even paying attention.

So, yeah, like that.

I think about that.

And it's kind of scary and it's kind of, I don't know, it's real.


SPEAKER_02:
think blue if people actually tried to do that I think they would be more misinformed than they would be informed as I said for half a dozen years I work with people who whose goal was to pull apart and sort of get a better understanding of this time on task piece and they're no closer today to understanding it then

They were a decade ago and they spent a lot of time on it because I don't know that this literally maps into an appreciation or understanding of what on task versus off task is.

There's tangents to tasking.

And I don't think that this really gives us a sense of what that is.

I think the blue layer does speak to the unplannable.

I think that the middle layer does speak to transition.

And I think the top of green red does speak to plannable.

But if somebody in an organization

thinks that they're going to have a better sense of how they're going to determine whether a person was on task or not, I say good luck with that.


SPEAKER_01:
So I actually have a colleague that's developing a way to determine if a person's in the flow state or not, which is very different, very interesting, like with physiological.

So attentional is different.

Like, are you paying attention versus are you in flow?

And it's really interesting.

And they've got some decent results so far.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, well, they can count the number of saccades or saccades.

And I've looked at the whole visual memory thing and all of that literature.

And they're still not getting any closer to understanding when a person is on or off task because they want to break it down to that kind of a binary.

I say, let them continue to do that because

I'm not sure if it's nefarious, but I think it has the potential to become that.

So I'd like them to go and spend all their time on it because they're not going to figure it out.

Keep them distracted.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, Dean, laying down breadcrumbs.

I love it.


SPEAKER_02:
Carry on.


SPEAKER_04:
Figure nine is going to be that same cycle of four that we were talking about on eight.

And now in addition to just the sort of qualitative label, we're gonna map that onto the structure of the model that we were discussing.

So here, like the redirection of attention is being framed as policy two, pi at the second level.

So where's the action?

Pi at the second level is this orange one here on figure five.

So that is influencing what one is paying attention to through time.

And then that is being mapped to here.

And similarly, you can read through and just work through the combinatorics here of what these map to from a dynamical systems perspective.

Like while it's in a parameter neighborhood or regime or attractor state,

or manifold that's in one area in a distracted state, described by a wide range of continuous parameters that map onto the categorical distinction of the true state being distracted, but the perception being that one is focused.

So just work through what these distinctions are.

It's pretty interesting.

Yeah, anything to add on that?

It's kind of cool.

Okay.

11 is going to be another kind of... Just like in 7, they had the attention at the second layer at one parameter level, and then they just, like, turned down the dimmer.

In figure...

11 they're going to have a high meta awareness and then turn down the dimmer to the low meta awareness at the s3 so recapitulating the way that they added this third layer to hespedal 2021 they're recapitulating figure seven in how they vary the parameters changing through time but now you can see the dynamics are totally different like the spiking between focus and distraction is actually happening faster during the period of fixed high meta awareness

Whereas during the period of low meta awareness, actually it's like there's longer intervals.

It's like, whoa, what just happened?

I was having low meta awareness.

The time just flew by.

Or maybe there's another interpretation, but it's just a nice plot that gets at how just a parameter combination can give us insight into the structure of the model.

So we kind of have the graphical doorway, the programming doorway, then this is like the outcome oriented

data science way, because this is just input in a model.

It's just in a machine learning notebook.

It doesn't really even explicitly invoke the graphical structure that we just have been talking about the whole time, but it is that embodied in a simulation.

All right, Dean?


SPEAKER_02:
No, I got to talk to the author tomorrow because it brings up the thing about... Is it tomorrow?

I'm pretty sure it's... Yes.

I'm going to want to bring up what I...

You should talk about it as a crosswalk analogy.

I'm just going to leave it at that.


SPEAKER_04:
I can see you being a great crosswalk guard.

you wait so figure 12 this is kind of the last figure i thought this was an awesome figure and one i i know that we'll return to many times a based graph of a deep generative model of mental action generalized over all precision parameters so now that attentional state

likelihood mapping is going from potentially a binary state like we saw here focused or not i mean uh yeah um the likelihood mapping kind of like the dark side of the moon album cover can emit like five simultaneous outputs it can output a tuple or a vector from a computational perspective perspective and it can output what we talked about here

but it can also emit an uncertainty and potentially even other things connecting to multiple of these lower level parameters.

So now there can be an uncertainty over the priors, whereas in the previous simulations, D just stood alone and there wasn't uncertainty around it.

So it's just sort of taking the next step and just being like, okay, if we went from estimating the valence

with the actual like plus or minus, are things going better or worse than expected?

And we just said, okay, what's the sister of valence, reward?

The sister is the uncertainty and the precision and their relationship.

So now this paper, that's why it builds on HESP 2021, because it fills in the other compliment there, which is the precision modulation by higher level states, rather than the valence modulation by higher level states.

How well are things going?

And then that insight to generalize into the variation from a top-down level has strong precedent in Bayesian modeling where it's related to like the parametric empirical Bayes and hierarchical Bayes.

So big.

A lot of philosophical questions about what a parameter means, challenges in implementing it, but this is a relatively generalizing step in the publications.

Oh yeah, exactly that.

It's the same higher level affective states applied to the likelihood precision rather than model precision.

And then, note that this evidence is only available when higher level likelihood precisions is non-zero, i.e.

when the state is opaque to some degree.

As a result, the transparency opacity distinction can be directly related to the evidence calculation.

so she thought what does that mean or just interesting like we don't notice something and then we do so it's kind of like it's transparent and then it becomes opaque and we observe it in this model it puts us over threshold of observation that takes us off task as defined by policy

Okay, on to the implications and bigger questions.

So, Blue, go for it.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, so just to your last point, like, I wonder if, you know, have you ever felt so focused you're distracted?

Like, that's a common thing for me, and maybe it's focused on the wrong task, but it's also, like, you're focused to the exclusion of everything else.

So I just wonder how that goes into this transparency, opacity, like...

Gradient, maybe?

So anyway, and then, yeah, on to implications and bigger questions.

So I think about, oh, sorry, go ahead.

Did you have something, some response?

Dean?

Oh.


SPEAKER_04:
Go for it, though.


SPEAKER_01:
So, yeah.

So implications and bigger questions.

So here I like when so I obviously got one during this discussion about being so focused that you're that you're not paying attention.

But also if we're talking about adding hierarchical levels.

So I wonder about here, beyond meta-awareness, I wonder about collective consciousness.

Like, so is there, you know, when you realize that you're part of a collective, and then when the collective develops some kind of meta-consciousness, like, so it makes me think about that and about maybe how to model something like that.

Maybe in ants, for example, because there's the individual level, and then there's definitely, like, the society structural level, the consciousness of the colony, maybe.

And also, you know, simulation theory, like...

So at what level, becoming aware that we're in a simulation, where does that fit into the hierarchical nesting of this deep meta-awareness?


SPEAKER_04:
Funny stuff.

Wouldn't have thought that that's where we would get, you know, but that's kind of what it has come to.

Any thoughts on that, Dean, before we go to the next slide?


SPEAKER_02:
No, I think it ties in nicely with the, what do we metacognize over?

And I'm going to bring up the crosswalk tomorrow.


SPEAKER_04:
Yep.

So this future of phenomenology slash neuro phenomenology, just whatever we want to call it.

Here's just a few angles on what is slash has and will happened.

There's multimodal brain measurements, OSPM, where art thy sting.

but just it lays out in 2007 and earlier, but in that textbook and in the online documentation, kind of generalized frameworks for harmonizing across different modalities of neuroimaging, behavioral imaging, hidden state modeling.

So a lot of the seeds are in SPM.

What we can talk about integrating now, other than in a laboratory setting like EEG and fMRI at the same time together, but increasingly, even at home, physiological sensors,

wearables, cameras, and environmental sensors, the capacity for models that involve multiple humans and finding the synchronies and attunements amongst them under environmental changes.

And this is like the work of Hyperscanning and Guillaume Dumas and a lot of other people in that field.

Thinking about cyber physical systems, like what if the state is inside the head purportedly of a human?

Is that different than if this state is purportedly inside of a software?

Which ones get to be affect?

Which ones get to be what standing?

And then also it helps us and always is important, maybe you'll go here with who and why and how, Dean, but,

really just all these axes that phenomenology has been addressed from developmental multicultural neurodiversity a lot of historical perspectives that also is continuing to weave together and not being said to be obsolete or simplified by a computational model yeah if you want to know more phenomenology go and read some sean gallagher

nice don't know about that but it sounds cool yeah anything there or last okay then here was just one paper that kind of came out just on a closing note like how it connects out maybe to other areas this was um looking at behaviors across a bunch of different fruit fly species drosophila

And then here's the big figure or one of them, kind of mapping, just like you might map genes being correlated or might map neural activations to be correlated across different regions of the brain, those same matrix methods, tensor methods, fundamentally, covariance estimation,

can be used to study different kinds of relationships.

So earlier, we saw the neural activity and the behavior.

Here, the heat map is like behavior to behavior.

They're looking for pure behavioral co-variation.

But then what's really cool about this paper is that they use several techniques from information theory, which we see all the time in FEP, information, thermo, cool, going that way, but then also puts it explicitly in a comparative evolutionary framework.

So this is really moving towards models that can just very seamlessly integrate different kinds of data as easy as integrating the same kind of data, just the matrix is type A of data by type B of data rather than type A by type A. So these kinds of models that cross data input types

need to be connected to broader traditions, like thinking about development, ecology, evolution.

And it's just also interesting how these fields, which are increasingly data rich, are gonna be using different cutting edge theoretical frameworks.

So that's just one closing thought about where's evolution in this?

Where's development?

Where's, what are we doing?

All these components that discussion elicits.

So any last thoughts?

Otherwise, thanks, Blue and Steven and Dean, because this was fun to work on, and I think we all got to learn a lot here.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Definitely.


SPEAKER_04:
More tomorrow.

Yep, I know.

We've just been so not on top.

Okay.

All right.

Thank you again.

Thanks, everyone, for watching.

Peace out.

Bye.

## eX5jt3HP27c

SPEAKER_06:
Hello, welcome to the ActInfLab livestream number 28.1.

It's September 7th, 2021.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on this page.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and will follow video etiquette for live streams.

Today on September 7th and next Tuesday, we're going to be discussing this paper on computational phenomenology.

Then we haven't set the paper for 29 yet, and then we have a few papers set for October.

today the goal is just to learn and discuss this very cool paper towards a computational phenomenology of mental action modeling meta awareness and attentional control with deep parametric active inference and we're really appreciative that lars the first author is here to discuss with us so we're just going to

Start wherever we start and go from there, I guess.

I think each of us here probably brought some questions and anyone who has a question in the live chat can ask it.

So let's just introduce ourselves and end with a author and go from there.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a postdoc in California and I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Morning, I'm Dean.

I'm retired.

I'm in Calgary.

I'm in Canada.

And the work that I do ties in nicely with this idea of being able to bring some precision to how we learn.

So I will


SPEAKER_06:
Dave, who can I pass it to?

So Dave, Dave may only be on mute.

He might be on text-to-speech mode, which is fine.

Right.

But welcome, Dave.

And we'll pass to Lars.

So Lars, welcome to this discussion.

And just thanks again for joining.

We're happy to hear any introduction.

And then we'll go from there.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, sure.

Well, thanks.

Excuse me.

Thank you.

Thanks for having me.

I'm kind of excited to be here.

Sounds like a fun couple hours ahead of us.

Just sending regards from the other co-authors as well.

Obviously, like a lot of these papers, this has emerged in collaboration with other people and they couldn't make it here today.

But I'm glad I'm able to be here.

So my name is Lars.

I'm based at, my affiliation is with the University of Lyon in France.

I'm doing my PhD there.

And my focus is explicitly on meditation, actually.

And that's what I'm interested in.

It's what brought me into academia.

I had a first stint in academia in physics

a while ago and kind of left it and went into corporate stuff for a little while and then was drawn back in by um disinterested in in meditation sorry there's a bit of background or i don't know if you can hear it but um yeah i'll i guess i'll leave it at that the the kind of genesis here

was from that angle through meditation and ending up in Carl's lab and asking questions around attention and meta-awareness through that lens of practice.

And that's where this paper emerged from.

So we'll get into that in a little bit more detail.


SPEAKER_06:
Cool.

And where did active inference come into play?

Was it from something you were learning about from that practice perspective, like you mentioned, or a theory driven perspective, or did a collaborator bring it to the table?


SPEAKER_02:
It was a collaborator.

So I sort of came into computational neuroscience looking explicitly to contribute to the field of meditation research.

And so I'd reached out to a lab in Lyon, Antoine Lutz's lab, who's one of the co-authors, and joined the lab there.

And they had a

like an ongoing relationship with Carl Fristen's lab because Jeremy Matu is one of the coauthors here, did his postdoc over at UCL.

And so they had a bit of an idea for an attention project using active inference.

And I kind of came in not really knowing very much about it, but eager to learn.

And then I was sent off to London with a pretty open

blank check, as it were, of like, see if you can figure out how to apply this to meditation and attention.

And we had some directions that we were thinking about, but then what ended up emerging was this hierarchical sort of deep parametric stuff.


SPEAKER_06:
Cool.

Interesting how it kind of came to be.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it really was right place, right time.

They were looking for somebody with a physics background with an interest in meditation and computational neuroscience, and I sent them an email, and that was pretty much the extent of the interview process, and off I went.


SPEAKER_06:
Cool.

Well, welcome, Stephen.

Dean or Stephen, if you have a question, you can...

Raise your hand or, of course, anyone in the chat.

Maybe, Dean, did you want to talk about a crosswalk or something like that?


SPEAKER_03:
I want to do that later, but I don't know if I'm asking.

It's fantastic to get the background about the meditation piece because...

When I before I picked up the paper, what I was wondering about was how precision plays a role in learning and especially when you're moving from novel contexts and trying to familiarize yourself with something.

And so for me, my curiosity was around the idea that when you have the simple model and then you move to these

more nested paradigms you're kind of moving from the unplanned because you can't plan your perception to the plan the idea of being able to think about your thinking and so that transition was what really fascinated me so now that you brought up the idea of meditation i wonder how meditation goes from the unplanned to the plan so you've opened up a pandora's box for me because now my original question is kind of now i've been taken down this tangent so i'm curious right


SPEAKER_02:
Well, I mean, I can speak to that a little bit.

The idea for me going in here was to see, I mean, just intuitively, as soon as I got familiar with active inference, there was a resonance there in terms of how the maths seems to echo a lot of

the kinds of ways that people talk about practice in general, there's this sort of balance between, you know, attention and

the the the that our perception is this this combination of prior and observation you know that idea and like how these two things are balanced and and getting into um the optimal space there is very very close to you know if you start thinking about mindfulness obviously as a way of paying attention and increasing the impact of the sensory observations but then also things like um

don't know mind, beginner's mind, this kind of fresh kind of stance that is very common in Zen, but in other areas as well.

And so already there was this kind of like, ooh, there's something here.

And so I arrived at

carl's lab and and what i started out with was just getting familiar with the attention literature uh because that's at least you know the a good way in for meditation because at least in the very beginning that's what it's all about and in some ways it's about that right to the end but um so the question was uh you know how do we uh talk about paying attention um within the

Already and I was really fortunate because I was kind of coming into the space when all the scaffolding and the maths I needed to start talking about this in a more practice related way or Metacognitive way was already there All it really needed was somebody to come in and ask a question.

That was for me phenomenologically driven which was in meditation

you are paying attention for sure, right?

You are deliberately paying attention to some object, you know, traditionally the breath, but really the aim of the game is, or an additional part of that, which is really, really important is being able to monitor where your attention is.

So in other words, being able to pay attention to attention.

And so that's where that kind of shift happened, right?

And you've mentioned like thinking about thinking it's like, well, okay.

So if we know some of the maths about, you know, what it means to pay attention,

What would it mean to pay attention to attention?

And what would it mean to be able to have control over the attentional states?

And how would this, how would we,

make that an allowable thing within within the framework um yeah so exactly the deep affective framework kind of set the set the scene for that um and casper casper tell's work sort of gave the gave the hint and that was on a different precision in the model and here we're just talking about likelihood precision and then that kind of created this this um opportunity then right that then becomes almost generalizable across and that's and we can get to it a bit later but really what i'm more excited about in this in this

whole work and paper really is what we start to hint at in the discussion at the end, pointing to the fact that we could generalize this across precisions throughout the model that could then be interpreted as different forms of mental action and what that might mean for understanding.

Yeah, I mean, it gets broad at that point.


SPEAKER_06:
awesome thank you for the summary and welcome blue at all at feline so steven with the raised hand and then any live chat or anyone else with a raised hand yeah welcome um yeah i was i'm really curious i like the what you're saying about the generalizability or the potential for generalizability in your


SPEAKER_00:
So extending beyond neurophenomenology to phenomenology in general, I suppose, is an aim.

I'm curious how you see action potentially coming in with meditations.

because you talk about sort of reflecting on mental states, like breathing is an action, I suppose, but in many cases they use meditation because you're reducing the amount of action that's happening and the amount of visual stimulus, because often the eyes are shut, you know, body's contained.

And now I see that, you know, okay, so how does this then come back into an action state?

And I know that there's a kind of in-between, like I know Vipassana,

vipassana type meditation on the body's senses or like you mentioned the breath but I'm curious how you see that kind of inactive piece starting to come in through this no thanks for the question and it's a really central one because


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, I guess to give a little bit more history to this paper, this is also building on a little bit of some of the intuitions of previous work by Antoine and Jeremy and another collaborator, Giuseppe Pagoni.

And they wrote a paper called On the Epistemic Value of Inaction, which speaks to this point.

I think...

to in the beginning off from the from the outset we can kind of separate you know mental action and overt action and in meditation you know you're putting yourself in this situation where you you know deliberately don't have that much overt action right you're sitting still and yet you're doing things you're definitely doing things with your mind even sort of

Do nothing meditation is still a kind of doing in a sense.

It gets a little bit sticky.

But for me, to answer your question, the cessation of overt action

puts you in this highly epistemic state because now the sort of self-evidencing side of the equation, you're putting yourself in a situation where that is harder to access so that, um,

you you no longer can fulfill your expectations through you know action acting in the world right so like um if you were to sit down and start getting um agitated or bored

rather than the sort of fulfilling the expectation there that you shouldn't be bored by going and doing something you have to stay stay bored and there's a certain discomfort that can arise from that and then the role of mindful sort of acceptance in that moment it becomes central but then what it allows then for is that that your model has to update right if the model can't be sort of

can't find evidence for it, well, then you got to update it.

And there you get to this notion of vipassana, right?

Which is like inside, clear, seeing inside, right?

Is that you're learning something through that that wasn't available to you the moment before.

And like apologies to everybody out there who's like maybe very into the meditation.

Like this is very sort of hand wavy way I'm talking about it, especially kind of like matching it over to the active inference, a very sort of loose way.

But that was kind of the gut intuition anyway coming into it and remains the intuition.

And I think there's this really, for me anyway, and where I'm kind of seeing my...

My career with this going just is the very beginning of an exploration of how to articulate meditations, different practices, how they might cash out in terms of precision dynamics, different forms of learning, different forms of optimization.

and what that might mean for us.

So I think that's why I wanted to start with attention because it's pretty uncontroversial, as it were, and just start building up the building blocks and be able to start making more and more interesting inferences about what it might mean to be doing other kinds of practice.


SPEAKER_06:
Awesome answer.

Thank you.

So blue or yes, go for blue.


SPEAKER_04:
Hi.

So I don't know if you had a chance to watch the discussion or like the preliminary discussion we did yesterday, but something that came up was in the idea.

So Daniel, can you flip to the circle about like attention and attention?


SPEAKER_06:
Here?


SPEAKER_04:
This one.

Yeah, that one.

So something that came up there when we were discussing this figure was like the

the discrete steps between like distracted awareness of distraction, redirection of attention and focus.

Like, you know, there's kind of like an intuitive feeling that the distracted awareness of distraction and redirection of attention back to focus is like discrete, but like there's a transition that's kind of muddy going from focused to distracted.

And something that I thought about was like, so you can become so intensely distracted

focused on something.

And like the example that I'll give you, because you'll relate, it's like going down a scientific rabbit hole, like where you're chasing reference after reference after reference.

And so you're still on task and you're still correctly paying attention to what it is you're supposed to be paying attention to.

But like, you're so focused that you're finally off task, right?

Because you just start getting interested in other things.

And so it's kind of a gradual transition from focus.

Like you're still focused, but you're, you're like focused on the wrong thing.

And so I just was wondering, where in this model do you think that kind of focus, until you're so focused you're not paying attention, where does that come into this?

Or how do you think to model something like that?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thanks for the question.

So this model that we're seeing here is, of course,

a bit of a caricature, right?

It's an intuitive sort of description of what's happening because you're right, there's degrees of distraction.

And, you know, in meditation we talk about, you actually can classify these.

You know, there's when you sit down to try and pay attention to the breath.

There are times when you've

totally forgotten that you were even meant to be meditating and you were like gone right you're thinking about something completely different and then the timer goes off and you become aware that you were completely gone but then there's other things that are much more subtle right that's like maybe you notice some sound in the room or you know some sensations in the body but still somewhere in your awareness the breath it remains present but maybe less and more in a background foreground kind of situation and so like are you distracted then or not

and to what extent, and all these things and everything in between.

So in terms of how that would cash out here, the first thing to point out to is that the precision parameter that we're talking about is a continuous parameter.

And so it doesn't have to be relating to discrete states.

And we could have been free to make more granular the attentional states.

So it's not just distracted or focused and sort of have grades of focus.

Would have been possible.

But then the other thing that isn't modeled here is...

what are you distracted by?

Here, distraction was just not paying attention to the thing.

But in reality, distraction is your attention being grabbed by some other stimulus and for some particular reason.

And that is not shown in this work.

That's something that we're hoping to start to work on in the future.

Part of the reason why we didn't go down that direction here in detail is because there's still, I think, a really central part that is difficult to tease out still at the moment, which is attentional resource.

in some ways, you could run this simulation and given the preferences on wanting to be paying attention, if you put that preference on a bunch of different observations, there's nothing stopping the agent just paying attention to all of it, right?

Maximally, and having really high precision observations across the board.

Now, that doesn't seem to be what we're able to be.

There seems to be like a

a finite um something finite about it and so when you're paying attention to one thing it's at the exclusion of something else and maybe part of practice and part of you know what you're getting in meditation is that that you know is softening a little bit your ability to sort of pay attention to more than one thing or have more allocation resources there in some way that might be learned over time but that's not um that's not shown shown here which is why you don't get that um


SPEAKER_06:
what you're talking about that kind of intuitive organic uh feeling of what it means to be what it really means to be distracted awesome i have a question and then blue so we've talked a lot about how spatial goals are set and even how some symbolic goals are set like sentence structure but how are cognitive goals set

so are they reducible to sensory preferences if so just the preference for you know some salt and sugar that's not going to really reduce your options in the city so how do we set those higher level and these increasingly like abstract and ephemeral cognitive goals


SPEAKER_02:
yeah no thank you for that daniel um this is the the question i'm working on right now actually on a follow-up paper where i'm trying to take this model and and and specifically model uh focus attention meditation and in that and in practice in general the the question of motivation and goal is really central and where where in the model are you actually putting like how are you driving

the attention behavior or meditation behavior.

One of the ways, the way that I did it here was to say that in this kind of setup that the agent is given an instruction, hey, I want you to pay attention to this stimuli and that that then translates to them wanting to see themselves in the attentional focused state.

And so the way that the dynamics here are driven is by having a preference on that attentional state.

and observations of that state.

So the kind of like metacognitive observations of seeing yourself paying attention.

Here, yeah, thank you.

So O2 there.

We put a preference on those ones, exactly.

um and uh just as a side note there you might think like uh but do those observations uh exist really are they sensory observations what kinds of observations are these um and i think that's a valid valid question and something we talked about for a while but my intuition here is that you know if i were to ask you the question um what are you paying attention to right now right

and you're gonna be able to give me an answer from having observed something um and so there's some kind of an observation there that you're able to make that you can um use to infer uh what attentional state that you're in so anyway that's where the preference is is is uh there you know i prefer to observe myself paying attention exactly so then the question is what is it that drives uh

you know, like a practice.

And I've been inspired by some of the work by Mirza and colleagues on sort of scene classification or scene perception, where there seems to be this attentional, driving of attentional policies given another kind of

preference, which is to resolve a scene, which is to clearly perceive a scene.

And that's actually the way that I'm starting to think about, at least in a practice context, in like a meditation context.

Because in reality, when you're meditating, it's not so much that you're trying to pay attention to the breath, although we talk about it like that.

It's more like you're trying to be continuously aware of the breath.

So you have some kind of a preference on perception or being able to resolve a hidden state.

And that is then what drives the kind of dynamics behind the scenes.


SPEAKER_06:
That's pretty interesting.

Thank you for the response.

Luke?


SPEAKER_04:
Sure, that kind of slides in nicely to what I was going to ask.

So as a follow-up to my question earlier and also to Daniel's question, Daniel, can you flip to the mind wandering slide?


SPEAKER_06:
Yes.


SPEAKER_04:
Thank you.

So I had a question here, and these are two different models.

The one on the left specifically is from the Mind Life Institute by a PhD who works with, you know, meditators, right?

And so, and then the one on the right, I'm not sure if that's an explicit meditation task, but I just thought there was an interesting context here.

So this paper on the right, which is the neural model of mind wandering.

So you have like this paradigm where you're on task, which is like in the meditation context, say focused on the breath or

I mean, maybe it's not focused on the breath, but I just, I think about meditation as, you know, being present in the, in the present, right.

Being in your, in your body, aware of your hands, feet, breath, et cetera.

So there's this model where you're on task, which is like focused on what you should be focused on in present.

And then mind wandering, they talk about as the pursuit of internal goals, which I thought was interesting.

But I think about that in terms of like,

thinking about your shopping list or all the things that you're not supposed to be thinking about while you're meditating, right?

Like just going off and pursuing your own internal goal oriented thoughts.

And then I have a separate category for being actually off task, which is like where you're not thinking about anything you should be thinking about, but just thinking about like random, like whatever nonsense.

And so I just wonder, like, do you,

or could you think about making those kinds of distinctions in this kind of like, and it goes from, from being focused on the right thing to focus on the wrong thing.

Like where does this off task come into play?

I'm just curious if you have any thoughts on that.


SPEAKER_02:
Um, I'm not exactly sure how they talk about off task, but what I could talk about here is the distinction between, um,

To me, the distinction here comes down to the meta-awareness piece, where on-task is pretty understandable.

Off-task, you could imagine just doing something else, but aware of that fact.

You know, like I've just decided to change and start focusing on something else, but there's sort of a metacognitive awareness of the fact that you are doing something else.

Whereas mind-wandering is this slightly, or at least the way that we're talking about it here, different situation where you're distracted or you're paying attention, by when I say distracted, I just mean paying attention to something you hadn't intended to pay attention to, but also not aware of that fact.

You haven't updated the fact that that's happening.

And that's the crucial piece here that we're trying to regulate with practice or whatever in an intentional task.

And for that distinction, I think...

active inference kind of, you know, it almost gives you that for free in a sense to kind of show you where, where that phase would be.

And that's what we were kind of showing in the results is that that period of, of updating of where your attentional state is when you sort of think it's one, but it's actually another.

So you think you're paying attention or you're somewhere, you don't really know where you, what you're doing, but you're, you're distracted is then how we would sort of express that or cash that out computationally.


SPEAKER_04:
In terms of active inference, I just wonder, is off-task or mind-wandering, I had never thought to split those two apart until I saw this paper and maybe check it out if you have time at some time.

Really, I think about this mind-wandering, is this epistemic exploration?

Is it exploitation when you're on task and you're focused on what you should be and then

We think about active inference in terms of optimizing exploration and exploitation.

Is there room in the model for that, epistemic exploration, or is it always a bad thing?


SPEAKER_02:
Is it always a bad thing?

You know, I don't have a good answer for you to be honest.

This is what we kind of want to go towards when I was saying, you know, what are you distracted by?

And what's the why behind, you know, the default loan network, basically?

Like, what is the value of that?

On the one hand,

I could imagine that, yeah, there's sort of like an epistemic wandering through state space and future possibilities and just sort of monitoring of potential negative outcomes in the future, for which there's obviously value.

And I don't think it's necessarily a bad thing.

I think when I, you know, in a practice context anyway, it's like that

that action can also lead to discomfort now and anxiety now because you're sort of simulating future bad events.

And there's actually a great paper.

Casper wrote a good paper on that.

Deep.


SPEAKER_04:
I've read it.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

The simulated future events.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, and so often meditating like frees up space in your mind.

I mean, I don't know if you've had the experience, but like where you're not thinking about some other problem, but like you'll be meditating and like, Whoa, have this like brilliant flash of brilliance or, or,

like key moments of insight, right?

Like Vipassana.

So there's just like insight, but it's maybe not insight into like some internal, like deep spiritual discovery, but it might be like insight into some external problem that you're having.

So there's that.

And so I wonder, like that might be the difference between off task and mind wandering.

Like if you're off task, it's like maybe a non-beneficial or like there's no excuse for, it's just like doing blah, blah, blah, whatever.

And then mind wandering might be like exploring your neural space

And in like a recombination phase, I think about that.

So anyway, it's just something to think about going forward.


SPEAKER_02:
Interesting.

Interesting.

No, I think the notion of insight and the kind of why practice leads to that is really exciting place to start thinking about, like, what is it about paying attention in a particular way that leads to these moments of aha, right?


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.

I'm going to read a question from Dave.

Dave wrote, a practice I've been following based in Naropa Institute's shamatha practice, but not much stress there, is to attend only intermittently, say, permit mind wandering during the out-breath, but attend during the in-breath.

There are two effects.

Obsessional thoughts are disattended without intending to disattend to any content.

The motion of the transition from disattentive to attentive occurs many times.

The usual return gently to resting the attention on the breath happens several times a minute rather than several times per hour.

Does anyone else do this or discuss it?

Maybe to warn against it?

Close parenthesis hyphen to your knowledge.


SPEAKER_02:
I like that.

I didn't know, I haven't heard of a practice like that before, but in the way that you're describing it, I could see a way that would be really, really powerful and really useful because one of the pitfalls, I can tell how this conversation is going to go more and more into meditation, but I'm up for that.

I'm game.

But one of the pitfalls, of course, in meditation,

in practice is is all these subtle ways in which resistance can come up towards our own minds and if we are paying attention and we start to see distractions as things that are stopping us from paying attention and that we don't want right then it creates this tension and is actually counter to what we want to be going for and i could see how

by deliberately letting mind-wandering happening and coming back, it sort of cuts that tendency to have resistance to thoughts, which actually just ends up perpetuating them or giving them more potency in the mind, whereas really the aim is to pay attention to the breath.

And it's funny because when we say pay attention, we think like it's this, like, focus, you know, thing.

In reality, 90% of it is relaxation and letting go and letting go of...

the resistance to distractions.

Distractions come and then we come back to the breath and that's what kind of does the work.

So I would love to, I'm going to look into that a little bit more detail, that style of practice would be interesting to see when we have a more fleshed out version of this, like how different approaches to practice might lead to different kind of learning outcomes at different rates, et cetera.


SPEAKER_06:
that topic of distraction it's like if somebody were a captain and they cited something very subtle that wouldn't be a distraction that'd be on task so then there's this aspect of the multiple levels like there's the eye circading and then there's higher higher and modeled in this paper greeting scott um at slower and slower kind of clicks of the model

and uh so it's just interesting yeah what a distraction implicitly says that it's not on task because if it was even something that was unexpected that drew the regime of attention that way if it were relevant for the task then it would still be considered not a distraction part of the relevant stimuli for the task but the exact same stimulus might be off task in a different context like five minutes later


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, yeah, completely.

I mean, if somebody is trying to talk to you and, you know, share something with you, you only paying attention to the sensations in your hands is not very helpful.

But I think what we're kind of flirting with here as well is this notion of task and goal and on task and off task.

And I think in a meditation context, that's a really...

you know um difficult difficult thing to define there's a big difference between somebody who comes into practice because they want to

you know, sleep a little bit better or not be so stressed or have a little bit, you know, more ease in a relationship to somebody who comes in and says, you know, I'm in it for really understanding myself and who I am and what I am.

And for, you know, questions, deeper questions of like awakening and, you know, expanding awareness and these kinds of things.

And those intentions and motivations are, you know, these task priors that you're setting over this whole thing and are driving the way that you practice.

And, you know, traditionally what is sort of said again and again and again is that defining that is pretty important in terms of what you're going to get out of the practice.

Because to pay attention to the breath, to just pay attention to the breath without really understanding why and where it's leading to, leading is one thing.

Whereas having it within a context of, you know, a wider program and goal is a completely other situation.

Now, modeling those in active inference is interesting, right?

I would say that the latter, sorry about the background noise here, but the latter example there of thinking a bit more broadly is having some kind of a preference on

your own happiness, right?

Like your own model fitness, ultimately, you know, if we kind of go on the affective inference kind of view of, you know, Casper et al that like affect in some ways related to how well you're doing and how well your model is predicting.

And so to have that as the intention, rather than just paying attention to the breath, but seeing how paying attention to the breath can lead to that ultimately is a different kind of goal statement than the sort of narrow attentional task itself.

Thank you, Lars.


SPEAKER_06:
Dean, and then Scott.


SPEAKER_03:
I think your topic lends itself to wanting to gallop ahead because it gets people so excited about this idea of moving from subliminal to liminal to kind of a liminal, like precision around edges, right?

So that transition gets people excited because now they say, oh, I can think of ways that I can use this.

in whatever it is that I'm trying to figure out.

Um, so at, at some point that transition, pulling that transition apart, but not breaking it is, is going to have to, we're going to have to sit down and really parse that with you.

Cause it feels to me like we're doing a, are we 28 or 29?

We're doing the point two right now because everybody wants to really get this thing going because it, because it's, uh,

it's kind of exciting stuff right like you've given us this this backpack of stuff and we're like opening it up and it's all this candy and we're but i'm still really kind of interested how that how that goes from subliminal which cannot be planned and cannot be thought out because we're talking about act sensory and activation to thinking about thinking because when i when i see the diagrams themselves

they're there, but it doesn't really help me understand that any better.

Cause I still think that's a really, really tough bridge to build.

You know what I'm saying?

I know it's there, but it's still hard for me to get my head around.


SPEAKER_02:
I think, I think I know what,

you mean, what you're referring to, which is like, where does the structure come from in the first place?

Is that what you're saying?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, well, we know where it comes from in the first place, and we know where it ends up.

It's the transition in between.

It's those, Casper got us to the third layer.

Now we've gone to a deep transitional.

We generated a context.

We're thinking about our thinking.

It's metacognition.

It just appeared.

It just emerged.

So how does the math work?

work on them.


SPEAKER_02:
This, I think, I think what you're getting at there, I mean, there's kind of two ways that you could think about a model like this is like, either you say, well, the structure is in place.

And what's changing through learning is the

the precision on observations, essentially, like you become aware of it, it becomes something that can factor into your perceptual belief updating.

That's one way around, or you can say that there's something about human development and maybe the evolutionary process that sort of leads to this sort of structure growth and learning.

And then the question is, well, how does that

The first question is a little bit easier to answer than the second question because obviously structured learning with an active inference is still an ongoing area of investigation and research and how exactly that comes about.

questions of neuroplasticity and it's quite difficult to grapple with.

And then how, why do particular practices and different paths in life lead to certain things and others.

But then to take the other stance or the other way to talk about this, which is, I think what you were saying, correct me if I'm wrong, but like, it's assumed that the structure is here that we have some kind of a deep hierarchical

parametric structure that is giving rise to metacognition.

How do we go from being not aware at all of the contents of our mind to being aware of the contents of our mind, right?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, well, it's kind of a contradiction, right?

Because the way it's set up is it's a bridge to everywhere, not a bridge to somewhere.

And then somehow in that bridge to everywhere metaphor, we select out a particular and we give it our focus or our attention.

And so I'm not saying that the math doesn't work.

I think the anchor piece is that at the basic level, nobody's going to argue that we have a Markov blanket and we're going to statistically move closer to what we think is going to happen next.

We're going to update.

It's the last piece, which is we're now thinking about our thinking that just seems to pop out

and make itself available, you know, because we've now built up a set of priors.

But I'd like to see how the math explains that.

Because it's still a distributed set until it collapses to what we focus or attend on.

And so it seems like a contradiction.

Maybe that's what it is.

Maybe that's what the math is trying to explain to us.

still not sure if i've completely uh grasped the the point of interest here what what was your how that how the transition works again i'm sure you'll be able to explain it but what i'm seeing is a transition to first starting out being very open and then the mind is able to

buckle down, for lack of a better expression, and get its attention on something.

It starts out open, and then it moves to something closer.

What I'd like to see is how the math explains that.

Does that make sense?

I think so.

I think so.


SPEAKER_06:
Dean, maybe one way to saying it would be just looking at figure five, like the lower levels are certainly outside of our control and the higher levels are moving towards phenomenology, whereas the lower level in traditional neuroscience would be seen more as like sensory processing.

And yeah, it's indeed similar kinds of models.

So how do we kind of bridge not just the science humanities gap, but like the parameter experience gap?

And then what is that?

sort of marsh between them and is it really the case that just by nesting this model that we know and love we ended up getting the or a structure of cognition is that the or a structure does that exist as part of a broader family of related models is it just about finding patterns of nodes that explain variance in multiple components of phenomenology and physiology


SPEAKER_03:
That's the question.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, for me, it all comes down to precision within the model.

Then that's kind of how I've been thinking about this is that at the sensory level, that first level, there are multiple places that you can start to identify

just patterns you know statistical patterns and then start to layer on top of that a confidence or precision over that which you know we have evidence for you know how that's mediated in the brain for various various places but the precision then itself itself becomes this thing that you can layer on top of your entire sensory experience and gives you this kind of um internal

flexibility as to how you're interacting with the world.

And then the modeling of how those precisions are being driven

without your awareness is then what those states, that B matrix at the second level would be encoding as you're starting to learn, ah, okay, so this, you know, my attention gets grabbed by this or that, or like these are the kinds of, and here we're talking explicitly about attention, but there's other precisions around that you can start to understand how they are evolving

and then also learning where your where your reach of control is like how much of how much of this can i control and and influence and what does that mean and what are the impacts of that um it's kind of what i find exciting about exciting about this because you can kind of see how different forms of precision control and awareness would lead to different kinds of model optimization and you can

calculate the free energy you know based on on how different precision profiles are defined and evolving and kind of over time that's something that you would hope to be able to learn and then the question is how do you actually learn that well

by paying attention, by paying attention to how it's changing.

And that's not always easy.

And sometimes things in life make us pay attention to it.

You start to notice like I'm the kind of person who gets, yeah, thank you, exactly this figure here that gets impacted in these ways.

But I think there's a really important thing to say around the role of a teacher in this as well, somebody who can point these things out.

and in doing so direct your attention in a way that you wouldn't have thought to previously into noticing like hey there's this pattern in my mind that i hadn't thought of as a pattern i just thought of this well i hadn't even thought of it it's just happening and then as soon as i start to see it as a pattern is something i can start to model and then you get this kind of emergence of a of a higher level structuring or understanding or grasping or modeling expectation over these patterns that were previously unconscious


SPEAKER_06:
thanks I'm gonna just read a comment with uh no response needed from the live chat and then go to Scott so Joshua Benjamin wrote all psychic ability seems to be subconsciously driven oneness of the active and subconscious mind would be magical to say the least people that already have their active and subconscious mind working as one also seem to have identical palmistry between their left and right palms interesting observation Scott


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thank you.

Sorry I was delayed in coming in, but I'm always thrilled.

As soon as I drop into the conversation, it's like being with family.

So this is so wonderful.

What a great conversation.

I wonder if you could comment a little bit on the attention versus intention.

It feels like part of what we're talking about, and let me comment on that a little bit, and it's following up on Dean's exploration there.

I was thinking, I always talk to people about the aha moment.

If you know the punchline to a joke and someone tells you a joke, it's just not funny because you know the punchline.

And so the aha moment is the same as that moment of eureka when you get out of the bathtub and run around yelling eureka.

You understand something.

It's a paradigm shift.

Like Thomas Kuhn in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions talks about that you shift from not knowing something to all of a sudden knowing it.

So I'm an addict for those moments.

I love ignorance as a result.

So I wonder if you could talk a little bit about going from attention to intention.

I am coming to the belief from working with all you folks and others in similar explorations that the mind actually doesn't exist at all in the brain.

The mind is always in society and in language, always.

The brain gets tuned into a local mind by exposure, by perception,

And then the attention turns into intention.

You adopt, like a bower bird, you adopt nascent models from the externality.

There's no on-board feral consciousness in my assertion here.

So you develop it and cultivate it based on your exposure to the environment.

As you build it up, the attentions, your teachers out there in the world, whether they're formal teachers or informal teachers,

can help you convert attention to intention because the models get developed based on their explanatory power of your environment, right?

If they get cast aside, if they're not as helpful in closing free energy gaps, for instance.

So I just wanted to throw those things out there.

And following up with Dean, to me, the paradox of the frizzle between consciousness and unconsciousness is not something that we can resolve.

It's something that we can observe and maybe manage in some ways with these models.

But the paradox is one thing I always told my kids is the only time you see reality is when you're seeing paradox.

And anytime you're seeing the absence of paradox, you are seeing a model.

And when people say they want to resolve paradox, it means they want their model to win.

Here, it feels like, as Dan was alluding to, that there are multiple models that are in play simultaneously.

And the multiple models maybe can give us a sense of the shift from attention to intention.

Anyway, your comments are welcome.

Thanks, Scott.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you for that.

Lots of interesting points there.

I'll just pick out one of the things you said there around insights and these aha moments from, and this isn't present here again, and it's working kind of falling into a Dean's trap here a little bit of running forward with it, but

If you imagine here that what's being afforded by paying attention in new ways to dynamics and precisions within our generative model and how all these things are evolving, we're gaining in model structure and complexity, ultimately.

And one of the...

bits of work that I find really interesting from Carl and other colleagues is around, you know, insights and they've been talking about it in the context of psychedelics specifically as these moments of model reduction, Bayesian model reduction, whereby you lose a bit of model structure and there's this

liberating aspect of that.

And there's this sort of knowing aspect of that too.

And it's not that you've sort of learned something new, you've kind of unlearned something.

And in that, um, you, you gain in model fitness as well.

You know, there's this kind of, um,

improvement of the state of affairs by doing that.

And so you could imagine a scenario whereby in playing this game of paying attention to how things go and how things are in the mind specifically, your model structure is kind of gaining complexity, but you're also identifying places that can be reduced and you get this sort of

cyclical growing of complexity and reduction, which matches on really, really nicely.

And I have to be really careful sometimes to not try and like recapitulate things that I like from sort of practice theory into science and really be, you know,

grounded in in in the act of inference but nevertheless there's you know my heart kind of wants to say that kind of nicely matches to the cycles of practice to these cycles of of insights and growth that does come in this sort of non non-linear and cyclical way thanks lars blue so this doesn't really like a question but it's more of a comment so scott was kind of talking about


SPEAKER_04:
Converting attention or intention to attention.

But I think that that's also something that's cyclical.

So you can convert attention to intention and intention to attention.

You intend to pay attention.

Attention gives you an intention.

I'm sorry.

That's like way tongue twister, but, but like, where does imagination come into play there?

Right?

Like there's attention intention, but what, where's the exploration?

the creativity and does active inference allow for maybe this component on attention, intention and imagination?


SPEAKER_02:
Cool question.

I think of imagination a lot in terms of generative practices.

So like state generation practices, like loving kindness, gratitude, forgiveness, these kinds of things.

And for me, the way that I think about that is you are using your imagination to generate

the goal observation, the goal state, right?

Which then allows you then to set a prior over that to aim for.

So if you evoke in your mind, the,

a, you know, may you be happy.

So I'm imagining a situation where you are happy.

And now that is a possible future state that I can put a prior over.

And once I've done that, then the machinery of active inference starts, you know, coming into play to achieve that kind of goal.

And

That's a very, very hand-wavy and very loose.

And again, I can sense that people out there might be cringing to this kind of way of talking about these models.

But in answer to the question, that's kind of how I think about at least that form of imagination.


SPEAKER_06:
That's some point two stuff, thinking about how our cultural environment scaffolds our preferences and our telios, our end directedness.

which is something that came up in navigation.

Now it's coming up in cognitive navigation and setting of these higher order parameters, Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
I just wonder, why is it cringy from the math perspective?

Because I'm a humanities guy, and the math always freaks me out.

So I want to understand, though, what is it about the – you're a math person, steeped in the math.

What is it about what you just said that makes you uncomfortable with the math?

And how might the math be – why is it stretching the math, or how might the math be extended?

to accommodate that cringiness problem?

Yeah, no, thanks, Scott.

That's a good question.


SPEAKER_02:
The reason I say that is because these models can pretty much model anything, right?

You can adapt them to make almost any point that you want.

And so if I start saying, oh, this is how it is, and this is what imagination is and does, well, then I can sort of ad hoc

play with the model until it makes that point.

And what I've really tried to do here in this paper is be very careful with that and to allow the dynamics to emerge intrinsically from moves in the mathematics that are like

allowed and don't make many assumptions.

Because really all we're doing here is having a higher level that is parameterizing precisions on the lower level.

And then we're just running it and seeing what kind of dynamics emerge.

And interestingly, the dynamics that emerge are aligned with expectations.

But if I go too far the other way, which is really easy to do with this, right?

Because you have, especially in a practice meditation context, there's really detailed phenomenological models of

all kinds of mental dynamics.

And it'd be very easy to say, you know, just gerrymander active inference to describe all of that.

And so that's why I'm trying to just be a little bit careful on how I talk about it.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, just to follow up, one of the things, so this may be rationalization, but so I'm a lawyer, so I was a rhetorician.

And so when we have incommensurables in the law, we use rhetoric to glue them together.

And it's not crazy glue.

Crazy glue doesn't fill gaps.

Its rhetoric is epoxy, right?

It glues stuff together and fills the gaps, right?

Crazy glue just sticks stuff together.

And so the reason I'm talking about that is, again, I asserted before that the mind actually exists in language.

That's very weird and loose language I'm using there.

The mind exists in language.

It exists in material culture.

We're born feral.

and our brain gets tuned to a local mind.

Let's go with that for a second as a posit.

So you have nothing on board when you're born.

I guess another way of asking the question, can the math construct consciousness from a feral mind with no social exposure?

That's my question.

And I'm beginning to believe that nothing is... Yes, there's imagination, of course.

There's a lot of lateral thinking.

But all the things are borrowings from the externality, is my assertion.

Now, that's not the imagination.

You can mix and match them different ways.

But if you're isolated and have no question is, I guess, will the math generate a consciousness without any external input?

And I think the answer is no.

And so therefore, it feels to me like the brain is a mind instant instance.

And the mind actually doesn't, it's paradigmatically weird and different.

I don't, maybe there are people who say this.

I don't know.

I just don't know enough about the mind studies.

But it feels like we can allow ourselves to not feel cringy about the extension of the math.

Now, again, I'm not the math guy.

I'm the cringy, I'm on the cringy side of this.

But by, if we recognize that the source of the mind stuff is external,

Maybe that's okay, and it's processed in the brain.

Anyway, I don't know if that's something he needs responding to, but to me, this is very interesting because this is that metaphysics jump, and is it metaphysical or not?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, I don't have much resistance to what you're saying there.

I don't think these things happen in a vacuum, and I think, you know...

just intuitively, you know, the that kind of a cognitive structure would not emerge without some kind of, you know, societal or back and forth multiple nodes in the network, you know, working working together on this and

Anecdotally, a line that always sticks with me and from the Buddha of all people is, there's two things that are required for awakening.

There's wise attention and the voice of another.

And it kind of speaks to that need for interaction.

Now, the reason what I really meant when I was saying cringy is that I think there's actually a huge advantage in just going slowly and systematically through this because what it allows us to do is be very, very precise in what we mean with our words.

Because I can talk about attention, and that might mean several things to different people, but it almost doesn't matter what the definition is of it.

I can just point here and say, well, whatever, this is what I mean by this word.

And I can keep doing that, building up the complexity of it, and I can start to have very detailed descriptions and articulations of mental dynamics that don't rely on interpretation of the words because they are referring to something quite specific.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.

And it is really important to have that, perhaps Carl Friston would say a deflationary view.

So the deflationary view of this figure 12, the generalized deep generative model of mental action, it's like,

I mean, big if true, the deflationary view would be that just like a linear model, like a linear regression, Bayesian modeling can be used on any kind of data.

So just because there's a word that you may or may not have familiarity in front of it, like frequentist statistics, Bayesian statistics, it doesn't get around the fundamental problems of data modeling.

And it actually has a lot of similarities with hierarchical Gaussian models of control.

which are common, at least related to this idea of nesting slower levels of policy inference with some, again, tricks that are really interesting, like the free energy calculation, all those other things that we talk about other times.

But that kind of model never took on a philosophical or metaphysical baggage, even when it did appear to correlate or even have predictive power, for example, predicting what somebody would buy.

And it just, it's a choice that we make.

What is our cultural priors?

What are our personal preferences over connecting that metaphysical jump that Scott mentioned?

Maybe some people, they think it's a six inch jump and they can jump 20 feet and other people, they have a belief that it's a bigger jump.

So that's why it's such an interesting area to talk about because there is some hyperinflation going on.

And then there's some extreme deflation and there's everything in between as well.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

And if I could just... Yeah, yeah.


SPEAKER_06:
Lars and then Scott.


SPEAKER_02:
The... I... Thank you.

Yeah.

For articulating that so well.

Because... And I'm also guilty of this in my own mind when I'm thinking about this privately of just sort of running this forward and losing track of...

of what these ontological commitments in this whole discussion.

And I think Maxwell, one of the co-authors, he sometimes refers to hard Fristonians and soft Fristonians.

And that speaks to this deflationary and inflationary point.

But for me in this work, what I'm most excited about isn't so much an ontological

proof or um conclusion of hey this is what it is and this is what the mind is doing this or or anything that's strong what i'm more excited about what i think is more uh relevant to our times is that even if this is a a facsimile or a or a kind of

loose description or a you know what am I trying to say approximated framework of something that's going on if it allows us to articulate intelligently like how these mental dynamics are going on it

really helps, you know, cause I teach meditation as well.

And one of the big obstacles that you come up against is like, yeah, but why should I do this?

Like, how does it work?

And what, what, what, what's the point?

And if you have something like this that, um, allows you to articulate, um, why and how and the dynamics and what's going on, then that breaks down that barrier and allows for in a conversation that's at least grounded in something closer to, um,

you know, biologically inspired computational neuroscience rather than phenomenological report.

Not that there's space for that, but for a lot of people, this is what would get them through the door.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks, Lars.

Scott, and then anyone else with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_01:
So I just wanted to go back.

This is fascinating.

And I wanted to go back to just that rule, the idea of rules of general application, like

are elements of this that are interesting reducible to formulas, is where I'm going with this query now.

And it made me think about, you have this society, you have different societies with different standards, so different music scales, different recipes of food, and things that people are familiar with, right?

They're raised in that context.

So Chinese food and music are familiar to a Chinese person.

If you're born in a different culture, those are unfamiliar to you.

So I wanted to talk a little bit about rules of general application because in law – so I come from law.

In law, we've got technical specs now, and here we've got Friston analysis and trying to find general rules of general application.

That's fine.

That's good stuff.

And one of the things that's interesting about rules of general application is how general they are.

So in law, you have this thing called equity, which corrects the rules of general application.

I just want to read you this Aristotle quote that guides me a lot here.

Aristotle said the source of the difficulty is that equity, though just, is not legal justice, but a rectification of legal justice.

The reason for this is that law is always a general statement, yet there are cases which it is not possible to cover in a general statement.

Hence, while the equitable is just and is superior to one sort of justice, it is not superior to absolute justice, but only to the error due to its absolute statement.

This is the essential nature of the equitable.

It is a rectification of law where law is defective because of its generality.

The reason I'm raising that here is, you know, we can find general rules.

They don't have to work in every edge case, right?

And if we find edge cases that undermine the general rule, it doesn't mean the general rule is no good.

Right.

It just means we need some tweaking at the edge cases or something.

Right.

And one of the things that's funny in equity, the idea is you have to bring in someone, a judge or someone who can come in and say, what did they mean when they were coming up with the original law?

Not what does the original words say, but what do they mean to do the substance of it?

Right.

And similarly here, what I guess I'm arguing for is.

is the social aspects of the mind probably don't need to be divorced from the model entirely, the hand-waving aspects of the mind, the metaphysical aspects of the mind, because they are, I think, are always the foundation of the possibility of a mind.

Right.

We come into social.

You come into life feral and then you are and then you learn that there's a society and other people and you have self and other you learn that.

as a child.

Now, maybe you would learn it out in the wild, maybe not.

I guess what I'm saying, though, is the model, it feels like, doesn't ultimately have to be mathematically 100% rigorous, because the borrowings in the model that are made from society intrinsically have caused leakage into that model being affected by the externality.

So I guess both the perception and the

other model contents feel like they're unavoidable?

Anyway, just a few ruminations there, and do with what you should with the cud that I just served up.


SPEAKER_02:
I mean, I think this, what you're speaking to here is a pretty big topic in the active inference community in general.

And this idea that, you know, the math is not the territory.

And depending on who's speaking, we kind of get lost in that a lot of the times.

Like, are we agents with generative models or are agents generative models?

And to what extent is this a description?

And to what extent is it?

You know, that's...


SPEAKER_01:
I'd rather not wait in there, to be honest.

No, I get it.

And I like your statement, the math is not the territory.

It's nice because really that's a nice way of thinking the math is the tool to understand the journey or whatever.

But that's a nice, I like that statement you just made about the math is not the territory because it often feels like, and that may be something that helps with the invitation.

You know, the space can be threatening to non-math people, right?

Because it does need a rigor, I get it.

But there are things that are being said by the math that need to be conveyed to non-math people.

You know, there are important things.

When I first dropped into the space, I said, oh my God, all the contracts I ever made are synthetic Markov blankets.

They are.

I'm creating a there there that wasn't there.

It's not an observation of a biological system that's natural.

It's an artificial creation of a thing, a place where these rules apply for internal and external operation.

It's an artifice.

And we do that a lot in the world.

So that was my first kind of impression.

But I'm never going to understand the math enough to have the rigor to be able to

delve into that and understand the implications of active inference math for the law, it just won't be available to me.

So if and to the extent that without going to metaphysics, we're able to create narratives that are honest to the math,

realistic and also available to the non-math people, that's going to be something that will lead to a lot more, both understanding and misunderstanding, I get it, but a lot more awareness and adoption of the models, I think, which will lead to more, I think, better systems, better policy, because there's a lot to be learned from this.

And it's the same thing as an engineer knowing how to make a nuclear power plant work and then other people down the line knowing how to sell power, but they don't know how to make a nuclear power plant work.

You need all steps of the supply chain of this to be delivered as a social good, I guess is what I'm saying.

So that's a big, I'm putting it all on your shoulders, you guys.


SPEAKER_02:
But I mean, that's the hope here.

I mean, that's I think what's at stake a lot of the time is that, you know, I think about this stuff in terms of a practice and a practice content sharing and communicating on how how best to, you know, improve our mental well-being, given given what the insights that this might afford and given the structure in terms of communication that it might allow for.

And it's already impacted the way that I teach.

It's already impacted the way that I practice personally.

But then there's a whole field of computational psychiatry as well, which is very closely related to this.

I mean, the kinds of well-being I'm talking about or the kinds of dysfunctions that the computational psychiatry people are talking about.

So there's a lot of hope to that.

And it doesn't take somebody to understand how to do a gradient descent on free energy to be able to benefit from that.


SPEAKER_06:
Yep.

definitely typo.

But this is a slide we had from the dot zero.

Just like, there's so many directions that this area verges towards.

And just how we even make sense of this field, where is active inference going to connect the pieces?

Just I don't know any of these elements on the list that was interesting to you and give a thought on or anyone else could just raise their hand.


SPEAKER_02:
The hyperscanning piece is really fascinating because there's obviously a deep tradition of these kinds of things being learned in community and in interaction with other people.

And that is not obvious how that happens.

And I'm looking forward to that whole space developing a little bit and being able to model what it'd be like to learn

You know, what's the difference between learning through an app and learning from a teacher?


SPEAKER_06:
Cool.

Very interesting.

So I see Scott's hand, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_01:
So the other place is just in the crass world of markets.

You know, you have information differentials are differentials.

And the markets are driven by information differentials.

I've asserted for a number of years that Cardo's equation in thermodynamics, the hot and cold differential is necessary for a heat engine to function.

That is equivalent to the information differentials in markets.

You don't have market action if everyone has the same information.

And that's that idea that markets generate information, price information, availability, things like that.

So the crass part of this, and that tends to make things get swept away in the world of craziness when you get things into markets because anything goes and it's just a big mess.

Having said that, the impact of this kind of analysis will be very appealing in markets because it does have a scale-independent aspect to it.

And so it allows for insights at different levels of different markets and meta markets and related supply chains that if everyone is doing this analysis, then it leads to a certain kind of interoperability because you have a risk and risk evaluation interoperability, right?

And so the value in markets, if everyone started doing active inference style of risk analysis, you'd be able to make observations about at different scales, because you'd have data coming out of every scale that was generated by models that were similar.

Right.

So that kind of aspiration, it's what I'm looking at with the I'm working with banks now, et cetera.

And I'm not talking to them about active inference or Carl Friston.

But I'm starting to set that up as best I can in the early stages of it because it feels just like a natural thing.

We are biological systems.

Our markets and our institutions are ultimately doing reproductive and nutritional opportunities at large scales.

you know and so there's a lot of biology that's still bound up in what we do as organisms in our scaled structures and so it's exciting to watch because this thing is going to come out of left field and it's like quantum computing everyone thought that was a thing in the lab for a lot of years and now people are like oh geez here we go that's going to be a big deal in other things like business and governments and da da da

And I mean, you just imagine legislative activity informed by a active inference style of model where you really do probe and we get feedback.

Right.

What if we had feedback from legislation every year saying this is good or not good?

More of this, less of that.

Right.

I mean, that's the kind of thing there's been aspirations that for years.

putting lobbying aside, that would lead to a great efficiency in things like legislative activity and enforcement activity, things like that.

So I'm very excited that these things are going to get

taken in the directions where they weren't intended.

And I think it behooves the people who really understand it early on to set up some nice, chunky, solid notions and paradigms.

So when they're adopted, they don't drift too far from where they should be, right?

Because the things get picked up and taken in all sorts of wacky directions out in the world.

So it's kind of that's what I'm talking about simplifying in a way that still does justice to the to the what's going on there.

And as a person who's teaching meditation, that's exactly the same kind of mindset you need going into these crazy markets.

Right.

It's something of common intention because the markets have different agendas and intention.

If we want the active inference intention to be carried forward, we need to make sure that we have robust intentionality.

presentation of the model so when it's picked up that model can withstand the abuses that happen out there in the rhetorical markets anyway again more just load on your shoulders any thoughts there blue or dean or dave

I didn't mean to bring things to a screaming halt.

Sorry, I can go in a different direction.


SPEAKER_06:
No, all good.

What's a figure or a word that you might like to go to, Lars, or when you're communicating this to different audiences, like more from the maybe non-active inference side, what is your entry point?

Is it one of the keywords here or one of the figures here?

How do you enter?

Do you show the action perception loop?

Do you just go straight to the Bayesian graphical model?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, good question.

I think this crowd is a particular one, but I think when I talk about this paper, I kind of do it in two steps, starting with figure, well, when we look at precision, so early on in just talking about attention.

So yeah, exactly here.

um and just starting here because it's quite straightforward as a model of of perception and attention ultimately and you can kind of see here intuitively what this precision is about and and we can

yeah let's do this let's kind of build it up and we'll go straight to go up to figure 12 which is where i'm really excited about going in the future which is this kind of generalization of this this across and what it might mean and the game that we have to play here a little bit is a little bit dicey in that in that um we're trying to um make intuitive phenomenological interpretations of

maths right and that's not not easy and requires a lot of discussion back and forth but that's why we started here with attention because it's the one place where it's less controversial and more widely sort of defined and so we're starting with attention here is just the precision on you know the likelihood matrix and you can kind of see just intuitively i mean maybe this

depending on who you are listening to this, it's like that's already kind of obvious.

Yeah, you know, higher precision on the likelihood matrix means, you know, is related to attention.

But just to kind of motivate that a little bit more subjectively, you can tell that at the center of your vision, you know, as opposed to the periphery, you're a bit more confident about what you're seeing.

Like if you see a glass on the table at the periphery of your vision,

you might not be sure if it's a glass or a mug, right?

But you can still see it.

And then when you look over to it, then you can be more confident in the causes of your sensory observations, right?

Whereas this case is,


SPEAKER_06:
Just lost Lars for a second, but just to sort of, while he's reconnecting, that's one sort of experiential, you're in a generative model type thought experiment or really commands for covert action for attention, which is to realize that the color detection outside of the center of vision, as well as the resolution is very low and that there's a significant blind spot.

So there's three features of your visual field.

for healthy vision that make it so that the visual field is not just seen homogeneously like a sort of silicone light detector device in a camera.

So just a starting point for saying, okay, something else is happening such that attention isn't being paid.

It's being normalized in some way to not just increase the resolution outside of the high resolution detection zone,

and colorize it in many cases but also to normalize the absence and paste over the blind spot so then that can be extended to other sensory observations so


SPEAKER_01:
What do you mean by normalize the absence and paint over the blind spot, that part?


SPEAKER_06:
Like, it feels normal to what is being perceived under just... Again, this is a whole interesting question about what is perceived as normal, at what scale.

Oh, it's weird, there's a door here.

How weird?

What about the door?

So...

I don't want to be normative with the way that I'm talking about the mental states, but there's different ways that anomaly can be detected.

And there's certain sensory illusions that are really illusions because the alternate perception, which turns out to be factually different than the actual sensory O.

that is different but that difference structurally or inaccuracy or resolution is just seen as part of not salience but not salient part of the organism's experience phenomenologically not to say unimportant at a nested level of analysis

Hey, Lars, welcome back.

We were just talking about generative model, vision.

So continue on to perfect.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks.

Thank you.

No, hopefully it doesn't drop out again.

So that's kind of motivating me.

phenomenological translation, let's say.

And then the next step is to then say, well, OK, we are somehow in control of that precision.

And here I leaned on existing work by Jakub Lemnowski and Friston and others, whereby that notion of control and mental action

then you can talk about that as a deployment of precision.

It's some kind of a precision modulation is the word I'm looking for.

And so then the natural, the kind of next step there is to, you know,

make that possible within the active inference framework in the same way the other action is also possible.

And that's where the second level comes from in figure four, I think it is.

Because then this is what then allows that to be the case.

And really all that we've done here is to say, okay, attention is this kind of thing.

This is this kind of precision.

And we can motivate that in all kinds of different ways, both computationally and intuitively.

And we know we can control it.

So what would it mean to be able to control it?

Well, the same thing that it means to control anything within this framework.

And then here you go.

This is what kind of makes that.

makes that possible.

And again, luckily, I'm really standing on the shoulders of giants here and in that, you know, a lot of this stuff was already worked out.

You know, Casper, Etal, and Deep Affective Inference already had this in place.

They just didn't have a policy set over this higher level yet.

And so this is cool.

But like I said in the beginning, the real aim of the game or what really allows for attentional freedom in the kind of practice context is not so much

the attention itself, right?

But it's your awareness of where the attention is.

So then the question for me was, well, how do we pay attention to attention?

But once we have this structure, well, then that becomes kind of

straightforward and not straightforward i mean you have to make a little bit of a leap but then you say well we pay attention to it in the same way that we pay attention to sensory states and that's where you get the third level um and where these states now are the degree to which you are aware of your attention um and you know if i just ask you

You know, how aware are you of where your attention is right now?

When I asked you the question, probably not so aware.

Just afterwards, probably a little bit more aware.

And so there was a transition there that happened in that higher level state, which is then modulating the precision on the lower levels.

Now, this kind of a move, computationally, mathematically, is...

internally coherent and allowed, but it's also not unique.

There's no reason why you can't do the same treatment to other precisions in the model.

The other ones that we're most familiar with from the literature are the precision on G, model precision, and the precision on B, which is usually related to sort of volatility beliefs.

sort of unexpected uncertainty, I think, if I'm saying that right.

And just as a side note, we made the decision to kind of change the notation here just because we're talking about so many different precisions.

In the literature up until here, precision on A was zeta, I think, and precision on B was omega.

Whereas here now we've just called all precisions gamma and with a subscript based on which parameter they're referring to.

Gamma previously was really just referring to the precision on G. So in case that's causing any confusion.

So the idea then, what I think is exciting is to then think about, all right, well, if we do the same treatment, right?

What does it mean to have this higher level state now, S1, S2, S superscript two, which parameterizes other precisions within the model?

Because that now goes from an attentional state to something quite different.

So we can talk about these individually and from a practice perspective, this is what, this is what I'm most enthusiastic about because there's a lot more to meditation practice, for instance, and also just sort of cognitive mental act or catalog of mental action than paying attention.

You know, there's lots of other things that we're doing.

So for example,

The notion of acceptance or equanimity would be the technical term.

Where does that live?

What does it mean to be in a state of equanimity?

And here we could define that as a factor of S2 state, which is modulating the precision over our preferences.

Gamma C, right?

To kind of give an idea here of how we could start talking about this.

So a state of acceptance would be, or a state of sensitivity would be the opposite, is to what degree are we allowing our preferences to impact our actions effectively?

And so in the example that you said in the beginning there, Dean, of sitting still, how important is that?

Yeah, that came from you.

Then a big part of that is acceptance, is being able to be OK with the discomfort that's arising from whatever is going on.

And that's also something that we're explicitly teaching.

That is an instruction.

that is important and a big part of what makes it all work.

And when I say it all work, it's leading to happiness, right?

Like it's leading to wellbeing.

And so you can start to, you can start to do that game with these different, different preferences, you know, if you, sorry, these different precisions and see what it would mean to affect a policy over them.

And then you have to do this, like I said, kind of,

um delicate work of translating that into you know a phenomenological kind of uh interpretation but i don't think that's impossible and i think a lot of it lends itself quite well intuitively to be able to do that because of this sort of bayesian um space that we're in of beliefs and beliefs of beliefs and different kind of forms and the way that we talk about precisions and sorry preferences and habits and the point there for me is that

you can start to figure out what is causing or what a kind of instruction you would need to alleviate different kind of dysfunction or unpleasantness.

So for example, Ryan Smith put out and colleagues put out a great paper recently on gut inference.

And the point there is they're trying to develop a model for

you know, the ways in which inferences from the gut could go wrong and try to see if that could be related to overeating.

And one of the things that has come out there is that one of the ways in which people's

well-being is effective comes from this tendency for priors to get frozen or not be updated very well.

And in that context, it means that people are effectively

I mean, the reason for that is that you're selecting attention away from uncomfortable sensations of hunger, right?

So if you are continuously selecting away because you have a preference against hunger sensations, then over time, the priors around hunger and your behavior around hunger gets frozen because you're not updating those with any new observations.

so what's the solution there right like how can we actually help somebody in that situation well this this gives us a bit of a hint is that maybe what needs to happen there is a training in mindful acceptance of sensations of hunger because that's where in this sort of precision dynamic and cocktail of interactions things are going wrong and if we can kind of translate

practice instructions or internal instructions into, into this, this framework, then it gives, it gives avenues for alleviating different forms of different ways in which things can go wrong here.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks.

Just one comment.

Thanks Scott.

And then could you mute Lars?

There's a different speaker set up for you.

Yeah.

You said about instructions that might alleviate some non-preferable state and that really recalls our discussions on instructionism and interactionism and how active inference lets us think about one extreme with the instructions like the cues and then on the other extreme who knows how many ways it goes with what it looks like to interact and co-develop based upon

a total model, or even parts of a total model, rather than to, oh, high level X in blood, that means you need to take the X blocker, or if it's too low, you take the supplement.

That could be approached here.

Oh, parameter's too high?

Lower it.

It's that sort of biomarker-driven approach that maybe we can move beyond when we have a rich generative model, and then we can go into underlying factors

informed by information rather than just trying to follow up on mathematical parameters and, um, constrain people that way.

So Scott, um, if you want to say anything or Scott, okay, Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
So, um, that last part of the equanimity brought me back to equity, the equity thing.

Again, I was reading from this book, the Aristotle thing before.

And it's, it's interesting because in a way it's a correction to too much

sensitivity, I guess, or the correction of the general rules in Aristotle's words.

And it got me thinking, you know, and this is something we may have talked about.

I'm just trying to remember the phrasing.

It feels like what we're talking about there is that the models themselves are engaging in a peer-to-peer discussion with each other.

to refine each other, right?

So the models, it's never one model.

It's right.

I always tell people, if I'm trying to explain active inference, I say, if you're in the woods and you don't have a flashlight and it's dark, you're not going to run full speed ahead.

You're going to stick your hand out.

That's the active part and feel if there's a tree.

And if there's a tree, you're not going to run forward straight into the tree.

So now you change your model, there's a tree in front of you.

Maybe that's a bad way to explain it, but that's how I explain it.

But the thing is, it's not just a tree.

There's also a model of the rain, and there's a wolf chasing you, and you're hungry.

There's 17 things going on.

So what it feels like is, in intention, we bring our models to bear in a peer-to-peer discussion internally,

And do we already use active inference to model the internal model discussion among models?

Has that already been something we've talked about in an earlier session?

I don't remember, but we know we have a zillion different things going on that are agenda in our heads that motivate behavior, right?

And so when we're trying to correct behavior or address behavior or become aware of behavior, we bring the other models to bear to let us do that.

And again, they're all borrowed ultimately from the externality.

But once they're on board, can active inference or does active inference already, has it been brought to bear to that internal discussion among the models that then informs the decision-making?

Thanks.


SPEAKER_06:
I believe the closest that we've seen, one example is this nesting, which we'll get back to when we return, but it was Mark Miller at all with their discussion of happiness with the drives for like low thirst, you know, low overwhelmingness for one stimuli versus another.

There's like a sort of domain specific optimization.

And then there's this cross domain

optimization that has to do with this like eudaimonia well-being component whereas the sort of hedonic drive is is the domain specific that's the department of thirst department of hunger and then those are being optimized in potentially recursed levels as well so that's one way it's gone was that mapping onto classical philosophical concepts of well-being success and then um another direction has been

Also linking it up a little bit more graphically, I think, in this type of work.

But nice insights, Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one on that, just a response to that.

When the imp of the perverse, which is that Edgar Allan Poe notion that people act against their own self-interest to show they have power, it's called the imp of the perverse.

And the idea is that people don't take vaccines because they want to show that they have efficacy or whatever.

So the it's interesting what you just said explains that nicely, because the state that they're seeking is a state of perceived efficacy.

And it's overwhelming perhaps some other things like the health thing or whatever.

So that's kind of an interesting notion we just raised.


SPEAKER_06:
All I'd say is just that we always got to keep that realism instrumentalism.

So you said there's 17 things going on.

Well, not if you didn't model them.

That's a claim about how it quote is out there.

And that's a second order question.

So if it's an allusion to some causal process inside of some people's head, that's different than saying I fit a model that has this hidden variable and that is...

this intersection of mathematics and qualitative experience that is so tantalizing and so important to how we think about it and frame it.

So it's nice insights though.

Lou?


SPEAKER_04:
So what Scott just said made me think of, you know, Scott was talking about how our own models interact with one another, right?

Like the desire for thirst or hunger or, you know, to regulate temperature or whatever.

But really like,

where can we start to model each other's models?

Because I think that in this like collective kind of dynamic, and that was something that I brought up in the .Zero, like this collective phenomenon, like my model of Daniel updates every time I see Daniel, he is as I expect him to be, but then, you know, suddenly, like if he were to be, you know, purple or something, then I would have like the mismatch, right?

So our models of each other are constantly interacting

And where can we start to maybe look at this or think of this?

In what aspect?


SPEAKER_02:
I love that point because what comes to mind for me is in this context of as you are

I mean, to respond to both of your points, really, like the, what we're talking about here is a model of our model, right?

As you move up in the hierarchy, you are modeling your own model.

You're getting some beliefs over how the precisions and the lower levels are, are, are evolving.

And so you've got a model of your, your model as you go up, but what you're also learning there is the, how your mind works and how, you know, different,

states lead to different like affect for instance and as you continue to do that right as you continue to learn how your own mind works and you get more and more awareness of how things go in your mind well then naturally that you you are also learning about how other people's minds work as well

And there's always this kind of tension between sort of compassion in practice and awareness in practice or tension.

There's this kind of duality between the two.

And they kind of seem to come together out of a model like this, whereby you're training in awareness of your own mind.

And what you end up discovering is how difficult it is actually sometimes for things to go well.

And

fundamentally that the one thing that's driving it all is your own desire to be happy.

As you learn that, as that really becomes part of your own model, then that naturally projects onto everybody else and you kind of get this rebound of, oh, but then everybody else is also trying to be happy and it's hard for them too.

And you get this kind of natural, compassionate response then that comes as a result that I think also is related to this idea that Scott was talking about before, which is that none of these things happen in a vacuum.

Like my own well-being is so...

intertwined with your well-being and so all these things kind of grow then together


SPEAKER_06:
Nice.

It's almost like in Scott's forest, one element is there's other people and maybe non-people entities in the forest.

And then another aspect would be like, you can modify your niche, you can walk different ways, you can use technology.

And it's sort of that tension between how sort of slam dunk it is for a very constrained case.

wanting and sort of hinting that it could generalize that more because of the ease at which it can integrate not just within a domain like the mountain car or just thirst but across domains especially in a way where all the benefits of the first level relatively speaking like the computability and the interpretability of parameters if one believes that then it exists also at the second level and higher levels so like figure five you have the three layers

or six, but then 12, the generalized model, like you only had two with it, I guess, implicit hint that you just do it again.

Yeah, it's just so pretty cool.


SPEAKER_02:
Dean, I mean, just to just to speak to that point.

I mean, you can and I have and you can start to think about, you know, the the third

level the sort of third level equivalent of attention was sort of awareness of mental states right so now it's like you're not you're not just aware of where your attention is but you're aware of how much you

you know, to what extent do I want here?

To what extent am I certain about my environment?

To what extent am I happy?

To what extent am I doing things automatically?

To what extent am I being influenced by my memories and priors, right?

That to go through the whole gambit there.

But then you could do the same thing with B at the third level, gamma B. And so, okay, so what is that state telling you?

And so, well, to what extent is my mind volatile?

So how confident am I about the transitions of my mental states?

And let's say you take a psychedelic or something and all of a sudden your mental states are all over the place.

Well, then maybe that precision at the third level would drop because now you don't have the ability to predict how your mental dynamics are moving.

Or C, to what extent am I wanting or not wanting particular mental states as opposed to sensory observations?

you know, like how much, how much attachment do I have to joy and fear right now is what you'd be inferring at that level.

And you can kind of keep, keep going, keep going through that.


SPEAKER_06:
Thanks Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
yeah so i know we're getting close to the end here and i just kind of wanted to bring this up so my history just a little bit of context was that i i was a context generating programmer for high school kids and i wanted to take them from a place of subliminal to liminal to understanding what the edges were what the limits were so my my basic job was unnesting

learners having them transition but having them take a model outline along with them so they weren't kind of going naked into the forest so what one of the things that we used to talk about in this transitioning across basically the deep generational transformation was using a street metaphor starting with perceiving

So which kind of is unplanned and moving to thinking about thinking, which is plan and attend and attend and plan.

And then this was the critical piece, realizing the inside the lines versus the outside the lines.

And with the example that we use is that there's a kind of a crosswalk logic calculation problem.

So you use logic to push the button that gets the flasher going before you enter the crosswalk.

You stay inside the lines.

You even have perfect gating and balance so that you can look at your phone while you're crossing the street through those lines of immortality.

And now you're dead because there was a driver in a car who was also looking at their phone.

And an accident occurred.

So the question you had then was, did you follow the logic?

Did you use the rules?

And the answer was yes.

And were you aware of the free energy gap?

And the answer was, well, not anymore.

Because logic tends to point at the jaywalker and ask, what are they thinking?

I mean, come on, they're taking the risk here.

Those jaywalkers are probably thinking about the opportunity that there's no cars coming at me right now or on the street, they're not present.

So they're thinking about the context and the directionality

of the transition, and they're also thinking about the rate of travel.

How fast can I get across the road?

And will I get a ticket?

Will there be somebody who's going to catch me and pull me over?

Altogether, who's making a decision based on more information from which to update?

And I think this is the big question around precision.

After all, are parallel lines in the street and in a mathematical operations context supposed to represent logic and precision?

I think they are.

And in this case, and based on this slide right here, this is why I liked you talking about math is not the territory.

Math does allow for the sketching out of territory.

And sometimes we can get inside the lines and think that we are using the logic when in fact, we're actually going to be more precise

and actually use what I would think to be logic based on more information once we get outside those lines.

So when I think when we get into the point two of this, I think that's going to be a really interesting point because Steven talked about, it was Steven, you were wondering, Lars, who was the person who was talking about being really still?

That was Steven before he had to take off.

I'm kind of wanting to think about this as being really active and being really contemplative and being really precise and then be able to sort of tie that in with the metacognition piece.

Because I think it's the transition here

that all of us are trying to parallel or trying to sort of piggyback on your paper.

And I think that's the real value in this conversation.

I also think that we can get outside the lines and learn more than we often do while we're inside the lines.

Because, you know, I'm immortal now.

I've got these two white lines protecting me.

And that's not always necessarily the case.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, yes, exactly.

I mean, what you're talking about there, for me, speaks to this power of suspended belief or uncertainty in our own, maintaining a sense of uncertainty in our own model so that no single belief can become so rigid and enshrined that it's resistant to updating in the future.

And if you spoke to Ines and Mark Miller recently, it's kind of down the same line that a lot of dysfunction, a lot of low states of well-being comes from that rigidness and that freezing of beliefs that then lead to all kinds of afferent behavior afterwards because you're trying to fulfill the expectations of belief that isn't being updated.

the the what's on offer here is a mechanism to describe how you might remedy that solution by deliberately controlling or inquiring about

the metacognitive belief, so gamma B in this case, over my priors.

And if I can control that state transition, well then it gives me the opportunity to relearn that B matrix at the bottom because I've injected a little bit of uncertainty and now I'm more able to sample information that is counter to what I know and allows for better optimization ultimately.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, take the bottle along.


SPEAKER_06:
thanks dean and awesome insight there so just in the last couple minutes to dave any textual questions live chat any final questions and then scott and then blue if you'd like to make a last comment so go ahead scott


SPEAKER_01:
So, Dean, what you were just saying there goes to what I was trying to fuss with on that equity point before, where it's the rules of general application.

And what I realized while you were saying, the reason the equity is so fascinating to me is what they did in law and equity is they said, okay, the rules of general application don't always lead to the right results.

And what they've now done is collected all the remedies for the bad results and can characterize those into groups.

So you may have a rule of general application, and then there's something out there in equity called unclean hands, which means if I did something wrong, if I'm a burglar, I can't sue you if I trip over your coffee table, right?

That's unclean hands, right?

Or the doctrine of unjust enrichment means if I find some money, or if I get some extra money, you pay me too much, give me an extra $20 bill, I say I keep it because you gave it to me, but it wasn't meant to be.

It's unjust enrichment.

So equitably, you should give it back or find someone's wallet, all this stuff.

Right.

So the reason I when you were just talking, maybe you realize, you know, it may be.

that we apply the rules of general application, and then we find some exceptions.

And then when we start or some ways they don't apply the right way in active inference, and maybe we start to cluster those bad results, let's call them or unintended results or something and start to cluster them and characterize those.

like they did in equity.

So that's what I was groping for before, is the rules of general application can have great value, and they need those corrections, and those corrections themselves may have clusterings and groupings that themselves can be managed.

Thanks.

Great discussion, by the way.

Thank you so much, Lars.

It's fascinating stuff.


SPEAKER_06:
Yep.

Thanks, Scott.

Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I'm looking forward to more next week, hopefully, if you're available.

And maybe kind of probing the different types of meditation.

And I'm not sure how familiar you are with different kinds of meditation, but I've done a bunch and highly variable.

And maybe whether or not they all fit this model or not is something I've been kind of thinking about.

And I'm going to think a little bit more about that over the next week.

So thanks for the great discussion.


SPEAKER_06:
Thank you.

Thanks, Blue.

I think it will be good to see if anybody who's listening in the intervening week wants to join or if they just want to watch along next week so that they can ask questions.

And I think exploring that aspect of group development

active inference agents by design or out there in nature that we've been discussing a lot you know when is it is it can we model it that way and then asking well can't we have nested metacognitive models of groups what does that mean is it a different philosophical bridge is it two exits on the same freeway what is going to be the relationship there so great times thanks lars and if you have any final comments otherwise we'll end it


SPEAKER_02:
No, thank you.

This has been really great and a really fun conversation.

Thank you for your openness and great questions.

I just really enjoy the energy here.

It's not been difficult at all, if you see what I'm saying.

Thanks.

Awesome.

Peace out, everybody.

See you next week.

## sEyNwzUuiII

SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome everyone to the Active Inference Lab.

This is ACT-INF Lab live stream number 28.2 on September 14th, 2021.

And we're going to be having our .2 follow-up discussion on the paper, Towards the Computational Phenomenology of Mental Action, Modeling Meta-Awareness and Attentional Control with Deep Parametric Active Inference.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab, that means you can participate, that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is recorded in an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can be improving our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

We'll be following good etiquette for live streams and see who joins in.

this short link you can find the calendar of events for 2021 as well as all the other kinds of streams that we do related to kind of wildcard guest streams and the more technically oriented model streams and math streams and we have some preliminary decisions for what we'll read in 29. today though we're here to continue the discussion on 28

paper, which is the towards a computational phenomenology of mental action paper.

And again, we'll see who joins and see where we go.

I wrote down a few comments and questions, but I know that there's many ways it can go.

And of course, everybody who's watching live, definitely, um, leave us questions and comments and we can address them on the stream, uh,

and everyone's participating who's here at this time.

We can start with just some introductions and warmups.

Since there's only a few of us, we can say hi and reminisce on what brought us to this paper or even where we'd like to go for the DOT 2.

Where are we jumping off from or to as we're in that kind of the middle of the gangplank, the middle of the diving board.

I'm Daniel and I'm a researcher in California.

And I think today I wrote down the pieces that I wanted to

if not resolve just at least explore a little bit and it had to do with annotating that generalized model of mental action and seeing if we could find words in a language or scenarios or exercises thought experiments find some tangible ways to interact with these different aspects of uncertainty and then

On a more theoretical note, ask how are those maybe related to neurological function or certain kinds of measurements that are made in the laboratory.

But just at the experiential level, are there cases where we actually can get in touch with some of these different, qualitatively different kinds of uncertainty?

So either Dean or Stephen.

Go ahead, Stephen, and then Dean.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah good morning from toronto um yeah i'm interested

to sort of pursue what we were talking about in the last session.

And I'm very interested in the fact that a bit like, to some extent, process-orientated psychology by the Mindels, which comes out of some work around information theory in the 70s, this idea of really getting into the process from within and the phenomenology.

So this paper starts to look at giving evidence

actual models or at least a heuristic as well for thinking about how we phenomenologically can be doing stuff from the inside and for me that's exciting because psychology can be kind of limiting because it's always this external modeling of people which then sort of but how can we get and look at some of the structures of how we operate at some level so this this is cool and i think this is the first

or one of the first papers that really gets into that phenomenology beyond a philosophical point of view and starts to sort of give a few handles on it.

And, um, that's where I'm interested.

So I'm going to pass this over if it's okay, Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Good morning.

My name is Dean.

I'm in Calgary.

And a few years back, I read a book by a philosopher by the name of Douglas Hofstadter.

It's called, I'm a strange loop.

And, uh,

Yeah, sort of trying to put some sort of a context on when I read that book and then this paper.

Hofstadter doesn't really get into the perception of, I'm aware of planning to make a plan because I can think about my thinking, so what of this plan policy of attention, and then all of the math that supports that.

And then he sort of doesn't really get into, and then what I attend to tells me what I'm losing focus on, which is what this paper also talks to.

So again, I'm just trying to, I'm trying to put these two ideas side by each and without saying either one of them is more correct.

I think they're very complimentary.

So yeah, that's where I kind of was,

looking at this and saying, Hmm, this is really interesting.

So yeah, that's where I, I'm kind of coming at this from.


SPEAKER_01:
So on the Hofstetter, the strange loop and the GEV, some works that I really love as well as mine's eye with Dennett.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
It does seem like his focus is on how symbols are,

are computed upon which makes sense given his kind of computational focus and so we've talked a lot about how syntax and semantic layers can be seen within active inference and that doesn't have phenomenology

in the picture at all.

And that's why the sort of question about how computers interpret syntax and how that becomes semantics is orthogonal.

It's kind of, you could take one take on another whether computers have experience or not.

Like you don't need to think that computers are having an experience or not to ask how a programming language is compiled or interpreted.

So there's sort of that two by two with how meaning is made in a computational sense and then how our meaning is made and experienced.

So that's definitely an interesting piece

Stephen, you wrote from the inside.

What do you think differentiated this approach rather than the theoretical or the philosophical?

And what does it look like for an academic work or for a work of research to not just be theoretical or philosophical?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is a good question.

Well, I suppose having sort of mechanisms and identifiable relationships between aspects of experience, i.e.

thinking about thinking and our sense of...

accuracy in our predictions and things like that gives a way for stuff to relate to each other otherwise it tends to be one thread of that so be it consciousness be it um

awareness be it that one thread then can be mused about and we could get quite an interesting philosophical explanation of what it is the thing is though that you can't really process that or try to emulate the process of that on its own there needs to be something else that it's

somehow like you say the body well what's the body you know some sort of sensory feelings some sort of sense of predictions about something else and normally that seems to be where things fall down a bit ends up going off to the neuroscience world and

which is great but still ends up being a kind of a model of the brain right so you're in this neuro phenomenology world where it's kind of explaining phenomenology but through the brain but again I can't the brain has got no feelings inside it you know so you can't be your brain I think we think we can because we have all these pictures of brains as if they are people but so I think

It's an interesting question because I hadn't really quite thought about it this way, but I think there's something about having different aspects of our phenomenological being able to meaningfully relate and not end up being kind of a deep explanation of one strand.

I don't know if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_01:
It also makes me think about in Hofstetter's Gödel-Escherbach, GEB, one of the main strange attractors is the Turing test.

So that's the question about how you can identify on the other side of the blanket some other system in another room.

How do you know whether it's a human or whether it's a computer or whether it's aware or not?

So...

There's been all kinds of thought on that.

And it's almost like, what happens when you take that as a fundamental unknowable?

How do we respect what's on the other side of the wall and maybe even give it an affective parameter?

while recognizing that we have the same and we're experiencing it, but we're never gonna be able to experience what's on the other side of the wall.

We're gonna be only able to experience our interactions with what's coming across.

And I think that's why Hofstetter and Dennett worked well together.

Because Dennett, with the intentional stance, is kind of like saying, it's simple.

It doesn't really matter if you're playing chess.

It doesn't matter if you're playing somebody who's human or a supercomputer or something.

It's about what's on the board.

And in a way, that's kind of like the way that we're addressing.

It's about the sensory input coming in and how we're modeling the external states.

So if it's in the other room, the Turing test is...

on the outside of our blanket.

We're experiencing what's inside, and that could be an illusion or it could be super real or all that's real, depending on, again, which philosophy you decide to lean towards.

But the question about how we interpret and experience our own parameterization of these models is really secondary from the implications of what's on the other side of the veil.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's a really useful

lens to bring to play actually and actually the game brings this back out maybe so that we're not suddenly focused only on the individual isolated from the world but one thing i think is really interesting with that is

With active inference, there's this, well, an active inference, if we're going to go down that route, is that you know with your body, right?

So ultimately, the active agent can check in.

And I think what you're just saying there is one thing that I would know over a period of time if something was alive is if they had to reflect on some aspect of our discourse, okay, and it was something which neither I could know or they could know.

I, but when they checked in with themselves, they came up with an answer, which I could find plausible.

That makes sense.

So there's no way that you, you know, you know, there's those things.

What do you feel about this?

Well, I fit.

And then you come up with something.

He's like, we, there's a knowing that you come up with.

Right.

But that wasn't in your semantic sense.

lexicon of pre-programmed stuff you're able to check in somehow and that's the sort of thing an artificial machine can't do unless it can check into some some way of knowing because if it wasn't known before how could it have ever been programmed into the supercomputer so that's kind of interesting


SPEAKER_01:
It comes up in this paper with a question about transparency and opacity.

So again, the kind of what is water transparent states are the ones that you see right through.

So you actually don't perceive them directly like air.

And then the opaque states are the ones kind of like the matte black wall.

You can see it really well.

And so this question about how a prompt

can almost like a phase transition move something from being transparent to opaque.

Like how does your leg feel right now?

And it moves it from being a transparent state, potentially one that attention is not being paid to, to an opaque state, which is something that attention is being paid to.

That's one of the major contributions of this paper, which is to take Metzinger's framework of transparent and opaque states

as applied to phenomenology and bring that into the affective framework developed by Hess at all for the deep parametric active inference.

So it is like these multiple threads coming together and then it's just so appropriate that attention is kind of the thread that links it and precision and awareness are kind of coming together in new ways.

Yeah.

The two things I wrote down, and of course, anyone watching live definitely ask random questions, no off topic questions, no such thing exists, not forbidding such questions.

So one thing as kind of addressed earlier was I thought it'd be fun to annotate figure 12 a bit and explore some of these qualitatively different forms of uncertainty.

And, but maybe a lead in topic.

And again, anyone can just feel differently or ask a question.

A lead in topic was like, how do we think about uncertainty?

Greetings, fellow jitzer, blue jitzer.

Uncertainty in remote work, just how often when you send a message,

you don't get that instantaneous feedback that you would in a video conversation or in an in-person conversation because the time lag is very different so it's almost like you're left hanging with the uncertainty or you have to come to a new way of understanding your uncertainty because you're not or you're expecting not to hear from them oh i know that they're on the other side of the world so i'm expecting not to hear from them for the next hours just

I wondered what sorts of these personal level uncertainties applied to the remote case, and then thinking about the remote team as its own active inference entity,

Are there uncertainties that exist for located or remote teams that don't necessarily find themselves simply explained by personal level affect?

Are the things that teams are uncertain about that people are certain about, like a hung jury or a split election or decision?

Are there things that people are uncertain about, but that groups can be quite certain about?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah but that's just things that we can just return to at any time just got my package through from my mum for baby clothes from england so i'm back nice nice um i think blue wants to say something yes blue


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so just to that point, I mean, I think that like that's like the kind of like lifeline or ask the audience like in the, you know, when you have uncertainty about a question.

I mean, an individual can be uncertain, but the crowd can have some certainty.

And wasn't there something about guessing the weight of a bison or something?

Some story like that, like where, you know, the I think it was the median value was exactly the weight of the bison, like from this entire like divergent crowd.

I'm not sure the exact I don't remember, like the exact story.

It's just kind of faint in my memory.

But I mean, I think that definitely the crowd knows what the individual can't.


SPEAKER_01:
Maybe there's many.

Oh, yeah, Stephen, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think that's an interesting one that Blue mentioned.

And also, I suppose there's this question, well, let's say we take Bayesian statistics.

If it's a distributed sense of something, well, so when you've got a very large number, there may be this distributed sense, which people have got a feel for it.

I mean, I suppose it assumes that there's not complete noise, that the people have got some kind of idea out of that group, but there's some knowing.

But in a team and stuff, there is this question, and this may be really what types of things we're evaluating, is with a team or a group, because teams tend to have a particular teleology, if we're trying to get a handle on something intersubjective,

I mean, a classic case with this would be, say, in a marketing agency or something like that, or with a film.

You know, you might want to get a sense of... You might get market research, but you also might... The creative team might get a sense of...

What is, you know, how's this going to land?

You know, and that might be an integrated thing.

And it might be the other creative director that is pushing out their one vision because they're trying to be novel.

They're trying to give something that breaks the group expectations.

However, you also then want to stay within.

I mean, a classic one would be like Ricky Gervais before the when he did his.

What is it?

It's not the Oscars, but he did the other one, the Golden Globes.

At some point, he had to kind of wait what he could get away with.

Right.

So there would have been a whole lot of people sort of seeing how that could get tweaked and nudged so that.

it basically fits on that very near edge.

And that's, uh, you know, that, that would tie quite well with the fact that you need to have more, you can't, it's not just multi-sensory integration on one person.

That's enough.

You might need multi into subjective awareness integration to get a better sort of integration.


SPEAKER_01:
right you need to know how others thinking through other minds or theory of mind you need to kind of have an estimate of how others will

feel about your stimuli from an affective dimension.

And Blue, I think the example with the ox and guessing the weight, it's Francis Galton, sir, Francis Galton, perhaps.

And I just looked it up.

It was 787 fair goers who predicted the weight of this animal.

And that the average was extremely close, even though of course, many individuals probably

or over or under by vast margins.

And it ties us back to the strange loop and Aunt Hillary, the ant colony in GEB.

And when does collective decision-making work?

Collective decision-making amongst cortical neurons, it seems to work pretty well.

That's kind of what evolution has shaped.

why did it work for predicting the weight of that ox well potentially many people were familiar with how much animals weighed another answer is that it was within an order of magnitude like you could probably say well it's probably not 100 pounds and it's probably not 10 000 pounds

so when there's bounds to the estimate rather than it being distributed over like many orders of magnitude there's a case for the average being something that can be taken and that actually has analogy to a lot of these mean seeking distributional techniques that we utilize like the case where the actual distribution might be very rough

but we use variational techniques that can pursue, for example, the mean of the distribution and just sit the weight of our distribution that we control Q and sit,

with only one or a few parameters right over the bulk of the distribution, rather than getting into the hundred parameters that might describe the actual underlying distribution.

And so it's like, under what cases can distributions be well approximated by their mean and by many independent estimates?

And under what cases might you be looking, just like Stephen said, with a marketing agent

trying to be creative or novel under what cases are you actually looking not to estimate the mean but rather to propose a counterfactual or to make something that is going to succeed by virtue of its novelty steven yeah and also it takes you into this world of the of the rural


SPEAKER_00:
community i don't know if it's rural america you know they will have their wisdom about those types of things they're fair goers they they probably got quite an insight into animals you know they i bet you could get a fairly good idea of how slippery it would be to try and grab hold of that baby hog you know in a way that the city folks wouldn't have a clue so it's a this kind of contextual

social like knowing it's quite you know that I think that's a good thing to bring in as well when we think about participation you know this knowing that can be in different communities outside of the

the cities and the advertising agencies and these dominating media leaders of thought, I think it shows how we need to be able to bring in these more disparate ways of experiencing the world.


SPEAKER_01:
well when it's seen that there's a mean or an average like there was the famous like um like average american survey or something like the dimensions of the average person but then like no single person was within a tolerable limit of that average yet there was an approximation um versus casting it into the experience like how will this be received by different people it includes in the question

the need to think through other minds and that no one was thinking through the animal when they had to predict the weight.

That's that external, the third person psychology.

And it was estimating a physical attribute.

So it's not like they were trying to do anything different.

But now if you asked on a scale of one to 10, how do we estimate how happy this animal is?

the variance around that estimate is going to be of a very different kind and potentially an irreducible kind.

We're not just looking for a point estimate to converge on.

Maybe there's differences in opinion and that is something that would be revealed through that question.

Whereas if you're wrong about the weight, it's just because maybe you're not used to it or something like that.

Steven, yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's a good point to bring in as well, is when looking, and say also we maybe want to bring in this Bayesian inference as well, like if you could have multiple rounds, you know, like when Carl Friston does some of the demonstrations, it would be interesting, A, to be able to have some way of looking at something and using multiple iterative rounds, which they do in a lot of processes like future search and...

other kind of group participatory processes and also though to break apart the generative models at play so you and this is this is the challenge is with a lot of things is with normal statistics is you'll get an answer you'll get a graph if you just take all the numbers and divide by x right and then so someone's now got research results but the thing is like you say it makes a difference if you've got three models two models five models one model

going on of the reality that they're trying to in theory that that the weight of the cow there's probably one model there might be a couple of different ways of trying to think about how to go to that model but you know it's sort of a fairly clear proposition but if you do have more than one generative model or one contextual engagement that's being used teasing that out and then having a way to iteratively

do Bayesian inference and active inference on each of those models so they can be teased apart would look like it'd be a useful thing.

Cool.

Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I was just going to say to Stephen's point, there's a book called The End of Average by Todd Rose that speaks to those times when finding the mean doesn't really work and you do have to kind of pull that generative model apart.

So if you're interested in that, there's a great reference.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
And then this idea of updating

it's almost like we have a vertical updating, which we're gonna look at when we look at the deep parametric model.

It's an updating within the agent, within the system, passing up and down, top down, bottom up, but it's an updating inside of the agent versus the updating laterally or across the ensemble of similar agents.

Like imagine if the people, instead of putting their weight estimate for the ox into a box,

they actually talked about it.

There's cases where you could imagine that would actually make a worse estimate.

Like a really persuasive person is convinced they have high precision about their estimate.

They're wrong, but they have high precision.

And then in that case, it's possible for them to shape group outcomes

like a more stubborn peg whereas there's other cases where when maybe um it's less important to be precise on a point estimate but like to brainstorm maybe sharing ideas early on helps increase that temperature and updates people's models in a way where just having them in separate lanes and then coming together to converge at the end it's it's too late

for those ideas to be meaningfully compared because they're of such different type whereas again if everybody is constrained to we're fitting something about weight only then maybe it's okay to combine them later on in the process blue so i was trying to pull the paper just now but i i think that they've looked at that actually like when you have really strong um


SPEAKER_04:
conviction about your beliefs or ideas, they look at how information is spread in networks.

And really like those people that are, you know, very strong in conviction, they like contaminate their like neighbors in the graph, essentially.

So it's really neat to kind of see this like information propagation, and how it really does start with the people with the strongest convictions.


SPEAKER_01:
it's almost like uh yeah yes people are spreading information based upon a few things but up there on the list would be how precise they are about it and also how they want to be seen so both of those are like first and second level estimates of precision about oneself metacognition

I won't raise my hand if I'm not totally sure, or I'm watching a live stream, but I'm not sure if this is a good question to ask, hint it is, but then you don't know, so you don't make the action, versus how will even other people perceive it

That was probably less important in an anonymous guess about weight.

But as we talk about issues that are increasingly social, those become the drivers.

Maybe 90% of people in a room or in a country feel a certain way, but it still isn't perceived as something that's okay to share.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this also ties into when a lot of context... There's actually a mediator, a chap who's a mediator, he had a really good quote that he actually came up with.

It was saying how process, both conscious and unconscious, implicit and explicit, has a greater impact on outcomes...

than substance i.e so if you're going to bring people together like we're saying and they're going to try and work together being able to the process through which people interact can have a bigger impact on the outcome than the substance partly because of exactly what blue was saying and you were saying you know around whether someone becomes a dominant voice whether certain information if it all becomes about the substance it's very easy to get trapped in this

who's right, who's wrong.

Well, if in this instance we're trying to get a different handle on things or to try and get an active influence, we need that process to be given a chance.

So I think that's quite, and I actually also had a good conversation yesterday with a

Gary Kirkham actually does a lot of devised theatre work through sort of interesting processes where they mix different artists and one thing there is when they go into the action space of exploring

they would have the director watching or they have like a device theater playwright watching.

And in some ways, the people who are in it, they just are totally immersed in it.

They can't really reflect on where they are.

At that moment, it's just in there.

And there's all this information and the people on the outside

are watching and you could say, I suppose they're actively inferring on what might be easier to say this Bayesian integration and waiting.

And then afterwards they will be told what works, what didn't work.

And then they could bring that to their conscious awareness and maybe bring that in a game with some, but that process is,

in a way, needed to be just a living process and not too cognitive for the person to give good quality, fuzzy information.


SPEAKER_01:
So two things there.

The first is, what do we say about active inference?

It's a process theory.

It's a corollary of free energy principle, and it probably draws on many other domains as well.

But

It's a process theory.

It's not a state theory.

And in the Alias 2018 interview, Friston talks about process versus state.

So that's a lot like this process versus substance you derived.

These are a set of patterns for how systems update.

and so it is about the process of active inferencing which i hear people using sometimes which even differentiates it even more from being just a static substance theory like it's a static theory about active entities it's like kind of but it's actually a dynamic theory about static and dynamic entities because you could have an active inference agent

that is just a thermometer, so its affordances are nil.

So it can't act, but we can still put it within this Bayesian graph framework.

It doesn't need to be far from equilibrium.

It doesn't need to be intelligent.

It doesn't need to be actively forging for information.

We know the model can go all those places, but it's almost like with a process theory, you can explain active and passive processes.

Whereas with a substance theory, you're able to explain static things pretty well, but then there's always this question about using the static theories to apply to dynamic systems.

And then also to connect to the first piece of what you said and to return to maybe some of the threads in this paper, you talked about how that was a mediator.

And so...

mediation can look like so many things from diplomacy negotiation maybe even marketing like you raised earlier but mediator sounds a lot like meditation like the mediation is like we're we're not just going to make a call and then you're going to live with it it's like we're going to mediate now what are we mediating when we meditate

Are we mediating our thoughts and these kind of mindfulness cues that Lars was providing last week, like putting the distance between oneself and their thoughts, in a way it's like being a meta mediator or somehow mediating lower level cognitive processes through the process, not the substance that we call meditation.

Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
So maybe like, what are we mediating in meditation?

That's like a super interesting question.

And I wonder if it's, you know, like the information transmission in the brain or maybe a propagation or like the ongoing, like wandering mental wandering maybe.

So there's, you know, if we're, if essentially meditation cuts that information transmission,

So when you just are letting go, let go of the thought.

The thought arises, just let go.

So the thought doesn't keep wandering around.

And I wonder if a thought spreads.

I don't know.

I mean, I know my background is neuroscience, but I don't know enough about, or maybe no one knows enough about the brain and functionality to know, does a thought propagate from one region of the brain to another region of the brain, stimulate a new thought?

And is that how mental wandering maybe works?

I mean, I don't know.

I mean, it's just hypothetical, but...


SPEAKER_00:
but maybe we're cutting that information transmission process off when we're mediating through meditation stephen yeah it's interesting i thought blue about trans it's actually funny because i was just watching this video on process orientated psychology and it was talking about moving between modalities you know like and it you know it could be you know i have a thought

having seen something and then maybe it processes into how I hear it and how I see it and how I color it, you know, like it could be, you know, there's, it could be interesting how the different sensory modalities could, um, you know, could hold a thought for a period of time and then pass it back again because synesthesia obviously is an interesting one on that.

And I've just seen an interesting paper actually that, um, talks about how, um,

And the vowels, I-E-A-O-U, they mapped it out for colors.

And they find that there's like a color map for how people see it.

And that maps across Swedish and English.

I think it was Swedish and English.

So that's interesting as well, that there could be, you know, these subconscious correlates.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Stephen.

Luke?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, so I mean, I really don't know that we know enough about a thought.

And this reminds me of our guest stream with Shanna Dobson.

What is the fundamental unit of a thought, right?

And so I know in a biological sense, the fundamental unit of a thought really kind of has to be the action potential.

But is it one action potential?

Is it some critical number of action potentials that instantiate the thought?

So I don't know.

And definitely, there is that propagation.

or like a spreading some contagion maybe to like other brain regions in synesthesia.

I think that that's been pretty well established, like that there's like some crossed wires.

And so like you get auditory perception, for example, in the visual cortex.

And so I know that there's that relationship.

So that kind of does like lend itself to this idea of like the thought propagating.

through different areas of the brain, but that's in a very incorrect sense.

I just wonder, even in normal people, does a thought, like what is a thought?

How many action potentials make up a thought?

And then does that, can that move around like within a region or to different regions?

Is that actually what's happening?

I mean, I don't know that we can quantify that at all, but it's just, it's interesting to think about.


SPEAKER_01:
not to always come back to aunt hillary the ant colony in geb but that's the analogy that hofstetter makes it says if ensembles of neurons are transiently activated even for the same word it's a different ensemble of neurons which is increasingly what molecular neuroscience is showing to be the case

And similarly with the ant colony, it's like the task group is assembling and disassembling and reorganizing.

The idea of a thought is still that noun-centric approach, which would lend us to want to find a static representation versus like a thinking unit or something that reminds us that it's a process, that thinking is a process.

um so one comment and then a nice question in the chat about the mediator and the meditation so let's go to figure five which is again one of the main contributions of the paper so it's this three level nested structure and

the outputs of one level influence a lower or an interior nested model so on the bottom in blue is the perceptive states like what am i perceiving is it light or dark

The second level is the attentional layer.

So contrast this with, for example, LSTM or other types of attention-based neural network architectures, which are not based upon first principles per se.

And then what this paper adds in is not just the affective components,

but actually this precision of how aware am i of where my attention is so then thinking about the mediation and meditation i thought well one mediation that might be happening in active inference is the mediation between epistemic and pragmatic goals so that's kind of like a seesaw and there's some sort of negotiation happening

with free energy minimization that is balancing it's mediating these two goals when the two goals are perfectly aligned great then it's like we agree but when they don't perfectly align when the pragmatic goal just wants to run up the mountain and then the epistemic goal wants to ask

Should we look around and see if there's another way that might be better in the long run?

Yeah, can we go around?

Exactly, Dean.

Solenoidal.

Yep, the solenoidal flow.

And so there's sometimes a tension there.

And so that's one type of mediation.

But then using the mediator more like the higher level diplomat here, it's almost like the green layer is serving as a mediator of attention by saying,

calling awareness to it,

And this is awareness of awareness.

That's why it's metacognition.

But it's mediating the dynamics of the second layer, which end up cascading to influence the perceptive layer as well.

But in a sense, it is mediating the activity of the second layer.

And certainly this is the level that in the paper they're saying is where meditation rests.

That's why when we just had active inference plus attention, we didn't have papers on meditation.

But now that we have active inference plus metacognition, awareness of attention, we bring in this whole experiential dimension with meditation.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
One question I might have here.

At that bottom, you say, what am I perceiving?

So that's kind of fair enough.

There's that kind of what's, you know, I was just thinking about, and then what am I trying to do?

Now there's an interest rather than what am I trying to perceive, which is kind of interesting how they went for the, that, because I mean, I'm just thinking about, there could be that time, for instance, I'm perceiving someone's, I don't know, say I'm perceiving someone's got a bit of food in their teeth.

Right.

And what I'm trying to do is listen to what they're saying, but I'm seeing that bit of food and it's kind of hard.

Um, so then what am I paying attention to?

But what am I trying to do is an interesting one, because in some ways, um,

You could say, what am I trying to do?

I think implicitly saying, what am I trying to do with my sensorial apparatus?

But it's a bit longer.

Rather than what am I trying to do, which could be a higher policy level thing.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

great question i think one possible answer and this relates to potentially the slightly different way that active inference partitions problems than other domains is your preference would be that the other person doesn't have your preference at the first level would be to see no food in the teeth so there's two states in that preference vector um in the in the c vector which the

isn't going to be shown here but the preference would be to not see the food and then the policy of the first perceptive layer is ocular motor the policy is what can be controlled at that first level so you could avert your eyes as a policy that's one way of not getting the visual stimuli however

can still hold it in your memory that it is likely to be that case so that's an example of like a hidden state which is the state of the food all you're going to get is photons corresponding to whether there might be food there or not and then you're doing hidden state inference now even though it's a visual so it's like why is it a hidden state if it's visual because it's actually your onboard state estimate of something that's out there

You're seeing it through visual mechanisms, but at the first level, the policy is for how you can move your eyes, not some other higher level policy.

Yeah, Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's quite a good way of thinking about it.

And I think it also shows...

like how it is probably more easily tractable when you say you have the visual, you have something fairly clearly on the visual or a particular sensory modality, then you could see how the attention shifts.

Now, obviously, in much of our life, but maybe not so much in meditation because we are able to attune to certain sensory patterns

roots more clearly but in daily life it's all mashed together so much that it probably is part of the reason why it becomes imperceivable because you know your body might be in the mode of

the bigger goal, i.e.

getting to work on time, and then your visual thing in that real time is trying to listen to the conversation with the ticket collector who's got a bit of food in their mouth, in their tooth or whatever.

And it would all become hard to make this tractable, because this isn't necessarily set up to think about multi-sensory integration.

Not that it can't, but that would start to distort this.

It's probably easier to think about this where there's a fairly clear...


SPEAKER_01:
modality at play another thing to know is we don't necessarily talk about goals in the active inference ontology we have preferences which are over sensory outcomes and policies which are action capacities action sequences that we're choosing so goals are

they're a word and people know what we're talking about, but in this model, there is no goal for anything.

They're just preferences and policies.

So I want to read this question, which is going to be interleaved with a definition, and then it will be an interesting question.

So Liberty wrote,

still reading through the paper, aren't we all?

Which seems deeply complimentary to Metzinger's account of M-autonomy.

So I just want to read a definition of M-autonomy since it wasn't a term I was very familiar with.

And this is a paragraph written by Christoph DeLega, who is also in the Active Inference community.

So kind of thanks for going out in front and helping us be clear about our definitions.

And so what Christoph wrote was,

In his recent article, Metzinger argues for a new construal of mental autonomy

the m as a functional property which consists in the deployment of a special kind of model one which represents the self as an epistemic agent this epistemic self model is and then here's the quote from metzinger a global model of the cognitive system as an entity that actively constructs sustains and controls knowledge relations to the world and itself metzinger 2015 page 272. so

Good call, Liberty.

Definitely we're hearing words like epistemic and self-modeling and active states that seem to bring us close to active inference.

And so their question was, how do processes such as intentional inhibition inform a formal account of cognitive control in your opinion?

So we can look at five while this is up and people are thinking, or just let me know which slide to go to.

So Stephen first, or Blue, you want to go?


SPEAKER_04:
Can you just reread the question one more time?


SPEAKER_01:
How do processes such as intentional inhibition inform a formal account of cognitive control in your opinion?

So Stephen, and then anyone else who wants to go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
So intentional inhibition or unintentional uninhibited behaviour or inhibited behaviour, I suppose you could have it in different ways.

I think for me what's interesting with this, when you start getting into how we relate and how we fit into our social...

landscape so to speak with that type of thing is when we because inhibition tends to be something you're thinking about in a social context within reason it's like that thing about dancers if you're on your own

I feel that is a really good case for where there'd be an interlocking model such as the type of work used in mental space psychology to mediate this Metzinger knowledge structure.

Because that then gives you a kind of an embodied inactive framework, which the brain can actually use as its kind of meta model in peripersonal space.

So I think that this is a quite a good point here is at what point do we need to have a mediating embodied sort of


SPEAKER_03:
metaphor or structuring to help some of this pass out into the complex domains of a social setting thanks steven dean yeah i just think it's interesting that if you if you think about inhibition and you think what the effects of that are you can actually control the situation if you don't talk because we all hate a void or a vacuum

And so by not expressing, sometimes you pull other people's expression into more than you maybe even anticipate.

And so I actually have found people who are less extroverted, a little bit more introverted, tend to have a lot more power in these kind of co-variational situations that maybe they believe they possess

I know that people that are extroverted think that they're controlling the conversation, but just stare blankly back at somebody and really pay attention and listen.

And you'd be amazed at how much control you actually possess in that relationship.


SPEAKER_01:
I have a thought on that, but blue first.


SPEAKER_04:
Go ahead, mine's unrelated.


SPEAKER_01:
It just reminded me of the sort of street hustle dynamic, which is on one hand, that person must be superficially extroverted.

I mean, they're coming up and speaking to a stranger.

If it's about a chess game or they're selling something or they want you to go to that club in Las Vegas, that is a very extroverted social activity.

But the art and the science of that street game is actually about what Dean just wrote or said, I guess, like the introversion that brings the other person and elicits them to feel like they should put out their personal information into a void.

But if someone's just like chat, chat, chat, chat, chat, there's no space for them to become vulnerable, to feel like they're part of the conversation and ultimately to reveal personal information.

So it shows that, of course, we're using the introvert and extrovert little loosely.

People say, oh, it means they draw their rejuvenating energy from being alone or in public.

Like there's different definitions, but it just shows that actually it's not just about saying something or being the first to speak.

That can also be a superficial mode of control and that there's a deeper mode of control that actually has to do with picking and choosing your words as well as when to use them.

Blue, anything on that?


SPEAKER_04:
So unrelated, but just going back to inhibition, Stephen, do you have something directly related?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, one little thing, just as a comment, is one thing I remember...

When they had the press inquiry in London about the Levenson inquiry and Rupert Maxwell had to give evidence about his newspaper empire, one thing that was really noticeable, and they were saying this because he was like, you know, he's a very, obviously he's a high level executive, et cetera.

He always took his time.

Like when he was asked a question, it was almost like he was always used to having the time to think through his answer, say what he needs to do and be able to reply at his own leisure.

in a way that other people might not and that that also speaks to that power of when someone who's presumably quite dominant and being able to be forceful also can they know they can hold the space and there's probably some element of knowing how much power you have to be able to get away with that and no one else steps in so that's quite interesting anyway thanks blue then dean


SPEAKER_04:
Go ahead, Dean.

You've got some retort.

So I'm going to go back to inhibition when you guys are done.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, no, I think it's just really interesting because I've read some stuff about if you're an FBI interrogator, one of the tactics that's actually trained into FBI interrogators is to be intentionally inhibited.


SPEAKER_01:
Interesting.

So there's intentional in the social intentionality.

And then I think...

Could be otherwise, but it seems like Metzinger's account and Liberty's question is about the intentional inhibition within the agent as a mechanism of cognitive control.

But it brings us right back to this idea of the vertical nesting.

And then in that situation, intentional control is kind of cascading from the top.

But then also there's intentionality laterally, like I am intending to control somebody else's cognitive state.

And so that's actually one reason why it's important to have a model that's kind of like Legos in two dimensions, because these active inference models, they plug in really well nesting internally

So we can talk about top-down cognitive control and maybe have intentional inhibition as a phenomena within a broader science of mental action, which we can get to in 12, but also we can just as fluidly use some of the same variables and some of the same code, some of the same formalisms for the kinds of intentional control that happen laterally.

So it's like when somebody is taking a deliberate pause or somebody asks a really hard question and then they go,

and they take their time with the response, that's an intentional cognitive control, which has traditionally been the realm of the sort of psychology perhaps, but then that can be understood to be deployed in a cultural context by which it's being used to intentionally control others' states.

And so we can have a bunch of different agents, each consisting of nested

models like this and we can stack them up vertically as well as have interactions laterally because intentionality is deployed in both of those directions stephen yeah and following on to what you're saying this this then starts to there's a big gap in basically between psychology and sociology


SPEAKER_00:
which is this idea, or I suppose you could, in many cases, teams is one area where it gets looked at.

It's great, you can take an average, and you can take your statistical averages, you get your sociology, in many cases, and you get your individual.

But part of the reason that we end up there is not because they're the most useful places to be, it's because you can measure them, you can get units of analysis which you can do stuff with.

And the intersubjective stuff around four or five people is a huge challenge, right?

Because you can't ignore the complexities of the individual, yet you've got the complexities of the group.

And so it speaks to that, you know, that ability to now start to get in and say, okay, well,

let's say we can tease out some generative models or not even generative models, I don't believe, but to be able to tease things out in a way which maybe can make meaning in group context and this participatory sense-making, that's really what is moving things forward, I think.


SPEAKER_01:
it almost makes me think of someone who can facilitate a group.

And it's like, I know you intended to just share what you're excited about, but you're unintentionally exerting cognitive control on other people by bringing up this topic or by speaking in this way.

So it helps us look at that vertical intentionality and the lateral social intentionality together, maybe even not just with the same model, but on a common footing,

of precision, precision within the individual and precision of the team.

So it's like these are the real nuts and bolts of where integrative models matter.

If we had a totally disjoint model for what was happening inside of a head and then across

bodies and brains, we wouldn't have the market to sort of flip back and forth between those currencies per se.

We would need another third level connector theory.

So it's like if you have one theory in theory B, you need to invent theory C in the middle.

But if you have just one integrative theory, then it's just a question of how it all works together.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, just one last quick comment.

I think it's really interesting that

that an inhibition can be seen as a tactical stance and a reveal on those Markov blanket hidden states.

I mean, I'm not sure it's a cipher, because you don't actually know what the other person, if they're going to sort of be drawn into something that they otherwise wouldn't.

But I just think it's really interesting that we assume that we have to keep the conversation going.

And we don't assume that maybe one of the ways to do that is to not say very much.


SPEAKER_01:
And to give one neurological comment on that, perhaps back in the day, people thought with the higher orders of the brain, the higher thinking processes being the generative and the creative processes, since those are the human specific ones and we're generative and creative and so on.

But when you look down to the synapse level, the frontal cortices are actually

using inhibitory control.

So it's this model where it's like we can actually be creative and we can be generative through the appropriate inhibition.

We don't need to have this passive midbrain that gets zolted into activity by a really smart forebrain.

Rather, we can actually have the endogenous wisdom and activity

that never seizes with targeted inhibition coming from some other parts of the brain.

I'm sure that was a simplification, Blue, so I know you can say more on that.


SPEAKER_04:
So that totally leads into exactly what I was wanting to say earlier about inhibition and cognitive control.

So if we were in this overly neurologically, like neuron to neuron excited state, I mean, that's a seizure, right?

So when you've got overexcitation in the brain, it's not always good.

But so, I mean, to what intent, like to what extent does inhibition,

intentional inhibition, right?

This is going back to the question.

That's what they said, intentional inhibition.

So when you have intentional inhibition, I wonder, and this goes back to what I was saying about meditation, like shutting off the fundamental unit of a thought.

So I wonder if intentional inhibition, when you refrain from blurting something out or when you practice restraint or

or refrain from letting your thoughts wander.

So when you inhibit yourself, this intentional inhibition, I don't know, but it's curious to think about, does this correspond to, there's activity in the brain, excitatory makes more action potentials happen, and inhibitory makes fewer action potentials happen.

So when I do this kind of intentional inhibition, does that inhibit my neurons in a corresponding way?

I'm curious, I mean, I would guess.

Because it just, you know, I mean, at least in the meditative sense, I would think inhibition of an action potential propagating forward.

So it's a curious thing to to wonder about to what extent is intentional inhibition exert cognitive control at the molecular level?


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Blue.

Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's actually got me thinking now on something that's quite

That.

that question about the higher level lower level i think and this this is a really interesting piece oh actually and it ties back to what i was thinking of asking as well about figure five where you put subliminal um processes and maybe conscious processes and i think that's an interesting point on figure five that you've there because maybe it's the middle bit that's more conscious at certain times and the top bit is actually never quite aware of you're only able to effectively feel

And so there might be that it's actually the middle layer there on figure five that's conscious.

And I like what, that's actually really interesting if it's inhibitory because there's an interesting model I've been trying to work with called Dilt's Logical Levels.

And you've got the kind of the identity level.

So if I map this onto this, the identity level or the face could be seen as what broadcasts where we are.

And some of that we're conscious of, and some of that we're not.

And then we've got where our awareness is in the moment.

And then we talked about this kind of lower level, which you can only, you're sort of aware of, but it's, again, it's slightly outside of that crystal clear question.

So I wonder, on figure five,

And maybe this is a question for Daniel, because he might be put that I don't know if you put those on there.

You know, where you put we've got subliminal and awareness.

And how is this interface mediated?

And I'm kind of wondering what I'm paying attention to maybe what is actually awareness in a

like sort of, I could tell you sense.

And the top one is an awareness in a kind of a, a felt almost like a metaphor.

It feels like this to try and have that meta awareness, but you can never quite get a handle on it, you know?


SPEAKER_01:
great point and totally open to anyone's uh insights or the authors or otherwise but this first level is again about sensory perception so it is possible that the second level

is the reportable opaque state that's one of the innovations of this paper and there would have to be another level to make this state at the very top reportable so it it might be the case that this green topmost layer is the felt awareness of where one's attention is as well as their preferences for where their attention should be which might be scaffold by meditation saying

it's awesome to focus on this mandala, or it's awesome to focus on compassion.

So these are shaping preferences over policies for how aware one should be.

It's great to be paying attention.

And then the what is one paying attention to is where those policies are influencing, yeah, where the attention is being paid.

But when somebody says like, you know, there was a car crash and I couldn't look away, it's almost like, well, the first layer is that they were perceiving cars on the road.

The attention they're reporting is that they were paying attention to that.

then there's this implicit third state that they were aware of where their attention was otherwise they wouldn't have been able to report i couldn't have looked away so they were extremely aware of where their awareness was that's what metacognition brings in that simply attention doesn't and

again another argument for first principles theories that work really well in this sort of composable way because there are

neural network models with so-called attention.

But where would you put metacognition in?

There might be a variety of ways to do that, and maybe some would be practical and some wouldn't, and maybe some would be implementable with the tools you already have, maybe others wouldn't.

But here, when we can just look at the skeleton of the model, we can come to some pretty interesting places just by working with what's composable

rather than just sort of trying to make it um fit well first and then make it composable and understandable second we're beginning with composability and comprehensibility and then the question about how it will fit empirical data well it's an empirical question stephen


SPEAKER_00:
this is interesting you can bring in empirical data you've got that advantage of potentially say the subliminal layer it may not be self-reports it could be that you could use other measures you know brain scanning and other things to give a sense of when you know what is coming in there and of course as they mentioned because attention

And again, this is where we get caught in our own need to make sure the literature can hold together.

You know, attention, as was mentioned by Lars, is kind of relatively uncontroversial.

Right.

But of course, you get we know from phenomenal, you know, you you sort of can't help at some level get into the idea of consciousness.

Right.

Because conscious awareness of attention is that kind of interesting thing.

thing so when it goes to what am i paying attention to what am i conscious of and then you get into phenomenological phenomenological consciousness or access consciousness coming into play um and it gets a bit fuzzier so um but i think at some level you you you you're gonna start to hit those

in between those two, you're sort of hitting that kind of fuzziness of where that sort of goes.

And then the next level up again probably is more, maybe it's actually more clear from the next level up when you go from attention to meta-awareness of attention.

But I think the bit that might be a whole shift in ontology even could be that shift from

how you're perceiving and how that translates into an attentional state.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

So to kind of bring it to multilevel and multisensory integration, the perception can be of two different kinds.

Like what gets passed to the agent at each time point might be a visual measurement and a temperature or appropriate reception.

And then the policy, what am I paying attention to,

could be reflected by paying attention to, for example, visual input as opposed to some other type of input.

And then one could be aware or not of whether they're paying attention to the smell or to the sound or to the light.

So how these models get integrated with then non-first personal measurements.

That's kind of what we explored in this future of phenomenology slide with like, okay, where do we bring in

empirical measurements and we kind of align them on the same time series and we can bring in any kind of measurement we don't even need to um limit ourself anything that's measured through time of any uncertainty over that measurement we can kind of cobble it together into this model what are we doing it for what do we want to know with those measurements

probably a lot of things that we could address there.

Maybe for the 45 minutes, let's at least go to 12, figure 12, and talk a little bit about just annotating or exploring this figure.

So in five, again, main contribution of the paper, one of them was the explicit three-level model with um.

what is being perceived, what is attention being paid to, and how aware is one of that.

Here, we're dropping back to two layers with the understanding that we could add another level like a green layer on top of the orange one that then connects back down to the orange one.

But look at some of these new parameters that are introduced in this paper.

Namely, all of these gamma subscripts, so gamma are the uncertainty variables,

Now there's a gamma with a subscript modulating a lot of the other parameters that previously have been presented just as kind of standing alone.

So like for example, in figure five,

you just have like preferences in the second level.

The preferences just exist and the affordances, E, they just exist.

Now in 12, we're thinking about, well, what does it look like to have an uncertainty or a precision being the inverses of each other over D, the prior, C, the preferences, G, the free energy minimization, E, the affordances,

pi is the policy and then we have an uncertainty over b which is the matrix that defines the transition between hidden states so like given that i'm inferring it to be raining outside what is the transition probabilities of it staying rainy versus becoming

not raining, and then we also have A, which is the matrix mapping between hidden states and observed states.

What's the relationship between the observation of photons and whether it's sunny or not?

Is it a simple matrix, just a clean mapping?

You can just sort of simply have 100% of the time map it, or is it the case that you're very uncertain about how hidden states are connected to observable outcomes?

So those are just to sort of recap what these parameters in a model mean, but maybe if anybody wants to like highlight one of these precision variables, just what's one that they're drawn to, or they're curious about, or what's one that might have applications in different systems.


SPEAKER_03:
Daniel, I would speak to it, but I,

in order for me to sort of explain it in a way that I think would make sense, might mean I would have to speak for a while and hijack this.

Would people be comfortable with me talking for a couple of minutes?


SPEAKER_01:
Please.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

So, I kind of look at this from the perspective of when in doubt, zoom in, zoom out in order to compute something, and this is a computational

I kind of take a whole cloth or a whole Markov blanket approach of precise or precision as the paper kind of does a good job of laying out as precise, i.e.

figure 12.

So on the topic of meta-awareness, meaning and collective decision-making between the greatest and the smallest distances that we can be aware of, we have information geography.

If you're searching for meaning and edge precision, things like contrast and proportion,

a fitting process i often think of like the 16th century maps of north america when the explorers first hit the coastlines and then there's information geometry when you're putting a dimensional space together so that's fixing the topology as a precise representation of difference over distances i've already shared in the 21 or 28-1

But I've got this generative model, I call it the unholy triad, which is in essence a computational phenomenology context generator that translates prediction error reduction, meaning we try to give people the sense of prediction management expertise.

I want them to be able to turn that ability to predict into a contribution.

For me, it was trying to create a professional contribution for high school kids.

So what does that mean?

It means getting to the geo, the geometric and the geographic essences of a situation that you've never been in before.

So it's a pretty big Markov blanket.

Inactively, it means generalized and transfer regardless of that degree of novelty.

It means understanding learner availability to phenomena as much as collecting data on learner attention, which is what this paper is kind of focused in on.

It's not about studying the swallow and regurgitating information

as a content cycle, which is a standardized form of learning measure, which is also an irony because I had to take these models here and give them to 16 to 18 year olds by using things like when in doubt, zoom in, zoom out, because I could present them with this, but this would be Sanskrit to them.

They wouldn't understand it at all.

So then what is a precise proposition as creative professional contribution in the to be materialized or propositional sense?

And in the paper,

I think I talked about this in 28.1.

There was a passage in the paper that talked about, and I'll just read it out.

It says, in computational terms, the central place of confidence and reliability and effective self-regulation speaks to the key role of precision.

And then they say that's the inverse variance of implicit beliefs.

And then they talk about, as an example, probabilistic or posterior Bayesian beliefs,

that describe a probability distribution over some latent quantity.

And I talked last week about going across the street, so there's a calculable risk in that.

And then back to the paper, it says these beliefs are sub-personal, meaning that they're unplannable.

However, the argument pursued in this work is that Bayesian beliefs about Bayesian beliefs can, in certain situations,

become propositional in the way that those things are estimated, optimized, and controlled.

That's referring to Hesp's, Casper's work.

Precisions in a nutshell quantify our confidence in our beliefs, say how confident we are about what we know about states,

of the world about their relation to our sensory observations or about how these states change over time.

By analogy, with physical action, a mental or covert action consists in deploying and adjusting these quantities without there necessarily being an explicit behavioral counterpart to these covert actions.

So for me,

If we're computing a transformation of unplannable to metacognitive from perception of, I'm aware of planning to make a plan because I can think about my thinking, so what if this policy of attention, then what I attend to tells me when I'm losing focus.

That's what the paper said and I agree, check.

That's one way of measuring that.

And in the crosswalk case study, you have two propositions, both are precise in terms of their,

They're disambiguated paths.

And both are examples of a nesting study, in this case, crossing a nest or a roadway.

And then what happens regardless of the awareness level inside or outside of the physical and the hypothetical lines.

This is what I would be asking people that were gonna go into these novel situations.

If we don't select right away, if we keep things open,

if we keep probability distributed across a propositional horizon of potential street crossings, is precision lost as an openness, as a distribution collection versus a focal point attenuation, which is I think what this paper was examining.

Perhaps a way of probing this might be to say that the concept of scale is fluid.

that it's the potential for scale change, that scale itself overtakes or retreats from as a directional inflation or deflation.

And sometimes we talk about that as a directional gradient descent or descent.

In this sense, scale either obliterates or gap increases, which Scott talked about having an epoxy.

And I agree with that.

That what we consider to be inside or outside the lines is not static due to our relationship, our betweenness to the focal point of interest.

This is a somewhat conventional explanation of scalable behavior.

But I think there's a second part to this we have to keep with that first.

And that second sense, which together with the first part, generates another type of between, which is a matter of the geography in, as in edge precision, and geometry out, as in of difference over, at once, at the exact same time.

that supports the very notion of and as scale, scaling down or scaling up.

So that's that up and down part we were talking about earlier today.

In my experience, it's very much the addition of this second sense as a parallel probing that works.

There's no violations in bringing in the statistical and the physical mechanics together.

that active inference parameterizes as an HOV or high occupancy vehicle, lane as a metaphor more than intersectional.

Intersectional is pretty much interventionist and it's kind of an instructionalist only reinforcing

view or perspective in the in the hov lane metaphor you are in as self-organizing you're non-interventionist because you're a constructor you're an interactor of lines live stream lines and i use the example of a 28 0 or a 28 1 in the way that we set the live streams up

If you're outside the HOV lines, maybe you're rewatching something that you were a participant in, or perhaps you're using the 0.2 part of this as a way of sort of detaching yourself and being able to appreciate scale.

So math is not the territory, but the math is both the diamond shape on and above

the parameterized state space, that road that we now say is high occupancy vehicle.

It shows the signals, meaning the geometrics and the restricted fit, the geographics that a two plus in the car mathematical quantity enables.

Again, you have opaque passengers and transparent traffic congestion reduction.

Check.

That's what this paper talked about.

But I think we also have to consider that the contrast, meaning that the texts in the background are different colors, and the proportion, meaning the depth of field is adjustable, is necessary to dial in the resolution and the resonation.

Daniel, you spoke about resolution and resonation, mostly about the resolution in the point one.

And so I wanted to really come back to that a bit.

This is collective phenomena.

This is not, I am attending or I realize that I'm not attending, but I think it's a big part of this attenuation versus collective thought piece that we're trying to get some sense of order and relationship around.

If we want context generation, the in plus the out equaling context to play a formal role in what we define as precision.

It's something to think about when looking at logic as a formalism.

The accessing of data collection sets, which we've talked about again quite a bit today, talks about the definition of a precise bigger picture as a distributed collection.

And then I can say in my work that was coming up with a professional contribution.

It also speaks to where there are relationships through lines, like a real physical line and those blankets that we keep talking about as a process.

And that also talks about what Scott talked about in the 21.1 is borrowing from the model as both a quantity and a quality determination.

I think at the end of the day it says instead of just looking at how and why we have to look at the when we're inside and outside the lines the who our relationship to all of the traffic that can be crossing the road and the which which do we look at do we look at the figure 12 or do we zoom out and add a third layer I don't think it really matters as long as we're prepared to look at both

So that is, to me, the essence of what a free energy principle as unplannable to metacognitive world looks like.

And I don't know that it's easy for people to sort of put all of that into a nutshell.

But like I said, it's kind of a whole cloth, whole Markov blanket thing.

And as you mentioned, Daniel, in the last

In the last live stream, we want the first principles to be able to generalize and scale up.

But I think the only way that that happens is if we don't see it as either always inflating or always deflating, but we see both the geometry and the geography sort of working hand in glove with that.

I think that's how we derive a fit here.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice, Dean.

Thank you.

Very interesting.

I guess Steven or Blue or anyone else, feel free to ask a question, but just a few notes on that.

So one is it's a subtle design choice, but notice that the green wraps around the whole box and then the orange wraps around the blue.

So it's not just like three Legos placed one on top of another.

It actually is a zooming in and out.

And so that moves us towards Bucky Fuller's dream of, you know, I went in stairs and out stairs rather than upstairs and downstairs because

It's not up and down for everyone.

Just say it's in and out because you're on a closed surface.

So that was about zooming in and out.

And it's not that we're even necessarily moving.

Again, we talk about top down and bottom up, and that's vertically how it's arranged here.

But perhaps inward out and outward in will make a lot more sense when we start to think about what these models are really doing.

And you brought up the idea of using the dot too.

And so that was interesting to think about resources and artifacts that might be considered epistemic.

I mean, it's research, we're talking about papers, but how do we use resources rather than just learn from them?

So seeing them as action artifacts rather than just epistemic artifacts.

And then also just this idea that where will we have precision?

Can we have precision in our policies?

How do we instruct a high schooler or younger their world that they're going to be having a career in?

And that's what it sounded like you were working towards was some sort of helping them get on a trajectory where they could have support and everything.

It's going to be changing a lot.

So

It's like, I'm sorry, I can't give you precision on whether crypto will be important in 15 years or something like that.

It's like, we could write a million papers on that and just not know the answer today.

What can we have precision on?

And then this really pushes the question, where can we exchange our uncertainty and what should we focus on so that we can have focus on, if not our own policy, like I'm gonna go on a walk every day, but our own attention.

And that kind of covert mental action to bring it back to intentionality might be what we will always remain sovereign over is our attention.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think this nestedness is important.

And I think, of course, time is part of that as well because these lower levels happen quicker.

And I wonder, Dean, what your thoughts are on this in terms of when we look at these different variables that can now come into play on figure 12, I mean, they're kind of, okay, you're going to start to have variational potential to vary, right?

how you set because in in theory that every one of these values is sit is is is there implicitly just can't be varied right it's like there's there's there's some sort of precision somehow in the system but theoretically now okay you can access or change the precision on your priors on your generative model on your expected free energy as well as on your transition matrix that gets you the sensory states and of course then this question is okay now it's showing this in one

level all these arrows come together somehow it's like that mesh mystery well how does that happen right like is it a case that they're all firing out with like okay well this is what it would be like if um you know my updating of states was to have a different precision this is what it would be like if my generative model was to have a different precision this is and is there almost like a a whole array

like imagine going in and out of the screen here of temporal depths or even different sort of combinations of these uh you know precision estimates and maybe the top level has to basically choose

And maybe at some point, the lower levels, if they don't get chosen very often, they die down, you know, i.e.

like the seven-legged unicorns running across the street isn't selected very often.

So it's like left to one side.

But maybe with creative people, they tend to keep all those things firing, which may not be healthy if you go too far with that.

Because there is a question there, isn't there, is how...

As we start to bring in these other ideas is, okay, so what's that ability to bring up a precision estimate on an A matrix for looking at observations into states and to integrate these with these others?

And is that just integration?

Are we going to start to have kinds of things?

Like you were saying, if you have...


SPEAKER_03:
particular change in in how much the priors are changed um and along with the model you know then what does that do yeah i actually have some some thoughts on that steven it's interesting because i think all of these figures and every paper has their figures because they show their model i think that that model is kind of a reflection

And I think the other thing that tends to happen is if you do reflect on, so what was I trying to perceive in terms of a sort of a metacognitive, now I'm thinking about a process.

I don't think we do that in isolation.

I think the environment kind of acts as a scrutinizer as well.

Like you guys are scrutinizing what I'm saying right now.

And I'm hoping that I'm not saying something that's so completely obscure that it sort of continues to build on what we're all sharing in terms of what we're taking away from this.

So I think there's an updating of updating and that's when

when Lars was talking about that in the 28-1, I was kind of nodding because, yeah, I think that's a vital component.

It's not sort of written out explicitly in this model here, but I think we should assume that when we're zooming in and zooming out, we are reflecting.

So we're taking something and we're stretching that timeframe.

And then I think the second thing that we can't sort of leave out if we're context generalizing is that context, that environment is acting as a scrutinizer.

It's giving us feedback all the time so that we don't get stuck in one place, that time actually and change actually does become something that we're not just aware of, but we're actually utilizing.

So that rate of change piece is, I think, we don't necessarily impose it.

I think it gets imposed on us.

Or maybe I'm wrong.

But I haven't seen any evidence to the contrary yet.


SPEAKER_00:
Actually, that's a good point, if I just jumped in there.

Yeah, I mean, a lot of this stuff,

I mean, it actually starts to support the inactive approaches in a way.

I suppose you actually start to see now that you're back into the realm of, well, how could you start to blend all of that?

It almost needs to be maybe hardwired into an active kind of dynamical biological thing, the technical term.

So because it's not necessarily tractable,

purely however there may be parts of it which need to be more cognitively uh and can only happen at a sort of a more structured cognitive level you know so there's this question about what what can be inferred

through acting in the world in different ways.

And like you say, the, you will find out when you bang into the wall or when you, or you just find out as you drink a cup, you know, you feel that you're feeling, you know, Hamilton's least action obviously becomes one of the options there is that we've come in with a free energy.

Okay.

What seems to be the type of configuration of precision estimates that kind of gives the overall least action, um,

um if that's if that information is available and so now you have a way to integrate those um in one context which may provide the general structure which is good enough to to to work with them in other contexts you know maybe that there's some sort of plausible so it sort of moves beyond neuro phenomenology

and moves a bit beyond the body.

And you're now in, you are in the mind body environment dynamic, you know?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

I think the really interesting part is when in doubt implies you're, you're, you're stuck.

You're not maybe taking action.

So zoom in, zoom out, like don't just do one or the other, be prepared, uh, inactively, but also from an active inference perspective to infer, uh,

the geometry and the geography.

And I mean, make that explicit.

Make that a part of your strategy, your tactics.

It's actually, it's more inhibited than most people think.

But in terms of what you're going to do is you're not going to get stuck on level one or level three.

You're gonna actually be able to go

cross levels.

That's why there's an envelopment in a lot of these representations.

You're already in the nest.

You're already deciding whether or not you're going to cross the street.

Now what you're asking is, is it more beneficial from a thinking perspective to that inside or outside the lines?

I'm not passing judgment on which is better, but what I am saying is don't restrict yourself to one or the other.

Zoom in, zoom out.


SPEAKER_01:
The opacity of the second layer

only arises because there is a higher and a lower level.


UNKNOWN:
Right.


SPEAKER_01:
So it's sort of like...

maybe the series kind of blurs off.

And so we have one type of awareness at our experienced tier.

And then it rests upon the shoulders of the first and the third level, the green and the blue here.

And then maybe those spiral off in reality, or maybe they don't.

We're modeling it this way.

And then it's the feedback with reality that we'll update our models based upon.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah and and this this because we've got levels at play and i know you you mentioned there about zoom in zoom out i mean zoom's quite an ocular kind of so i suppose we've got we there's a there's a kind of a question in terms of how we language some of this because

We want to look at different temporal... We've got different levels of abstraction as we see when we then look at things as they map across to our other knowledge epistemic systems.

We've got different... We know that the hierarchies have different speeds.

I mean, in a way, they don't...

Nature, in theory, doesn't care about the levels in a sense, but it might care about the speed at which the processing happens.

And if it has to go quicker at the lower levels, it has no choice around that.

But then we've also got this question of zooming out, scale-ups, scale happening, some of which you can't avoid.

I mean, we've got cells inside our body at a scale, and then we've got organs, and then we've got...

I'm wondering, yeah, when we say zoom in, is that an attentional, no, okay, I'll pass it.


SPEAKER_03:
No, I just, that's a great question because as I said, I don't have any pushback on anything the authors wrote in this paper.

I think it's a great paper.

And I'm suggesting we hold up attention and availability, because that's what zoom in, zoom out is.

It's leaving yourself available to what could be considered included in a definition of what attention is.

I'm saying include both.

That's what the zoom in, zoom out does.

It says, what am I available to?

Am I making myself available to outside the lines metaphorically, physically, as well as inside the lines?

Is that part of my reasoning in terms of not necessarily being afraid of bumping into things?


SPEAKER_00:
That's a good point.

I mean, one other thing that I think is interesting when I think from science to...

visual art, well, art is in science, you tend to think of zooming in and out, say with a microscope, right?

Because you can go in and you see more.

Now in art, you tend to crop.

So you have the same, roughly the same image.

Maybe you go a little bit more detail, but you're just cropping in.

Now, cropping in terms of how we kind of think informationally is quite different, right?

Because it's what you're taking away to leave focus.

Whereas zooming in, because we get more detail on something small, we maybe don't focus on all the things that, well, you could zoom in and you just expand the, you know, the frame gets bigger, right?

Normally, that's the question, you know, you're zooming in

on an object that's like a penny and it gets to a certain size until it fills your frame of awareness.

Because once you go beyond that, you can't help but crop because you can't fit everything in and you then gain more detail on something, but you can't take in other detail.

So there's, I mean, even that's a scale dependent thing, right?

It's dependent on the organism, right?

So for a mouse to zoom in and zoom out,

um well also can to some extent without using a tool or an instrument can we zoom like it's interesting because we if can i zoom with my eyes in a way i can focus and i can go in i can

take my most accurate i suppose in some ways i can zoom by having the area of my eye that has the most um cells being given attention to a particular part of the i can take my attentional um fidelity to bear

but some of the things also, like I say, we, we, we kind of imagine ourselves as if we've got a binoculars or some other tool in our hands.

Right.

And we, um, because we sort of, it's such an embodied thing to do, but actually that's not necessarily, that's not necessarily what we could do without that tool, if that makes sense.

So there's a, there's a, there's a question there around, um,

Yeah, where do... And maybe we were able to use... Maybe that's the thing that's kind of unique about humans is that ability to pick up a microscope and look through it and extend through the tool usage, you know?

And that's not necessarily available to other animals.


SPEAKER_03:
I think that the paper speaks to...

I can attend or not attend, and I'll know that I'm attending when I'm not attending.

So that's the sort of inflationary, deflationary,

part of it, and I'm not saying drop that, I think that that's important, but I think if it's only held up as that, you're missing the other two vertices of the triad.

The other two vertices being, can I also on the open end of the triangle relative to that first part, which is the,

Am I or am I not attending?

Am I inflating or deflating?

Am I going up or down?

Is the geometry and the geography.

And I think if you put all, I know this sounds very abstract, but after you put it into practice, after you have your checklist or your model that you carry in with saying, have I addressed all three sides of this?

you tend to generate a context much sooner.

Your Markov blanket becomes more transparent, more tunneling effect into these novel situations than I'm waiting around for somebody to point to what I need to attend to next, which is more of the instructionalist model again, right?

So, I mean, if you want to give a person the ability to make sense sooner, all I'm suggesting is that have three vertices, right?

Have three corners to this to dimensionalize the space.

And again, if you put it into practice,

it's pretty easy to transfer from the abstract into actual physical things that you do.

I mean, you can decide what the focal point is and what the horizon is.

You can decide what the difference is and you can decide what the proportions and the contrast are.

And if somebody says to you, I'm not getting this, you can also explain to them what you're not seeing.

which is really, really helpful to the person who's trying to be the guide or the wayfinder.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Dean.

Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I wanted to kind of talk about zooming in and zooming out and using a microscope or not.

And so something that I have found in the course of my life is the capacity for mental zooming in and zooming out.

especially with regard to consideration for others.

So like I started life as a kid, like everything was provided for me.

And then like as a teenager, I was like the most self-absorbed creature alive, right?

And so like, as I've gotten older, like my, so I was so focused on just me, right?

Just me, me, me, me, me, I'm the center of my world.

But then like, you know, you really start to expand that,

you know, to consider more and more people and the planet and like all of the consequences of your actions as I, you know, developed and, you know, probably really set in at like 25, right?

With full frontal lobe development and the understanding of consequences and, you know, this kind of ripple effect, the butterfly effect of our actions and so forth.

But also in meditation to kind of bring it back in and tie it back to the paper.

you do this meditation.

I mean, I've done meditations where you're doing, for example, loving kindness and you focus on loving kindness and it's kindness for yourself and your inner circle and then you expand it to include

you know, the people in the room and your extended family and, you know, everyone that's suffering the same ailments as you and so forth.

So you kind of expand your awareness, this mental zooming out through meditation.

And yeah, so I just wanted to kind of say, like, we don't always need a microscope, but it is mental.

And it may also be something that's uniquely human.


SPEAKER_03:
Can I just respond to that, Blue?

I think you're absolutely right.

And the funny thing is, is that

Again, when you take it off the page, what you're describing and what I'm describing, although I'm probably doing a terrible job of it, is identity and feelings.

When you actually use this approach of being able to hold up three things at once, it's your identity and your feelings that you're really becoming metacognitive of.


SPEAKER_04:
So is it metacognitive or is it dissolving?

the identity, right?

And so that's like the question of Mike Levin, you know, expanding the cognitive boundary of the self.

So in his paper, I don't, I'm not sure if you read the computational boundary of the self or not.

But, but, you know, he talked about this, the computational boundary and, you know, not just of a person, but also like a cell and an organ and a tissue.

And so, but also

human and and when you've dissolved this computational boundary of the self you've expanded it you've dissolved i mean this is eventually the end goal of meditation is this dissolution of identity this ceasing of grasping to the self i mean in many traditions right this is the letting go of self-grasping and letting go of the idea of the self and so you have this very expansive consideration of the self and so it's encompassing all um beings in that in that boundary


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, and that's interesting because that's exactly what we used to talk about is what does it mean to go from being a student to being a professional contributor?

Well, all I know is it's not an extension of being a student.

I have no idea what it means in your particular situation, right?

So it is a dissolving, if nothing else, it's a forming and a dissolving at the same time.

That's why I said,

You still have me because it was your influence that got me watching Soul, and that's exactly what they were talking about.

And so, again, it is ephemeral, and we can reflect on it, and we can have the environment scrutinize on it, and that doesn't destroy everything.

That's actually building things up.


SPEAKER_02:
Thanks, Steve.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
And this, what you're just mentioning there in terms of dissolving the self,

and meditation and precision estimates.

Um, I think this, this could speak to this idea.

You know, we talk about the five, the six plus or minus one in terms of how many ideas you can hold in your head.

And we have this idea, you know, with higher thinking it's purer, or we have certain things that we hold in our minds.

And I can imagine that it's like with meditation, the idea that,

if it's done well, because it can, you know, you could end up going into some places where you just don't, it's not productive, but in a productive sense, it's like you are able to adjust and integrate.

You can imagine why D, why B, why C, why E, why G, why A, and

So you're still accepting that you can go with different precision estimates, but you don't get this kind of attachment or making certain precision estimates as kind of rarefied things, which we often do.

So we kind of feel like it should be like something or we feel uncomfortable or we get drawn to our kind of...

you know our desires or the things that we get kind of obsessive with or things that we are avoiding so that could be interesting and the other thing that then can tie to that because i like to mix as well as meditation which this talks about which is kind of yeah you've got meditation you've got action in the world where we can like you say with the environment walking around and then we've got ritual and ritual tends to be more in the um indigenous approaches but there

you're not necessarily trying to dissolve anything.

It's almost like you're trying to disrupt it.

It's not like you've got a nice, pure drop that you're hoping to, like...

evaporate and allow to become a mist that we're not reifying anymore it's a bit like you know you see that you're going to put on a big mask and a costume and you're going to dance around the fire and until you start to go into another state now that could access another set of

informational inferences and that that may be doing some other things you know that maybe things which are more useful when we're in a communal integration and social integration or social sense making so it could be like we're trying to regulate as a group and then meditation is helping us regulate as individuals and it's neither one's better than the other but they have different

you know, niche properties for us.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Well, interesting discussion.

Maybe we can each give a closing thought and then I have a short quote to close based upon something Dean said.

it's um it's a really interesting paper i think we all enjoyed reading it it really does point the way towards uh what does a generalized computational phenomenology or at the very least without getting experience into the mix just what is a computational framing of mental action is that a paradox in and of itself is it impossible is mental action just like

a no-go?

Or is mental action going to be understood to be everything of the iceberg that isn't the tip of the iceberg?

Blue?


SPEAKER_04:
So just a final thought, you know, this metacognitive aspect and, you know, that the idea of identity dissolution, and I do think it was mentioned in

this paper, but just briefly, what about under the influence of psychedelic drugs, where we know we have this identity dissolution, this ego dissolution, this expansion of the cognitive boundary?

So when you have psychedelics, how is the metacognitive hierarchy influenced, disrupted?

Is it obliterated?

Is it enhanced?

So I'd be interested to see if the authors go down that road in the future or


SPEAKER_03:
to see someone you know take it to that level exploring the metacognition of um people under the influence of hallucinogenics thanks blue dean i think back in the 28 zeros we were wondering about whether or not this this paper and the stuff that it points to could be used for nefarious purposes and i

I think I commented back then that I used to work with a lot of people who were spending a lot of time with focus and attention on task.

And I just like to sort of keep that where that is, because I know that's a thing.

And I'd like to just sort of hold it up with the background of what we're available to, that availability piece, because I think that's the more powerful thing.

And I'm not sure that that's necessarily threatening.

But I think if we can have conversations with people about how active inference acts as an availability enhancer,

they might be more attracted to this and not necessarily see it as something that people could use for nasty purposes.

I mean, there's going to be people out there going to do their nasty thing, but I think there's actually a really empathetic and sincere aspect to this that isn't just exploitable, but is really explorable and is really kind of cool.


SPEAKER_01:
We'll have a quantitative framework for saying that we would prefer if they didn't, even though we expect them to behave the way that they're expecting.

But we'll have an interaction sequence that might change the way that that works.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, a couple of points.

Well, one, it might be interesting to see what Adam Saffron makes of some of this with the psychedelics, as he's just started a postdoc now in psychedelics at John Hopkins.

So that'd be...

That'd be interesting.

And then I suppose the other thing that I've noticed is with some of the nefarious actions, and I think you're right, but I think also what I've noticed is some of the kind of intuitive nefarious actions of politicians who are particularly adept at...

getting people on their side.

It may actually be that some of that they're doing through kind of like some sort of roundabout intuitive artistic route.

This might help us reverse engineer how they're doing it.

So there might also be some benefits to understanding what is it they're doing, even if they don't quite know how to describe it.


SPEAKER_03:
Dean?

I think you're absolutely right, Stephen.

I think if we are able to make this available to more people, their bullshit detectors are going to get really, really improved.


SPEAKER_01:
So the closing quote to hopefully bring some of these threads together, we talked a lot about, you know, distributed versus centralized sense-making and what is the role of scrutiny and the scrutinizer like Dean brought up.

And of course, GEB, Hofstetter's book from 1979.

But another work of art from 1979 was Frank Zappa's song, Central Scrutinizer.

And just closing with some of the first lines of that poem.

Thank you, everybody, though.

Fun times.

See you in
